


The PREFACE.


_It may be necessary to acquaint the reader, that the following
observations and experiments were not drawn up with a view to their being
made publick, but were communicated at different times, and most of them in
letters wrote on various topicks, as matters only of private amusement._

_But some persons to whom they were read, and who had themselves been
conversant in electrical disquisitions, were of opinion, they contain'd so
many curious and interesting particulars relative to this affair, that it
would be doing a kind of injustice to the publick, to confine them solely
to the limits of a private acquaintance._

_The Editor was therefore prevailed upon to commit such extracts of
letters, and other detach'd pieces as were in his hands to the press,
without waiting for the ingenious author's permission so to do; and this
was done with the less hesitation, as it was apprehended the author's
engagements in other affairs, would scarce afford him leisure to give the
publick his reflections and experiments on the subject, finish'd with that
care and precision, of which the treatise before us shews he is alike
studious and capable. He was only apprized of the step that had been thus
taken, while the first sheets were in the press, and time enough for him to
transmit some farther remarks, together with a few corrections and
additions, which are placed at the end, and may be consulted in the
perusal._

_The experiments which our author relates are most of them peculiar to
himself; they are conducted with judgment, and the inferences from them
plain and conclusive; though sometimes proposed under the terms of
suppositions and conjectures._

_And indeed the scene he opens, strikes us with a pleasing astonishment,
whilst he conducts us by a train of facts and judicious reflections, to a
probable cause of those phænomena, which are at once the most awful, and,
hitherto, accounted for with the least verisimilitude._

_He exhibits to our consideration, an invisible, subtile matter,
disseminated through all nature in various proportions, equally unobserved,
and, whilst all those bodies to which it peculiarly adheres are alike
charged with it, inoffensive._

_He shews, however, that if an unequal distribution is by any means brought
about; if there is a coacervation in one part of space, a less proportion,
vacuity, or want, in another; by the near approach of a body capable of
conducting the coacervated part to the emptier space, it becomes perhaps
the most formidable and irresistible agent in the universe. Animals are in
an Instant struck breathless, bodies almost impervious by any force yet
known, are perforated, and metals fused by it, in a moment._

_From the similar effects of lightening and electricity our author has been
led to make some propable conjectures on the cause of the former; and at
the same time, to propose some rational experiments in order to secure
ourselves, and those things on which its force is often directed, from its
pernicious effects; a circumstance of no small importance to the publick,
and therefore worthy of the utmost attention._

_It has, indeed, been of late the fashion to ascribe every grand or unusual
operation of nature, such as lightening and earthquakes, to electricity;
not, as one would imagine, from the manner of reasoning on these occasions,
that the authors of these schemes have, discovered any connection betwixt
the cause and effect, or saw in what manner they were related; but, as it
would seem, merely because they were unacquainted with any other agent, of
which it could not positively be said the connection was impossible._

_But of these, and many other interesting circumstances, the reader will be
more satisfactorily informed in the following letters, to which he is
therefore referred by_

_The_ EDITOR.




[Illustration]




LETTER I.

FROM

Mr BENJ. FRANKLIN, in _Philadelphia_.

TO

Mr PETER COLLINSON, F.R.S. _London_.

_July 28, 1747_.

  _SIR_,

THE necessary trouble of copying long letters, which perhaps when they come
to your hands may contain nothing new, or worth your reading (so quick is
the progress made with you in Electricity) half discourages me from writing
any more on that subject. Yet I cannot forbear adding a few observations on
M. _Muschenbroek_'s wonderful bottle.

1. The non-electric contain'd in the bottle differs when electrised from a
non-electric electrised out of the bottle, in this: that the electrical
fire of the latter is accumulated _on its surface_, and forms an electrical
atmosphere round it of considerable extent: but the electrical fire is
crouded _into the substance_ of the former, the glass confining it.

2. At the same time that the wire and top of the bottle, &c. is electrised
_positively_ or _plus_, the bottom of the bottle is electrised _negatively_
or _minus_, in exact proportion: _i. e._ whatever quantity of electrical
fire is thrown in at top, an equal quantity goes out of the bottom. To
understand this, suppose the common quantity of Electricity in each part of
the bottle, before the operation begins, is equal to 20; and at every
stroke of the tube, suppose a quantity equal to 1 is thrown in; then, after
the first stroke, the quantity contain'd in the wire and upper part of the
bottle will be 21, in the bottom 19. After the second, the upper part will
have 22, the lower 18, and so on 'till after 20 strokes, the upper part
will have a quantity of electrical fire equal to 40, the lower part none:
and then the operation ends: for no more can be thrown into the upper part,
when no more can be driven out of the lower part. If you attempt to throw
more in, it is spued back thro' the wire, or flies out in loud cracks thro'
the sides of the bottle.

3. The equilibrium cannot be restored in the bottle by _inward_
communication or contact of the parts; but it must be done by a
communication formed _without_ the bottle, between the top and bottom, by
some non-electric, touching both at the same time; in which case it is
restored with a violence and quickness inexpressible: or, touching each
alternately, in which case the equilibrium is restored by degrees.

4. As no more electrical fire can be thrown into the top of the bottle,
when all is driven out of the bottom, so in a bottle not yet electrised,
none can be thrown into the top, when none _can_ get out at the bottom;
which happens either when the bottom is too thick, or when the bottle is
placed on an electric _per se_. Again, when the bottle is electrised, but
little of the electrical fire can be _drawn out_ from the top, by touching
the wire, unless an equal quantity can at the same time _get in_ at the
bottom. Thus, place an electrised bottle on clean glass or dry wax, and you
will not, by touching the wire, get out the fire from the top. Place it on
a non-electric, and touch the wire, you will get it out in a short time;
but soonest when you form a direct communication as above.

So wonderfully are these two states of Electricity, the _plus_ and _minus_,
combined and balanced in this miraculous bottle! situated and related to
each other in a manner that I can by no means comprehend! If it were
possible that a bottle should in one part contain a quantity of air
strongly comprest, and in another part a perfect vacuum, we know the
equilibrium would be instantly restored _within_. But here we have a bottle
containing at the same time a _plenum_ of electrical fire, and a _vacuum_
of the same fire; and yet the equilibrium cannot be restored between them
but by a communication _without_! though the _plenum_ presses violently to
expand, and the hungry vacuum seems to attract as violently in order to be
filled.

5. The shock to the nerves (or convulsion rather) is occasion'd by the
sudden passing of the fire through the body in its way from the top to the
bottom of the bottle. The fire takes the shortest course, as Mr _Watson_
justly observes: But it does not appear, from experiment, that, in order
for a person to be shocked, a communication with the floor is necessary;
for he that holds the bottle with one hand, and touches the wire with the
other, will be shock'd as much, though his shoes be dry, or even standing
on wax, as otherwise. And on the touch of the wire (or of the gun-barrel,
which is the same thing) the fire does not proceed from the touching finger
to the wire, as is supposed, but from the wire to the finger, and passes
through the body to the other hand, and so into the bottom of the bottle.


EXPERIMENTS _confirming the above_.


EXPERIMENT I.

Place an electrised phial on wax; a small cork-ball suspended by a dry
silk-thread held in your hand, and brought near to the wire, will first be
attracted, and then repelled: when in this state of repellency, sink your
hand, that the ball may be brought towards the bottom of the bottle; it
will there be instantly and strongly attracted, 'till it has parted with
its fire.

If the bottle had an electrical atmosphere, as well as the wire, an
electrified cork would be repelled from one as well as from the other.


EXPERIMENT II.

FIG. 1. From a bent wire (_a_) sticking in the table, let a small linen
thread (_b_) hang down within half an inch of the electrised phial (_c_).
Touch the wire of the phial repeatedly with your finger, and at every touch
you will see the thread instantly attracted by the bottle. (This is best
done by a vinegar cruet, or some such belly'd bottle). As soon as you draw
any fire out from the upper part by touching the wire, the lower part of
the bottle draws an equal quantity in by the thread.


EXPERIMENT III.

FIG. 2. Fix a wire in the lead, with which the bottom of the bottle is
armed, (_d_) so as that bending upwards, its ring-end may be level with the
top or ring-end of the wire in the cork (_e_), and at three or four inches
distance. Then electricise the bottle, and place it on wax. If a cork
suspended by a silk thread (_f_) hang between these two wires, it will play
incessantly from one to the other, 'till the bottle is no longer
electrised; that is, it fetches and carries fire from the top to the bottom
of the bottle, 'till the equilibrium is restored.


EXPERIMENT IV.

FIG. 3. Place an electricised phial on wax; take a wire (_g_) in form of a
C, the ends at such a distance when bent, as that the upper may touch the
wire of the bottle, when the lower touches the bottom: stick the outer part
on a stick of sealing wax (_h_) which will serve as a handle. Then apply
the lower end to the bottom of the bottle, and gradually bring the
upper-end near the wire in the cork. The consequence is, spark follows
spark till the equilibrium is restored. Touch the top first, and on
approaching the bottom with the other end, you have a constant stream of
fire, from the wire entering the bottle. Touch the top and bottom together,
and the equilibrium will soon be restored, but silently and imperceptibly;
the crooked wire forming the communication.


EXPERIMENT V.

FIG. 4. Let a ring of thin lead or paper surround a bottle (_i_), even at
some distance from or above the bottom. From that ring let a wire proceed
up, 'till it touch the wire of the cork (_k_). A bottle so fixt cannot by
any means be electrised: the equilibrium is never destroyed: for while the
communication between the upper and lower parts of the bottle is continued
by the outside wire, the fire only circulates: what is driven out at
bottom, is constantly supply'd from the top. Hence a bottle cannot be
electrised that is foul or moist on the outside.


EXPERIMENT VI.

Place a man on a cake of wax, and present him the wire of the electrified
phial to touch, you standing on the floor, and holding it in your hand. As
often as he touches it, he will be electrified _plus_; and any one standing
on the floor may draw a spark from him. The fire in this experiment passes
out of the wire into him; and at the same time out of your hand into the
bottom of the bottle.


EXPERIMENT VII.

Give him the electrified phial to hold; and do you touch the wire; as often
you touch it he will be electrified _minus_, and may draw a spark from any
one standing on the floor. The fire now passes from the wire to you, and
from him into the bottom of the bottle.


EXPERIMENT VIII.

Lay two books on two glasses, back towards back, two or three Inches
distant. Set the electrified phial on one, and then touch the wire; that
book will be electrified _minus_; the electrical fire being drawn out of it
by the bottom of the bottle. Take off the bottle, and holding it in your
hand, touch the other with the wire; that book will be electrised _plus_;
the fire passing into it from the wire, and the bottle at the same time
supply'd from your hand. A suspended small cork-ball will play between
these books 'till the equilibrium is restored.


EXPERIMENT IX.

When a body is electrised _plus_ it will repel an electrified feather or
small cork-ball. When _minus_ (or when in the common state) it will attract
them, but stronger when _minus_ than when in the common state, the
difference being greater.


EXPERIMENT X.

Tho', as in EXPER. VI. a man standing on wax may be electrised a number of
times, by repeatedly touching the wire of an electrised bottle (held in the
hand of one standing on the floor) he receiving the fire from the wire each
time: yet holding it in his own hand, and touching the wire, tho' he draws
a strong spark, and is violently shock'd, no Electricity remains in him;
the fire only passing thro' him from the upper to the lower part of the
bottle. Observe, before the shock, to let some one on the floor touch him
to restore the equilibrium in his body; for in taking hold of the bottom of
the bottle, he sometimes becomes a little electrised _minus_, which will
continue after the shock; as would also any _plus_ Electricity, which he
might have given him before the shock. For, restoring the equilibrium in
the bottle does not at all affect the Electricity in the man thro' whom the
fire passes; that Electricity is neither increased nor diminish'd.


EXPERIMENT XI.

The passing of the electrical fire from the upper to the lower part of the
bottle, to restore the equilibrium is render'd strongly visible by the
following pretty experiment. Take a book whose cover is filletted with
gold; bend a wire of eight or ten inches long in the form of (_m_) FIG. 5,
slip it on the end of the cover of the book over the gold line, so as that
the shoulder of it may press upon one end of the gold line, the ring up,
but leaning towards the other end of the book. Lay the book on a glass or
wax; and on the other end of the gold lines, set the bottle electrised:
then bend the springing wire, by pressing it with a stick of wax till its
ring approaches the ring of the bottle wire; instantly there is a strong
spark and stroke, and the whole line of gold, which completes the
communication between the top and bottom of the bottle, will appear a vivid
flame, like the sharpest lightning. The closer the contact between the
shoulder of the wire, and the gold at one end of the line, and between the
bottom of the bottle and the gold at the other end, the better the
experiment succeeds. The room should be darkened. If you would have the
whole filletting round the cover appear in fire at once, let the bottle and
wire touch the gold in the diagonally opposite corners.

_I am_, &c.

B. FRANKLIN.




LETTER II.

FROM

Mr BENJ. FRANKLIN, in _Philadelphia_.

TO

Mr PETER COLLINSON, F.R.S. _London_.

_Sept. 1, 1747._

  _SIR_,

In my last I informed you that, in pursuing our electrical enquiries, we
had observed some particular Phænomena, which we looked upon to be new, and
of which I promised to give you some account, tho' I apprehended they might
possibly not be new to you, as so many hands are daily employ'd in
electrical experiments on your side the water, some or other of which would
probably hit on the same observations.

The first is the wonderful effect of pointed bodies, both in _drawing off_
and _throwing off_ the electrical fire. For example:

Place an iron shot of three or four inches diameter, on the mouth of a
clean dry glass bottle. By a fine silken thread from the cieling, right
over the mouth of the bottle, suspend a small cork-ball, about the bigness
of a marble; the thread of such a length, as that the cork-ball may rest
against the side of the shot. Electrify the shot, and the ball will be
repelled to the distance of four or five inches, more or less, according to
the quantity of Electricity.--When in this state, if you present to the
shot the point of a long slender sharp bodkin, at six or eight inches
distance, the repellency is instantly destroy'd, and the cork flies to the
shot. A blunt body must be brought within an inch, and draw a spark, to
produce the same effect. To prove that the electrical fire is _drawn off_
by the point, if you take the blade of the bodkin out of the wooden handle,
and fix it in a stick of sealing wax, and then present it at the distance
aforesaid, or if you bring it very near, no such effect follows; but
sliding one finger along the wax till you touch the blade, and the ball
flies to the shot immediately.--If you present the point in the dark, you
will see, sometimes at a foot distance, and more, a light gather upon it
like that of a fire-fly or glow-worm; the less sharp the point, the nearer
you must bring it to observe the light; and at whatever distance you see
the light, you may draw off the electrical fire, and destroy the
repellency.--If a cork-ball so suspended be repelled by the tube, and a
point be presented quick to it, tho' at a considerable distance, 'tis
surprizing to see how suddenly it flies back to the tube. Points of wood
will do as well as those of iron, provided the wood is not dry; for
perfectly dry wood will no more conduct Electricity than sealing wax.

To shew that points will _throw off_ as well as _draw off_ the electrical
fire; lay a long sharp needle upon the shot, and you cannot electrise the
shot, so as to make it repel the cork-ball.--Or fix a needle to the end of
a suspended gun-barrel, or iron rod, so as to point beyond it like a little
bayonet; and while it remains there, the gun-barrel, or rod, cannot by
applying the tube to the other end be electrised so as to give a spark, the
fire continually running out silently at the point. In the dark you may see
it make the same appearance as it does in the case beforementioned.

The repellency between the cork-ball and the shot is likewise destroy'd; 1.
By sifting fine sand on it; this does it gradually. 2. By breathing on it.
3. By making a smoke about it from burning wood.[1] 4. By candle light,
even tho' the candle is at a foot distance: these do it suddenly.--The
light of a bright coal from a wood fire; and the light of red-hot iron do
it likewise; but not at so great a distance. Smoke from dry rosin dropt on
hot iron, does not destroy the repellency; but is attracted by both shot
and cork-ball, forming proportionable atmospheres round them, making them
look beautifully, somewhat like some of the figures in _Burnet_'s or
_Whiston_'s theory of the earth.

_N. B._ This experiment should be made in a closet where the air is very
still.

The light of the sun thrown strongly on both cork and shot by a
looking-glass for a long time together, does not impair the repellency in
the least. This difference between fire-light and sun-light, is another
thing that seems new and extraordinary to us.

We had for some time been of opinion, that the electrical fire was not
created by friction, but collected, being really an element diffus'd among,
and attracted by other matter, particularly by water and metals. We had
even discovered and demonstrated its afflux to the electrical sphere, as
well as its efflux, by means of little light windmill wheels made of stiff
paper vanes, fixed obliquely and turning freely on fine wire axes. Also by
little wheels of the same matter, but formed like water wheels. Of the
disposition and application of which wheels, and the various phænomena
resulting, I could, if I had time, fill you a sheet. The impossibility of
electrising one's self (tho' standing on wax) by rubbing the tube and
drawing the fire from it; and the manner of doing it by passing the tube
near a person or thing standing on the floor, &c. had also occurred to us
some months before Mr _Watson_'s ingenious _Sequel_ came to hand, and these
were some of the new things I intended to have communicated to you.--But
now I need only mention some particulars not hinted in that piece, with our
reasonings thereupon; though perhaps the latter might well enough be
spared.

1. A person standing on wax, and rubbing the tube, and another person on
wax drawing the fire; they will both of them, (provided they do not stand
so as to touch one another) appear to be electrised, to a person standing
on the floor; that is, he will perceive a spark on approaching each of them
with his knuckle.

2. But if the persons on wax touch one another during the exciting of the
tube, neither of them will appear to be electrised.

3. If they touch one another after exciting the tube, and drawing the fire
as aforesaid, there will be a stronger spark between them, than was between
either of them and the person on the floor.

4. After such strong spark, neither of them discover any electricity.

These appearances we attempt to account for thus. We suppose as aforesaid,
that electrical fire is a common element, of which every one of the three
persons abovementioned has his equal share, before any operation is begun
with the Tube. _A_, who stands on wax and rubs the tube collects the
electrical fire from himself into the glass; and his communication with the
common stock being cut off by the wax, his body is not again immediately
supply'd. _B_, (who stands on wax likewise) passing his knuckle along near
the tube, receives the fire which was collected by the glass from _A_; and
his communication with the common stock being likewise cut off, he retains
the additional quantity received.--To _C_, standing on the floor, both
appear to be electrised: for he having only the middle quantity of
electrical fire, receives a spark upon approaching _B_, who has an over
quantity; but gives one to _A_, who has an under quantity. If _A_ and _B_
approach to touch each other, the spark is stronger, because the difference
between them is greater; after such touch there is no spark between either
of them and _C_, because the electrical fire in all is reduced to the
original equality. If they touch while electrising, the equality is never
destroy'd, the fire only circulating. Hence have arisen some new terms
among us: we say, _B_, (and bodies like circumstanced) is electrised
_positively_; _A_, _negatively_. Or rather, _B_ is electrised _plus_; _A_,
_minus_. And we daily in our experiments electrise bodies _plus_ or _minus_
as we think proper.--To electrise _plus_ or _minus_, no more needs to be
known than this, that the parts of the tube or sphere that are rubbed, do,
in the instant of the friction attract the electrical fire, and therefore
take it from the thing rubbing: the same parts immediately, as the friction
upon them ceases, are disposed to give the fire they have received, to any
body that has less. Thus you may circulate it, as Mr _Watson_ has shewn;
you may also accumulate or substract it upon or from any body, as you
connect that body with the rubber or with the receiver, the communication
with the common stock being cut off. We think that ingenious gentleman was
deceived, when he imagined (in his _Sequel_) that the electrical fire came
down the wire from the cieling to the gun-barrel, thence to the sphere, and
so electrised the machine and the man turning the wheel, _&c._ We suppose
it was _driven off_, and not brought on thro' that wire; and that the
machine and man, _&c._ were electrised _minus_; _i. e._ had less electrical
fire in them than things in common.

As the vessel is just upon sailing, I cannot give you so large an account
of American Electricity as I intended: I shall only mention a few
particulars more.--We find granulated lead better to fill the phial with,
than water, being easily warmed, and keeping warm and dry in damp air.--We
fire spirits with the wire of the phial.--We light candles, just blown out,
by drawing a spark among the smoke between the wire and snuffers.--We
represent lightning, by passing the wire in the dark over a china plate
that has gilt flowers, or applying it to gilt frames of looking-glasses,
_&c._--We electrise a person twenty or more times running, with a touch of
the finger on the wire, thus: He stands on wax. Give him the electrised
bottle in his hand. Touch the wire with your finger, and then touch his
hand or face; there are sparks every time.--We encrease the force of the
electrical kiss vastly, thus: Let _A_ and _B_ stand on wax; give one of
them the electrised phial in hand; let the other take hold of the wire;
there will be a small spark; but when their lips approach, they will be
struck and shock'd. The same if another gentleman and lady, _C_ and _D_,
standing also on wax, and joining hands with _A_ and _B_, salute, or shake
hands.--We suspend by fine silk thread a counterfeit spider, made of a
small piece of burnt cork, with legs of linnen thread, and a grain or two
of lead stuck in him to give him more weight. Upon the table, over which he
hangs, we stick a wire upright as high as the phial and wire, two or three
inches from the spider; then we animate him by setting the electrified
phial at the same distance on the other side of him; he will immediately
fly to the wire of the phial, bend his legs in touching it, then spring
off, and fly to the wire in the table; thence again to the wire of the
phial, playing with his legs against both in a very entertaining manner,
appearing perfectly alive to persons unacquainted. He will continue this
motion an hour or more in dry weather.--We electrify, upon wax in the dark,
a book that has a double line of gold round upon the covers, and then apply
a knuckle to the gilding; the fire appears every where upon the gold like a
flash of lightning: not upon the leather, nor, if you touch the leather
instead of the gold. We rub our tubes with buckskin, and observe always to
keep the same side to the tube, and never to sully the tube by handling;
thus they work readily and easily, without the least fatigue; especially if
kept in tight pastboard cases, lined with flannel, and fitting closeto the
tube.[2]--This I mention because the _European_ papers, on Electricity,
frequently speak of rubbing the tube, as a fatiguing exercise. Our spheres
are fixed on iron axes, which pass through them. At one end of the axis
there is a small handle, with which we turn the sphere like a common
grindstone. This we find very commodious, as the machine takes up but
little room, is portable, and may be enclosed in a tight box, when not in
use. 'Tis true, the sphere does not turn so swift, as when the great wheel
is used: but swiftness we think of little importance, since a few turns
will charge the phial, _&c._ sufficiently.

_I am_, &c.

B. FRANKLIN.

[Illustration]




LETTER III.

FROM

Mr BENJ. FRANKLIN, in _Philadelphia_.

TO

Mr PETER COLLINSON, F.R.S. _London_.


_Farther_ EXPERIMENTS _and_ OBSERVATIONS _in_ ELECTRICITY.


_1748._

  _SIR_,

§ 1. There will be the same explosion and shock, if the electrified phial
is held in one hand by the hook, and the coating touch'd with the other, as
when held by the coating, and touch'd at the hook.

2. To take the charg'd phial safely by the hook, and not at the same time
diminish its force, it must first be set down on an electric _per se_.

3. The phial will be electrified as strongly, if held by the hook, and the
coating apply'd to the globe or tube; as when held by the coating, and the
hook apply'd.

4. But the _direction_ of the electrical fire being different in the
charging, will also be different in the explosion. The bottle charged thro'
the hook, will be discharged thro' the hook; the bottle charged thro' the
coating, will be discharged thro' the coating, and not other ways: for the
fire must come out the same way it went in.

5. To prove this; take two bottles that were equally charged thro' the
hooks, one in each hand; bring their hooks near each other, and no spark or
shock will follow; because each hook is disposed to give fire, and neither
to receive it. Set one of the bottles down on glass, take it up by the
hook, and apply its coating to the hook of the other; then there will be an
explosion and shock, and both bottles will be discharged.

6. Vary the experiment, by charging two phials equally, one thro' the hook,
the other thro' the coating: hold that by the coating which was charged
thro' the hook; and that by the hook which was charg'd thro' the coating:
apply the hook of the first to the coating of the other, and there will be
no shock or spark. Set that down on glass which you held by the hook, take
it up by the coating, and bring the two hooks together: a spark and shock
will follow, and both phials be discharged.

In this experiment the bottles are totally discharged, or the equilibrium
within them restored. The _abounding_ of fire in one of the hooks (or
rather in the internal surface of one bottle) being exactly equal to the
_wanting_ of the other: and therefore, as each bottle has in itself the
_abounding_ as well as the _wanting_, the wanting and abounding must be
equal in each bottle. See §. 8, 9, 10, 11. But if a man holds in his hands
two bottles, one fully electrify'd, the other not at all, and brings their
hooks together, he has but half a shock, and the bottles will both remain
half electrified, the one being half discharged, and the other half
charged.

7. Place two phials equally charged on a table at five or six inches
distance. Let a cork-ball, suspended by a silk thread, hang between them.
If the phials were both charged through their hooks, the cork, when it has
been attracted and repell'd by the one, will not be attracted, but equally
repelled by the other. But if the phials were charged, the one through the
hook, and the other[3] through the coating, the ball, when it is repelled
from one hook, will be as strongly attracted by the other, and play
vigorously between them, 'till both phials are nearly discharged.

8. When we use the terms of _charging_ and _discharging_ the phial, 'tis in
compliance with custom, and for want of others more suitable. Since we are
of opinion, that there is really no more electrical fire in the phial after
what is called its _charging_, than before, nor less after its
_discharging_; excepting only the small spark that might be given to, and
taken from, the non-electric matter, if separated from the bottle, which
spark may not be equal to a five hundredth part of what is called the
explosion.

For if, on the explosion, the electrical fire came out of the bottle by one
part, and did not enter in again by another; then, if a man standing on
wax, and holding the bottle in one hand, takes the spark by touching the
wire hook with the other, the bottle being thereby _discharged_, the man
would be _charged_; or whatever fire was lost by one, would be found in the
other, since there is no way for its escape: But the contrary is true.

9. Besides the phial will not suffer what is called a _charging_, unless as
much fire can go out of it one way, as is thrown in by another. A phial
cannot be charged standing on wax or glass, or hanging on the prime
conductor, unless a communication be form'd between its coating and the
floor.

10. But suspend two or more phials on the prime conductor, one hanging to
the tail of the other; and a wire from the last to the floor, an equal
number of turns of the wheel shall charge them all equally, and every one
as much as one alone would have been. What is driven out at the tail of the
first, serving to charge the second; what is driven out of the second
charging the third; and so on. By this means a great number of bottles
might be charged with the same labour, and equally high, with one alone,
were it not that every bottle receives new fire, and loses its old with
some reluctance, or rather gives some small resistance to the charging,
which in a number of bottles becomes more equal to the charging power, and
so repels the fire back again on the globe, sooner than a single bottle
would do.

11. When a bottle is charged in the common way, its _inside_ and _outside_
surfaces stand ready, the one to give fire by the hook, the other to
receive it by the coating; the one is full, and ready to throw out, the
other empty and extremely hungry; yet as the first will not _give out_,
unless the other can at the same instant _receive in_; so neither will the
latter receive in, unless the first can at the same instant give out. When
both can be done at once, 'tis done with inconceivable quickness and
violence.

12. So a strait spring (tho' the comparison does not agree in every
particular) when forcibly bent, must, to restore itself, contract that side
which in the bending was extended, and extend that which was contracted; if
either of these two operations be hindered, the other cannot be done. But
the spring is not said to be _charg'd_ with elasticity when bent, and
discharg'd when unbent; its quantity of elasticity is always the same.

13. Glass, in like manner, has, within its substance, always the same
quantity of electrical fire, and that a very great quantity in proportion
to the mass of glass, as shall be shewn hereafter.

14. This quantity, proportioned to the glass, it strongly and obstinately
retains, and will have neither more nor less, though it will suffer a
change to be made in its parts and situation; _i. e._ we may take away part
of it from one of the sides, provided we throw an equal quantity into the
other.

15. Yet when the situation of the electrical fire is thus altered in the
glass; when some has been taken from one side, and some added to the other,
it will not be at rest or in its natural state, till 'tis restored to its
original equality.--And this restitution cannot be made through the
substance of the glass, but must be done by a non-electric communication
formed without, from surface to surface.

16. Thus, the whole force of the bottle, and power of giving a shock, is in
the GLASS ITSELF; the non-electrics in contact with the two surfaces,
serving only to _give_ and _receive_ to and from the several parts of the
glass; that is, to give on one side, and take away from the other.

17. This was discovered here in the following manner. Purposing to analyse
the electrified bottle, in order to find wherein its strength lay, we
placed it on glass, and drew out the cork and wire which for that purpose
had been loosely put in. Then taking the bottle in one hand, and bringing a
finger of the other near its mouth, a strong spark came from the water, and
the shock was as violent as if the wire had remained in it, which shewed
that the force did not lie in the wire. Then to find if it resided in the
water, being crouded into and condensed in it, as connfi'd by the glass,
which had been our former opinion, we electrify'd the bottle again, and
placing it on glass, drew out the wire and cork as before; then taking up
the bottle we decanted all its water into an empty bottle, which likewise
stood on glass; and taking up that other bottle, we expected if the force
resided in the water, to find a shock from it; but there was none. We
judged then, that it must either be lost in decanting, or remain in the
first bottle. The latter we found to be true: for that bottle on trial gave
the shock, though filled up as it stood with fresh unelectrified water from
a tea-pot.--To find then, whether glass had this property merely as glass,
or whether the form contributed any thing to it; we took a pane of
sash-glass, and laying it on the stand, placed a plate of lead on its upper
surface; then electrify'd that plate, and bringing a finger to it, there
was a spark and shock. We then took two plates of lead of equal dimensions,
but less than the glass by two inches every way, and electrified the glass
between them, by electrifying the uppermost lead; then separated the glass
from the lead, in doing which, what little fire might be in the lead was
taken out and the glass being touched in the electrified parts with a
finger, afforded only very small pricking sparks, but a great number of
them might be taken from different places. Then dexterously placing it
again between the leaden plates, and compleating a circle between the two
surfaces, a violent shock ensued.--Which demonstrated the power to reside
in glass as glass, and that the non-electrics in contact served only, like
the armature of a loadstone, to unite the force of the several parts, and
bring them at once to any point desired: it being a property of a
non-electric, that the whole body instantly receives or gives what
electrical fire is given to or taken from any one of its parts.

18. Upon this, we made what we call'd an _electrical-battery_, consisting
of eleven panes of large sash-glass, arm'd with thin leaden plates pasted
on each side, placed vertically, and supported at two inches distance on
silk cords, with thick hooks of leaden wire, one from each side, standing
upright, distant from each other, and convenient communications of wire and
chain, from the giving side of one pane, to the receiving side of the
other; that so the whole might be charged together, and with the same
labour as one single pane; and another contrivance to bring the giving
sides, after charging, in contact with one long wire, and the receivers
with another, which two long wires would give the force of all the plates
of glass at once through the body of any animal forming the circle with
them. The plates may also be discharged separately, or any number together
that is required. But this machine is not much used, as not perfectly
answering our intention with regard to the ease of charging, for the reason
given § 10. We made also of large glass panes, magical pictures, and
self-moving animated wheels, presently to be described.

19. I perceive by the ingenious Mr _Watson_'s last book, lately received,
that Dr _Bevis_ had used, before we had, panes of glass to give a shock;
though, till that book came to hand, I thought to have communicated it to
you as a novelty. The excuse for mentioning it here, is, that we tried the
experiment differently, drew different consequences from it, (for Mr
_Watson_ still seems to think the fire _accumulated on the non-electric_
that is in contact with the glass, page 72) and, as far as we hitherto
know, have carried it farther.

20. The magical picture is made thus. Having a large metzotinto with a
frame and glass, suppose of the KING, (God preserve him) take out the
print, and cut a pannel out of it, near two inches distant from the frame
all round. If the cut is through the picture 'tis not the worse. With thin
paste or gum-water, fix the border that is cut off on the inside of the
glass, pressing it smooth and close; then fill up the vacancy by gilding
the glass well with leaf gold or brass. Gild likewise the inner edge of the
back of the frame all round except the top part, and form a communication
between that gilding and the gilding behind the glass: then put in the
board, and that side is finished. Turn up the glass, and gild the fore side
exactly over the back gilding, and when it is dry, cover it by pasting on
the pannel of the picture that had been cut out, observing to bring the
corresponding parts of the border and picture together, by which the
picture will appear of a piece as at first, only part is behind the glass,
and part before.--Hold the picture horizontally by the top, and place a
little moveable gilt crown on the king's-head. If now the picture be
moderately electrified, and another person take hold of the frame with one
hand, so that his fingers touch its inside gilding, and with the other hand
endeavour to take off the crown, he will receive a terrible blow, and fail
in the attempt. If the picture were highly charged, the consequence might
perhaps be as fatal as that of high-treason; for when the spark is taken
through a quire of paper laid on the picture, by means of a wire
communication, it makes a fair hole through every sheet, that is, through
48 leaves, (though a quire of paper is thought good armour against the push
of a sword or even against a pistol bullet) and the crack is exceeding
loud. The operator, who holds the picture by the upper-end, where the
inside of the frame is not gilt, to prevent its falling, feels nothing of
the shock, and may touch the face of the picture without danger, which he
pretends is a test of his loyalty.--If a ring of persons take the shock
among them, the experiment is called, _The Conspirators_.

21. On the principle, in § 7, that hooks of bottles, differently charged,
will attract and repel differently, is made, an electrical wheel, that
turns with considerable strength. A small upright shaft of wood passes at
right angles through a thin round board, of about twelve inches diameter,
and turns on a sharp point of iron fixed in the lower end, while a strong
wire in the upper-end passing thro' a small hole in a thin brass plate,
keeps the shaft truly vertical. About thirty _radii_ of equal length, made
of sash glass cut in narrow strips, issue horizontally from the
circumference of the board, the ends most distant from the center being
about four inches apart. On the end of every one, a brass thimble is fixed.
If now the wire of a bottle electrified in the common way, be brought near
the circumference of this wheel, it will attract the nearest thimble, and
so put the wheel in motion; that thimble, in passing by, receives a spark,
and thereby being electrified is repelled and so driven forwards; while a
second being attracted, approaches the wire, receives a spark, and is
driven after the first, and so on till the wheel has gone once round, when
the thimbles before electrified approaching the wire, instead of being
attracted as they were at first, are repelled, and the motion presently
ceases.--But if another bottle which had been charged through the coating
be placed near the same wheel, its wire will attract the thimble repelled
by the first, and thereby double the force that carries the wheel round;
and not only taking out the fire that had been communicated to the thimbles
by the first bottle, but even robbing them of their natural quantity,
instead of being repelled when they come again towards the first bottle,
they are more strongly attracted, so that the wheel mends its pace, till it
goes with great rapidity twelve or fifteen rounds in a minute, and with
such strength, as that the weight of one hundred _Spanish_ dollars with
which we once loaded it, did not seem in the least to retard its
motion.--This is called an electrical jack; and if a large fowl were
spitted on the upright shaft, it would be carried round before a fire with
a motion fit for roasting.

22. But this wheel, like those driven by wind, water, or weights, moves by
a foreign force, to wit, that of the bottles. The self-moving wheel, though
constructed on the same principles, appears more surprising. 'Tis made of a
thin round plate of window-glass, seventeen inches diameter, well gilt on
both sides, all but two inches next the edge. Two small hemispheres of wood
are then fixed with cement to the middle of the upper and under sides,
centrally opposite, and in each of them a thick strong wire eight or ten
inches long, which together make the axis of the wheel. It turns
horizontally on a point at the lower end of its Axis, which rests on a bit
of brass cemented within a glass salt-celler. The upper end of its axis
passes thro' a hole in a thin brass plate cemented to a long strong piece
of glass, which keeps it six or eight inches distant from any non-electric,
and has a small ball of wax or metal on its top to keep in the fire. In a
circle on the table which supports the wheel, are fixed twelve small
pillars of glass, at about four inches distance, with a thimble on the top
of each. On the edge of the wheel is a small leaden bullet communicating by
a wire with the gilding of the _upper_ surface of the wheel; and about six
inches from it is another bullet communicating in like manner with the
_under_ surface. When the wheel is to be charged by the upper surface, a
communication must be made from the under surface to the table. When it is
well charg'd it begins to move; the bullet nearest to a pillar moves
towards the thimble on that pillar, and passing by electrifies it and then
pushes itself from it; the succeeding bullet, which communicates with the
other surface of the glass, more strongly attracts that thimble on account
of its being before electrified by the other bullet; and thus the wheel
encreases its motion till it comes to such a height as that the resistance
of the air regulates it. It will go half an hour, and make one minute with
another twenty turns in a minute, which is six hundred turns in the whole;
the bullet of the upper surface giving in each turn twelve sparks, to the
thimbles, which make seven thousand two hundred sparks; and the bullet of
the under surface receiving as many from the thimbles; those bullets moving
in the time near two thousand five hundred feet.--The thimbles are well
fixed, and in so exact a circle, that the bullets may pass within a very
small distance of each of them.--If instead of two bullets you put eight,
four communicating with the upper surface, and four with the under surface,
placed alternately; which eight, at about six inches distance, compleats
the circumference, the force and swiftness will be greatly increased, the
wheel making fifty turns in a minute; but then it will not continue moving
so long.--These wheels may be applied, perhaps, to the ringing of chimes,
and moving of light-made Orreries.

23. A small wire bent circularly with a loop at each end; let one end rest
against the under surface of the wheel, and bring the other end near the
upper surface, it will give a terrible crack, and the force will be
discharged.

24. Every spark in that manner drawn from the surface of the wheel, makes a
round hole in the gilding, tearing off a part of it in coming out; which
shews that the fire is not accumulated on the gilding, but is in the glass
itself.

25. The gilding being varnish'd over with turpentine varnish, the varnish
tho' dry and hard, is burnt by the spark drawn thro' it, and gives a strong
smell and visible smoke. And when the spark is drawn through paper, all
round the hole made by it, the paper will be blacked by the smoke, which
sometimes penetrates several of the leaves. Part of the gilding torn off,
is also found forcibly driven into the hole made in the paper by the
stroke.

26. 'Tis amazing to observe in how small a portion of glass a great
electrical force may lie. A thin glass bubble, about an inch diameter,
weighing only six grains, being half-filled with water, partly gilt on the
outside, and furnish'd with a wire hook, gives, when electrified, as great
a shock as a man can well bear. As the glass is thickest near the orifice,
I suppose the lower half, which being gilt was electrified, and gave the
shock, did not exceed two grains; for it appeared, when broke, much thinner
than the upper half.--If one of these thin bottles be electrified by the
coating, and the spark taken out thro' the gilding, it will break the glass
inwards at the same time that it breaks the gilding outwards.

27. And allowing (for the reasons before given, § 8, 9, 10,) that there is
no more electrical fire in a bottle after charging, than before, how great
must be the quantity in this small portion of glass! It seems as if it were
of its very substance and essence. Perhaps if that due quantity of
electrical fire so obstinately retained by glass, could be separated from
it, it would no longer be glass; it might lose its transparency, or its
brittleness, or its elasticity.--Experiments may possibly be invented
hereafter, to discover this.

27. We are surprized at the account given in Mr _Watson_'s book, of a shock
communicated through a great space of dry ground, and suspect there must be
some metaline quality in the gravel of that ground; having found that
simple dry earth, rammed in a glass tube, open at both ends, and a wire
hook inserted in the earth at each end, the earth and wires making part of
a circle, would not conduct the least perceptible shock, and indeed when
one wire was electrify'd, the other hardly showed any signs of its being in
connection with it.--Even a thoroughly wet pack-thread sometimes fails of
conducting a shock, tho' it otherwise conducts electricity very well. A dry
cake of ice, or an icicle held between two in a circle, likewise prevents
the shock; which one would not expect, as water conducts it so perfectly
well.--Gilding on a new book, though at first it conducts the shock
extremely well, yet fails after ten or a dozen experiments, though it
appears otherwise in all respects the same, which we cannot account for.

28. There is one experiment more which surprizes us, and is not hitherto
satisfactorily accounted for; it is this. Place an iron shot on a glass
stand, and let a ball of damp cork, suspended by a silk thread, hang in
contact with the shot. Take a bottle in each hand, one that is electrify'd
through the hook, the other through the coating: Apply the giving wire to
the shot, which will electrify it _positively_, and the cork shall be
repelled: Then apply the requiring wire, which will take out the spark
given by the other; when the cork will return to the shot: Apply the same
again, and take out another spark, so will the shot be electrify'd
_negatively_; and the cork in that case shall be repelled equally as
before. Then apply the giving wire to the shot, and give the spark it
wanted, so will the cork return: Give it another, which will be an addition
to its natural quantity, so will the cork be repelled again: And so may the
experiment be repeated as long as there is any charge in the bottles. Which
shews that bodies having less than the common quantity of Electricity,
repel each other, as well as those that have more.

Chagrined a little that we have hitherto been able to produce nothing in
this way of use to mankind; and the hot weather coming on, when electrical
experiments are not so agreeable, 'tis proposed to put an end to them for
this season, somewhat humorously, in a party of pleasure, on the banks of
_Skuylkill_.[4] Spirits, at the same time, are to be fired by a spark sent
from side to side through the river, without any other conductor than the
water; an experiment which we some time since performed, to the amazement
of many. A turkey is to be killed for our dinner by the _electrical shock_,
and roasted by the _electrical jack_, before a fire kindled by the
_electrified bottle_; when the healths of all the famous electricians in
_England_, _Holland_, _France_, and _Germany_, are to be drank in
[5]_electrified bumpers_, under the discharge of guns from the _electrical
battery_.

  _April 29,
    1749._

[Illustration]



LETTER IV.

CONTAINING

OBSERVATIONS _and_ SUPPOSITIONS, _towards forming a new_ HYPOTHESIS, _for
explaining the several_ Phænomena _of_ THUNDER-GUSTS.[6]


  _SIR_,

§. 1. Non-electric bodies, that have electric fire thrown into them, will
retain it 'till other non-electrics, that have less, approach; and then
'tis communicated by a snap, and becomes equally divided.

2. Electrical fire loves water, is strongly attracted by it, and they can
subsist together.

3. Air is an electric _per se_, and when dry will not conduct the
electrical fire; it will neither receive it, nor give it to other bodies;
otherwise no body surrounded by air could be electrified positively and
negatively: for should it be attempted positively, the air would
immediately take away the overplus; or negatively, the air would supply
what was wanting.

4. Water being electrified, the vapours arising from it will be equally
electrified; and floating in the air, in the form of clouds, or otherwise,
will retain that quantity of electrical fire, till they meet with other
clouds or bodies not so much electrified, and then will communicate as
beforementioned.

5. Every particle of matter electrified is repelled by every other particle
equally electrified. Thus the stream of a fountain, naturally dense and
continual, when electrified, will separate and spread in the form of a
brush, every drop endeavouring to recede from every other drop. But on
taking out the electrical fire, they close again.

6. Water being strongly electrified (as well as when heated by common fire)
rises in vapours more copiously; the attraction of cohesion among its
particles being greatly weakened, by the opposite power of repulsion
introduced with the electrical fire; and when any particle is by any means
disengaged, 'tis immediately repelled, and so flies into the air.

7. Particles happening to be situated as _A_ and _B_, are more easily
disengaged than _C_ and _D_, as each is held by contact with three only,
whereas _C_ and _D_ are each in contact with nine. When the surface of
water has the least motion, particles are continually pushed into the
situation represented by FIG. 6.

8. Friction between a non-electric and an electric _per se_, will produce
electrical fire; not by _creating_, but _collecting_ it: for it is equally
diffused in our walls, floors, earth, and the whole mass of common matter.
Thus the whirling glass globe, during its friction against the cushion,
draws fire from the cushion, the cushion is supplied from the frame of the
machine, that from the floor on which it stands. Cut off the communication
by thick glass or wax placed under the cushion, and no fire can be
_produced_, because it cannot be _collected_.

9. The Ocean is a compound of water, a non-electric, and salt an electric
_per se_.

10. When there is a friction among the parts near its surface, the
electrical fire is collected from the parts below. It is then plainly
visible in the night; it appears at the stern and in the wake of every
sailing vessel; every dash of an oar shows it, and every surff and spray:
in storms the whole sea seems on fire.--The detach'd particles of water
then repelled from the electrified surface, continually carry off the fire
as it is collected; they rise, and form clouds, and those clouds are highly
electrified, and retain the fire 'till they have an opportunity of
communicating it.

11. The particles of water rising in vapours, attach themselves to
particles of air.

12. The particles of air are said to be hard, round, separate and distant
from each other; every particle strongly repelling every other particle,
whereby they recede from each other, as far as common gravity will permit.

13. The space between any three particles equally repelling each other,
will be an equilateral triangle.

14. In air compressed, these triangles are smaller; in rarified Air they
are larger.

15. Common fire joined with air, increases the repulsion, enlarges the
triangles, and thereby makes the air specifically lighter. Such Air among
denser air, will rise.

16. Common fire, as well as electrical fire gives repulsion to the
particles of water, and destroys their attraction of cohesion; hence common
fire, as well as electrical fire, assists in raising vapours.

17. Particles of water, having no fire in them, mutually attract each
other. Three particles of water then being attached to the three particles
of a triangle of air, would by their mutual attraction operating against
the air's repulsion, shorten the sides and lessen the triangle, whereby
that portion of air being made denser, would sink to the earth with its
water, and not rise to contribute to the formation of a cloud.

18. But if every particle of water attaching itself to air, brings with it
a particle of common fire, the repulsion of the air being assisted and
strengthened by the fire, more than obstructed by the mutual attraction of
the particles of water, the triangle dilates, and that portion of air
becoming rarer and specifically lighter rises.

19. If the particles of water bring electrical fire when they attach
themselves to air, the repulsion between the particles of water
electrified, joins with the natural repulsion of the air, to force its
particles to a greater distance, whereby the triangles are dilated, and the
air rises, carrying up with it the water.

20. If the particles of water bring with them portions of _both sorts_ of
fire, the repulsions of the particles of air is still more strengthened and
increased, and the triangles farther enlarged.

21. One particle of air may be surrounded by twelve particles of water of
equal size with itself, all in contact with it; and by more added to those.

22. Particles of air thus loaded would be drawn nearer together by the
mutual attraction of the particles of water, did not the fire, common or
electrical, assist their repulsion.

23. If air thus loaded be compressed by adverse winds, or by being driven
against mountains, &c. or condensed by taking away the fire that assisted
it in expanding; the triangles contract, the air with its water will
descend as a dew; or, if the water surrounding one particle of air comes in
contact with the water surrounding another, they coalesce and form a drop,
and we have rain.

24. The sun supplies (or seems to supply) common fire to all vapours,
whether raised from earth or sea.

25. Those vapours which have both common and electrical fire in them, are
better supported, than those which have only common fire in them. For when
vapours rise into the coldest region above the earth, the cold will not
diminish the electrical fire, if it doth the common.

26. Hence clouds formed by vapours raised from fresh waters within land,
from growing vegetables, moist earth, &c. more speedily and easily deposite
their water, having but little electrical fire to repel and keep the
particles separate. So that the greatest part of the water raised from the
land is let fall on the land again; and winds blowing from the land to the
sea are dry; there being little use for rain on the sea, and to rob the
land of its moisture, in order to rain on the sea, would not appear
reasonable.

27. But clouds formed by vapours raised from the sea, having both fires,
and particularly a great quantity of the electrical, support their water
strongly, raise it high, and being moved by winds may bring it over the
middle of the broadest continent from the middle of the widest ocean.

28. How these ocean clouds, so strongly supporting their water, are made to
deposite it on the land where 'tis wanted, is next to be considered.

29. If they are driven by winds against mountains, those mountains being
less electrified attract them, and on contact take away their electrical
fire (and being cold, the common fire also;) hence the particles close
towards the mountains and towards each other. If the air was not much
loaded, it only falls in dews on the mountain tops and sides, forms
springs, and descends to the vales in rivulets, which united make larger
streams and rivers. If much loaded, the electrical fire is at once taken
from the whole cloud; and, in leaving it, flashes brightly and cracks
loudly; the particles instantly coalescing for want of that fire, and
falling in a heavy shower.

30. When a ridge of mountains thus dams the clouds, and draws the
electrical fire from the cloud first approaching it; that which next
follows, when it comes near the first cloud, now deprived of its fire,
flashes into it, and begins to deposite its own water; the first cloud
again flashing into the mountains; the third approaching cloud, and all the
succeeding ones, acting in the same manner as far back as they extend,
which may be over many hundred miles of country.

31. Hence the continual storms of rain, thunder, and lightning on the
east-side of the _Andes_, which running north and south, and being vastly
high, intercept all the clouds brought against them from the _Atlantic_
ocean by the trade winds, and oblige them to deposite their waters, by
which the vast rivers _Amazons_, _La Plata_, and _Oroonoko_ are formed,
which return the water into the same sea, after having fertilized a country
of very great extent.

32. If a country be plain, having no mountains to intercept the electrified
clouds, yet is it not without means to make them deposite their water. For
if an electrified cloud coming from the sea, meets in the air a cloud
raised from the land, and therefore not electrified; the first will flash
its fire into the latter, and thereby both clouds shall be made suddenly to
deposite water.

33. The electrified particles of the first cloud close when they lose their
fire; the particles of the other cloud close in receiving it: in both, they
have thereby an opportunity of coalescing into drops.--The concussion or
jerk given to the air, contributes also to shake down the water, not only
from those two clouds but from others near them. Hence the sudden fall of
rain immediately after flashes of lightning.

34. To shew this by an easy experiment. Take two round pieces of pasteboard
two inches diameter; from the center and circumference of each of them
suspend by fine silk threads eighteen inches long, seven small balls of
wood, or seven peas equal in bigness; so will the balls appending to each
pasteboard, form equal equilateral triangles, one ball being in the center,
and six at equal distances from that, and from each other; and thus they
represent particles of air. Dip both sets in water, and some cohering to
each ball they will represent air loaded. Dexterously electrify one set,
and its balls will repel each other to a greater distance, enlarging the
triangles. Could the water supported by the seven balls come into contact,
it would form a drop or drops so heavy as to break the cohesion it had with
the balls, and so fall.--Let the two sets then represent two clouds, the
one a sea cloud electrified, the other a land cloud. Bring them within the
sphere of attraction, and they will draw towards each other, and you will
see the separated balls close thus; the first electrified ball that comes
near an unelectrified ball by attraction joins it, and gives it fire;
instantly they separate, and each flies to another ball of its own party,
one to give, the other to receive fire; and so it proceeds through both
sets, but so quick as to be in a manner instantaneous. In the collision
they shake off and drop their water, which represents rain.

35. Thus when sea and land clouds would pass at too great a distance for
the flash, they are attracted towards each other till within that distance;
for the sphere of electrical attraction is far beyond the distance of
flashing.

36. When a great number of clouds from the sea meet a number of clouds
raised from the land, the electrical flashes appear to strike in different
parts; and as the clouds are jostled and mixed by the winds, or brought
near by the electrical attraction, they continue to give and receive flash
after flash, till the electrical fire is equally diffused.

37. When the gun-barrel (in electrical experiments) has but little
electrical fire in it, you must approach it very near with your knuckle,
before you can draw a spark. Give it more fire, and it will give a spark at
a greater distance. Two gun-barrels united, and as highly electrified, will
give a spark at a still greater distance. But if two gun-barrels
electrified will strike at two inches distance, and make a loud snap, to
what a great distance may 10,000 acres of electrified cloud strike and give
its fire, and how loud must be that crack!

38. It is a common thing to see clouds at different heights passing
different ways, which shews different currents of air, one under the other.
As the air between the tropics is rarified by the sun, it rises, the denser
northern and southern air pressing into its place. The air so rarified and
forced up, passes northward and southward, and must descend in the polar
regions, if it has no opportunity before, that the circulation may be
carried on.

39. As currents of air, with the clouds therein, pass different ways, 'tis
easy to conceive how the clouds, passing over each other, may attract each
other, and so come near enough for the electrical stroke. And also how
electrical clouds may be carried within land very far from the sea, before
they have an opportunity to strike.

40. When the air, with its vapours raised from the ocean between the
tropics, comes to descend in the polar regions, and to be in contact with
the vapours arising there, the electrical fire they brought begins to be
communicated, and is seen in clear nights, being first visible where 'tis
first in motion, that is, where the contact begins, or in the most northern
part; from thence the streams of light seem to shoot southerly, even up to
the zenith of northern countries. But tho' the light seems to shoot from
the north southerly, the progress of the fire is really from the south
northerly, its motion beginning in the north being the reason that 'tis
there first seen.

For the electrical fire is never visible but when in motion, and leaping
from body to body, or from particle to particle thro' the air. When it
passes thro' dense bodies 'tis unseen. When a wire makes part of the
circle, in the explosion of the electrical phial, the fire, though in great
quantity, passes in the wire invisibly: but in passing along a chain, it
becomes visible as it leaps from link to link. In passing along
leaf-gilding 'tis visible: for the leaf-gold is full of pores; hold a leaf
to the light and it appears like a net; and the fire is seen in its leaping
over the vacancies.--And as when a long canal filled with still water is
opened at one end, in order to be discharged, the motion of the water
begins first near the opened end, and proceeds towards the close end, tho'
the water itself moves from the close towards the opened end: so the
electrical fire discharged into the polar regions, perhaps from a thousand
leagues length of vaporiz'd air, appears first where 'tis first in motion,
_i. e._ in the most northern part, and the appearance proceeds southward,
tho' the fire really moves northward. This is supposed to account for the
_Aurora Borealis_.

41. When there is great heat on the land, in a particular region (the sun
having shone on it perhaps several days, while the surrounding countries
have been screen'd by clouds) the lower air is rarified and rises, the
cooler denser air above descends; the clouds in that air meet from all
sides, and join over the heated place; and if some are electrified, others
not, lightning and thunder succeed, and showers fall. Hence thunder-gusts
after heats, and cool air after gusts; the water and the clouds that bring
it, coming from a higher and therefore a cooler region.

42. An electrical spark, drawn from an irregular body at some distance is
scarce ever strait, but shows crooked and waving in the air. So do the
flashes of lightning; the clouds being very irregular bodies.

43. As electrified clouds pass over a country, high hills and high trees,
lofty towers, spires, masts of ships, chimneys, _&c._ as so many
prominencies and points, draw the electrical fire, and the whole cloud
discharges there.

44. Dangerous, therefore, is it to take shelter under a tree during a
thunder-gust. It has been fatal to many, both men and beasts.

45. It is safer to be in the open field for another reason. When the
clothes are wet, if a flash in its way to the ground should strike your
head, it will run in the water over the surface of your body; whereas, if
your clothes were dry, it would go thro' the body.

Hence a wet rat cannot be killed by the exploding electrical bottle, when a
dry rat may.

46. Common fire is in all bodies, more or less, as well as electrical fire.
Perhaps they may be different modifications of the same element; or they
may be different elements. The latter is by some suspected.

47. If they are different things, yet they may and do subsist together in
the same body.

48. When electrical fire strikes thro' a body, it acts upon the common fire
contained in it, and puts that fire in motion; and if there be a sufficient
quantity of each kind of fire, the body will be inflamed.

49. When the quantity of common fire in the body is small, the quantity of
the electrical fire (or the electrical stroke) should be greater: if the
quantity of common fire be great, less electrical fire suffices to produce
the effect.

50. Thus spirits must be heated before we can fire them by the electrical
spark. If they are much heated a small spark will do; if not, the spark
must be greater.

51. Till lately we could only fire warm vapours; but now we can burn hard
dry rosin. And when we can procure greater electrical sparks, we may be
able to fire not only unwarm'd spirits, as lightning does, but even wood,
by giving sufficient agitation to the common fire contained in it, as
friction we know will do.

52. Sulphureous and inflammable vapours arising from the earth, are easily
kindled by lightning. Besides what arise from the earth, such vapours are
sent out by stacks of moist hay, corn, or other vegetables, which heat and
reek. Wood rotting in old trees or buildings does the same. Such are
therefore easily and often fired.

53. Metals are often melted by lightning, tho' perhaps not from heat in the
lightning, nor altogether from agitated fire in the metals.--For as
whatever body can insinuate itself between the particles of metal, and
overcome the attraction by which they cohere (as sundry menstrua can) will
make the solid become a fluid, as well as fire, yet without heating it: so
the electrical fire, or lightning, creating a violent repulsion between the
particles of the metal it passes thro', the metal is fused.

54. If you would, by a violent fire, melt off the end of a nail, which is
half driven into a door, the heat given the whole nail before a part would
melt, must burn the board it sticks in. And the melted part would burn the
floor it dropp'd on. But if a sword can be melted in the scabbard, and
money in a man's pocket, by lightning, without burning either, it must be a
cold fusion.

55. Lightning rends some bodies. The electrical spark will strike a hole
thro' a quire of strong paper.

56. If the source of lightning, assigned in this paper, be the true one,
there should be little thunder heard at sea far from land. And accordingly
some old sea-captains, of whom enquiry has been made, do affirm, that the
fact agrees perfectly with the hypothesis; for that, in crossing the great
ocean, they seldom meet with thunder till they come into soundings; and
that the islands far from the continent have very little of it. And a
curious observer, who lived 13 years at _Bermudas_, says, there was less
thunder there in that whole time than he has sometimes heard in a month at
_Carolina_.




ADDITIONAL PAPERS.

TO

Mr. PETER COLLINSON, F.R.S. _London_.

PHILADELPHIA, _July 29, 1750_

  _SIR_,

As you first put us on electrical experiments, by sending to our library
company a tube, with directions how to use it; and as our honourable
proprietary enabled us to carry those experiments to a greater height, by
his generous present of a compleat electrical apparatus; 'tis fit that both
should know from time to time what progress we make. It was in this view I
wrote and sent you my former papers on this subject, desiring, that as I
had not the honour of a direct correspondence with that bountiful
benefactor to our library, they might be communicated to him through your
hands. In the same view I write, and send you this additional paper. If it
happens to bring you nothing new (which may well be, considering the number
of ingenious men in _Europe_, continually engaged in the same researches)
at least it will show, that the instruments, put into our hands, are not
neglected; and, that if no valuable discoveries are made by us, whatever
the cause may be, it is not want of industry and application.

  _I am, Sir,
    Your much obliged
      Humble Servant_,
        B. FRANKLIN.




OPINIONS and CONJECTURES,
_Concerning the Properties and Effects of the electrical Matter, arising
from Experiments and Observations, made in_ Philadelphia, 1749.


§ 1. The electrical matter consists of particles extreamly subtile, since
it can permeate common matter, even the densest metals, with such ease and
freedom, as not to receive any perceptible resistance.

2. If any one should doubt, whether the electrical matter passes thro' the
substance of bodies, or only over and along their surfaces, a shock from an
electrified large glass jar, taken thro' his own body, will probably
convince him.

3. Electrical matter differs from common matter in this, that the parts of
the latter mutually attract, those of the former mutually repel, each
other. Hence the appearing divergency in a stream of electrified effluvia.

4. But tho' the particles of electrical matter do repel each other, they
are strongly attracted by all other matter.[7]

5. From these three things, the extreme subtilty of the electrical matter,
the mutual repulsion of its parts, and the strong attraction between them
and other matter, arise this effect, that when a quantity of electrical
matter, is applied to a mass of common matter, of any bigness or length
within our observation (which has not already got its quantity) it is
immediately and equally diffused through the whole.

6. Thus common matter is a kind of spunge to the electrical fluid. And as a
spunge would receive no water, if the parts of water were not smaller than
the pores of the spunge; and even then but slowly, if there were not a
mutual attraction between those parts and the parts of the spunge; and
would still imbibe it faster, if the mutual attraction among the parts of
the water did not impede, some force being required to separate them; and
fastest, if, instead of attraction, there were a mutual repulsion among
those parts, which would act in conjunction with the attraction of the
spunge. So is the case between the electrical and common matter.

7. But in common matter there is (generally) as much of the electrical, as
it will contain within its substance. If more is added, it lies without
upon the surface, and forms what we call an electrical atmosphere: and then
the body is said to be electrified.

8. 'Tis supposed, that all kinds of common matter do not attract and retain
the electrical, with equal strength and force; for reasons to be given
hereafter. And that those called electrics _per se_, as glass, &c. attract
and retain it strongest, and contain the greatest quantity.

9. We know that the electrical fluid is _in_ common matter, because we can
pump it _out_ by the globe or tube. We know that common matter has near as
much as it can contain, because, when we add a little more to any protion
of it, the additional quantity does not enter, but forms an electrical
atmosphere. And we know that common matter has not (generally) more than it
can contain, otherwise all loose portions of it would repel each other, as
they constantly do when they have electric atmospheres.

10. The beneficial uses of this electrical fluid in the creation, we are
not yet well acquainted with, though doubtless such there are, and those
very considerable; but we may see some pernicious consequences, that would
attend a much greater proportion of it. For had this globe we live on as
much of it in proportion, as we can give to a globe of iron, wood, or the
like, the particles of dust and other light matters that get loose from it,
would, by virtue of their separate electrical atmospheres, not only repel
each other, but be repelled from the earth, and not easily be brought to
unite with it again; whence our air would continually be more and more
clogged with foreign matter, and grow unfit for respiration. This affords
another occasion of adoring that wisdom which has made all things by weight
and measure!

11. If a piece of common matter be supposed intirely free from electrical
matter, and a single particle of the latter be brought nigh, 'twill be
attracted and enter the body, and take place in the center, or where the
attraction is every way equal. If more particles enter, they take their
places where the balance is equal between the attraction of the common
matter and their own mutual repulsion. 'Tis supposed they form triangles,
whose sides shorten as their number increases; 'till the common matter has
drawn in so many, that its whole power of compressing those triangles by
attraction, is equal to their whole power of expanding themselves by
repulsion; and then will such piece of matter receive no more.

12. When part of this natural proportion of electrical fluid, is taken out
of a piece of common matter, the triangles formed by the remainder, are
supposed to widen by the mutual repulsion of the parts, until they occupy
the whole piece.

13. When the quantity of electrical fluid taken from a piece of common
matter is restored again, it enters, the expanded triangles being again
compressed till there is room for the whole.

14. To explain this: take two apples, or two balls of wood or other matter,
each having its own natural quantity of the electrical fluid. Suspend them
by silk lines from the ceiling. Apply the wire of a well-charged vial, held
in your hand, to one of them (A) Fig. 7. and it will receive from the wire
a quantity of the electrical fluid; but will not imbibe it, being already
full. The fluid therefore will flow round its surface, and form an
electrical atmosphere. Bring A into contact with B, and half the electrical
fluid is communicated, so that each has now an electrical atmosphere, and
therefore they repel each other. Take away these atmospheres by touching
the balls, and leave them in their natural state: then, having fixed a
stick of sealing wax to the middle of the vial to hold it by, apply the
wire to A, at the same time the coating touches B. Thus will a quantity of
the electrical fluid be drawn out of B, and thrown on A. So that A will
have a redundance of this fluid, which forms an atmosphere round it, and B
an exactly equal deficiency. Now bring these balls again into contact, and
the electrical atmosphere will not be divided between A and B, into two
smaller atmospheres as before; for B will drink up the whole atmosphere of
A, and both will be found again in their natural state.

15. The form of the electrical atmosphere is that of the body it surrounds.
This shape may be rendered visible in a still air, by raising a smoke from
dry rosin, dropt into a hot tea-spoon under the electrised body, which will
be attracted and spread itself equaly on all sides, covering and concealing
the body. And this form it takes, because it is attracted by all parts of
the surface of the body, tho' it cannot enter the substance already
replete. Without this attraction it would not remain round the body, but
dissipate in the air.

16. The atmosphere of electrical particles surrounding an electrified
sphere, is not more disposed to leave it or more easily drawn off from any
one part of the sphere than from another, because it is equally attracted
by every part. But that is not the case with bodies of any other figure.
From a cube it is more easily drawn at the corners than at the plane sides,
and so from the angles of a body of any other form, and still most easily
from the angle that is most acute. Thus if a body shaped as A, B, C, D, E,
in Fig. 8, be electrified, or have an electrical atmosphere communicated to
it, and we consider every side as a base on which the particles rest and by
which they are attracted, one may see, by imagining a line from A to F, and
another from E to G, that the portion of the atmosphere included in F, A,
E, G, has the line A, E, for its basis. So the portion of atmosphere
included in H, A, B, I, has the line A, B, for its basis. And likewise the
portion included in K, B, C, L, has B, C, to rest on; and so on the other
side of the figure. Now if you would draw off this atmosphere with any
blunt smooth body, and approach the middle of the side A, B, you must come
very near before the force of your attracter exceeds the force or power
with which that side holds its atmosphere. But there is a small portion
between I, B, K, that has less of the surface to rest on, and to be
attracted by, than the neighbouring portions, while at the same time there
is a mutual repulsion between its particles and the particles of those
portions, therefore here you can get it with more ease or at a greater
distance. Between F, A, H, there is a larger portion that has yet a less
surface to rest on and to attract it; here therefore you can get it away
still more easily. But easiest of all between L, C, M, where the quantity
is largest, and the surface to attract and keep it back the least. When you
have drawn away one of these angular portions of the fluid, another
succeeds in its place, from the nature of fluidity and the mutual repulsion
beforementioned; and so the atmosphere continues flowing off at such angle,
like a stream, till no more is remaining. The extremities of the portions
of atmosphere over these angular parts are likewise at a greater distance
from the electrified body, as may be seen by the inspection of the above
figure; the point of the atmosphere of the angle C, being much farther from
C, than any other part of the atmosphere over the lines C, B, or B, A: And
besides the distance arising from the nature of the figure, where the
attraction is less, the particles will naturally expand to a greater
distance by their mutual repulsion. On these accounts we suppose
electrified bodies discharge their atmospheres upon unelectrified bodies
more easily and at a greater distance from their angles and points than
from their smooth sides.--Those points will also discharge into the air,
when the body has too great an electrical atmosphere, without bringing any
non-electric near, to receive what is thrown off: For the air, though an
electric _per se_, yet has always more or less water and other non-electric
matters mixed with it; and these attract and receive what is so discharged.

17. But points have a property, by which they _draw on_ as well as _throw
off_ the electrical fluid, at greater distances than blunt bodies can. That
is, as the pointed part of an electrified body will discharge the
atmosphere of that body, or communicate it farthest to another body, so the
point of an unelectrified body, will draw off the electrical atmosphere
from an electrified body, farther than a blunter part of the same
unelectrified body will do. Thus a pin held by the head, and the point
presented to an electrified body, will draw off its atmosphere at a foot
distance; where if the head were presented instead of the point, no such
effect would follow. To understand this, we may consider, that if a person
standing on the floor would draw off the electrical atmosphere from an
electrified body, an iron crow and a blunt knitting kneedle held
alternately in his hand and presented for that purpose, do not draw with
different forces in proportion to their different masses. For the man, and
what he holds in his hand, be it large or small, are connected with the
common mass of unelectrified matter; and the force with which he draws is
the same in both cases, it consisting in the different proportion of
electricity in the electrified body and that common mass. But the force
with which the electrified body retains its atmosphere by attracting it, is
proportioned to the surface over which the particles are placed; i.e. four
square inches of that surface retain their atmosphere with four times the
force that one square inch retains its atmosphere. And as in plucking the
hairs from the horse's tail, a degree of strength insufficient to pull away
a handful at once, could yet easily strip it hair by hair; so a blunt body
presented cannot draw off a number of particles at once, but a pointed one,
with no greater force, takes them away easily, particle by particle.

18. These explanations of the power and operation of points, when they
first occurr'd to me, and while they first floated in my mind, appeared
perfectly satisfactory; but now I have wrote them, and consider'd them more
closely in black and white, I must own I have some doubts about them: yet
as I have at present nothing better to offer in their stead, I do not cross
them out: for even a bad solution read, and its faults discover'd, has
often given rise to a good one in the mind of an ingenious reader.

19. Nor is it of much importance to us, to know the manner in which nature
executes her laws; 'tis enough if we know the laws themselves. 'Tis of real
use to know, that china left in the air unsupported will fall and break;
but _how_ it comes to fall, and _why_ it breaks, are matters of
speculation. 'Tis a pleasure indeed to know them, but we can preserve our
china without it.

20. Thus in the present case, to know this power of points, may possibly be
of some use to mankind, though we should never be able to explain it. The
following experiments, as well as those in my first paper, show this power.
I have a large prime conductor made of several thin sheets of Fuller's
pasteboard form'd into a tube, near 10 feet long and a foot diameter. It is
cover'd with _Dutch_ emboss'd paper, almost totally gilt. This large
metallic surface supports a much greater electrical atmosphere than a rod
of iron of 50 times the weight would do. It is suspended by silk lines, and
when charg'd will strike at near two inches distance, a pretty hard stroke
so as to make one's knuckle ach. Let a person standing on the floor present
the point of a needle at 12 or more inches distance from it, and while the
needle is so presented, the conductor cannot be charged, the point drawing
off the fire as fast as it is thrown on by the electrical globe. Let it be
charged, and then present the point at the same distance, and it will
suddenly be discharged. In the dark you may see a light on the point, when
the experiment is made. And if the person holding the point stands upon
wax, he will be electrified by receiving the fire at that distance. Attempt
to draw off the electricity with a blunt body, as a bolt of iron round at
the end and smooth (a silversmith's iron punch, inch-thick, is what I use)
and you must bring it within the distance of three inches before you can do
it, and then it is done with a stroke and crack. As the pasteboard tube
hangs loose on silk lines, when you approach it with the punch iron, it
likewise will move towards the punch, being attracted while it is charged;
but if at the same instant a point be presented as before, it retires
again, for the point discharges it. Take a pair of large brass scales, of
two or more feet beam, the cords of the scales being silk. Suspend the beam
by a packthread from the cieling, so that the bottom of the scales may be
about a foot from the floor: The scales will move round in a circle by the
untwisting of the packthread. Set the iron punch on the end upon the floor,
in such a place as that the scales may pass over it in making their circle:
Then electrify one scale by applying the wire of a charged phial to it. As
they move round, you see that scale draw nigher to the floor, and dip more
when it comes over the punch; and if that be placed at a proper distance,
the scale will snap and discharge its fire into it. But if a needle be
stuck on the end of the punch, its point upwards, the scale, instead of
drawing nigh to the punch and snapping, discharges its fire silently
through the point, and rises higher from the punch. Nay, even if the needle
be placed upon the floor near the punch, its point upwards, the end of the
punch, tho' so much higher than the needle, will not attract the scale and
receive its fire, for the needle will get it and convey it away, before it
comes nigh enough for the punch to act. And this is constantly observable
in these experiments, that the greater quantity of electricity on the
pasteboard tube, the farther it strikes or discharges its fire, and the
point likewise will draw it off at a still greater distance.

Now if the fire of electricity and that of lightening be the same, as I
have endeavour'd to show at large in a former paper, this pasteboard tube
and these scales may represent electrified clouds. If a tube of only 10
feet long will strike and discharge its fire on the punch at two or three
inches distance, an electrified cloud of perhaps 10,000 acres, may strike
and discharge on the earth at a proportionably greater distance. The
horizontal motion of the scales over the floor, may represent the motion of
the clouds over the earth; and the erect iron punch, a hill or high
building; and then we see how electrified clouds passing over hills or high
buildings at too great a height to strike, may be attracted lower till
within their striking distance. And lastly, if a needle fix'd on the punch
with its point upright, or even on the floor below the punch, will draw the
fire from the scale silently at a much greater than the striking distance,
and so prevent its descending towards the punch; or if in its course it
would have come nigh enough to strike, yet being first deprived of its fire
it cannot, and the punch is thereby secured from the stroke. I say, if
these things are so, may not the knowledge of this power of points be of
use to mankind, in preserving houses, churches, ships, &c. from the stroke
of lightning, by directing us to fix on the highest parts of those
edifices, upright rods of iron made sharp as a needle, and gilt to prevent
rusting, and from the foot of those rods a wire down the outside of the
building into the ground, or down round one of the shrouds of a ship, and
down her side till it reaches the water? Would not these pointed rods
probably draw the electrical fire silently out of a cloud before it came
nigh enough to strike, and thereby secure us from that most sudden and
terrible mischief?

21. To determine the question, whether the clouds that contain lightning
are electrified or not, I would propose an experiment to be try'd where it
may be done conveniently. On the top of some high tower or steeple, place a
kind of sentry-box, (as in FIG. 9.) big enough to contain a man and an
electrical stand. From the middle of the stand, let an iron rod rise and
pass bending out of the door, and then upright 20 or 30 feet, pointed very
sharp at the end. If the electrical stand be kept clean and dry, a man
standing on it when such clouds are passing low, might be electrified and
afford sparks, the rod drawing fire to him from a cloud. If any danger to
the man should be apprehended (though I think there would be none) let him
stand on the floor of his box, and now and then bring near to the rod, the
loop of a wire that has one end fastened to the leads, he holding it by a
wax handle; so the sparks, if the rod is electrified, will strike from the
rod to the wire, and not affect him.

22. Before I leave this subject of lightning, I may mention some other
similarities between the effects of that, and these of electricity.
Lightning has often been known to strike people blind. A pigeon that we
struck dead to appearance by the electrical shock, recovering life, droop'd
about the yard several days, eat nothing though crumbs were thrown to it,
but declined and died. We did not think of its being deprived of sight; but
afterwards a pullet struck dead in like manner, being recovered by
repeatedly blowing into its lungs, when set down on the floor, ran headlong
against the wall, and on examination appeared perfectly blind. Hence we
concluded that the pigeon also had been absolutely blinded by the shock.
The biggest animal we have yet killed or try'd to kill with the electrical
stroke, was a well-grown pullet.

23. Reading in the ingenious Dr. _Hales_'s account of the thunder storm at
_Stretham_, the effect of the lightning in stripping off all the paint that
had covered a gilt moulding of a pannel of wainscot, without hurting the
rest of the paint, I had a mind to lay a coat of paint over the filleting
of gold on the cover of a book, and try the effect of a strong electrical
flash sent through that gold from a charged sheet of glass. But having no
paint at hand, I pasted a narrow strip of paper over it; and when dry, sent
the flash through the gilding; by which the paper was torn off from end to
end, with such force, that it was broke in several places, and in others
brought away part of the grain of the Turky-leather in which it was bound;
and convinced me, that had it been painted, the paint would have been
stript off in the same manner with that on the wainscot at _Stretham_.

24. Lightning melts metals, and I hinted in my paper on that subject, that
I suspected it to be a cold fusion; I do not mean a fusion by force of
cold, but a fusion without heat. We have also melted gold, silver, and
copper, in small quantities, by the electrical flash. The manner is this:
Take leaf gold, leaf silver, or leaf gilt copper, commonly called leaf
brass or _Dutch_ gold: cut off from the leaf long narrow strips the breadth
of a straw. Place one of these strips between two strips of smooth glass
that are about the width of your finger. If one strip of gold, the length
of the leaf, be not long enough for the glass, add another to the end of
it, so that you may have a little part hanging out loose at each end of the
glass. Bind the pieces of glass together from end to end with strong silk
thread; then place it so as to be part of an electrical circle, (the ends
of gold hanging out being of use to join with the other parts of the
circle) and send the flash through it, from a large electrified jar or
sheet of glass. Then if your strips of glass remain whole, you will see
that the gold is missing in several places, and instead of it a metallic
stain on both the glasses; the stains on the upper and under glass exactly
similar in the minutest stroke, as may be seen by holding them to the
light; the metal appeared to have been not only melted, but even vitrified,
or otherwise so driven into the pores of the glass, as to be protected by
it from the action of the strongest _Aqua Fortis_ and _Ag: Regia_. I send
you enclosed two little pieces of glass with these metallic stains upon
them, which cannot be removed without taking part of the glass with them.
Sometimes the stain spreads a little wider than the breadth of the leaf,
and looks brighter at the edge, as by inspecting closely you may observe in
these. Sometimes the glass breaks to pieces: once the upper glass broke
into a thousand pieces, looking like coarse salt. These pieces I send you,
were stain'd with _Dutch_ gold. True gold makes a darker stain, somewhat
reddish; silver, a greenish stain. We once took two pieces of thick
looking-glass, as broad as a Gunter's scale, and 6 inches long; and placing
leaf gold between them, put them betwixt two smoothly plain'd pieces of
wood, and fix'd them tight in a book-binder's small press; yet though they
were so closely confined, the force of the electrical shock shivered the
glass into many pieces. The gold was melted and stain'd into the glass as
usual. The circumstances of the breaking of the glass differ much in making
the experiment, and sometimes it does not break at all: but this is
constant, that the stains in the upper and under pieces are exact
counterparts of each other. And though I have taken up the pieces of glass
between my fingers immediately after this melting, I never could perceive
the least warmth in them.

25. In one of my former papers, I mention'd, that gilding on a book, though
at first it communicated the shock perfectly well, yet fail'd after a few
experiments, which we could not account for. We have since found, that one
strong shock breaks the continuity of the gold in the filleting, and makes
it look rather like dust of gold, abundance of its parts being broken and
driven off; and it will seldom conduct above one strong shock. Perhaps this
may be the reason; when there is not a perfect continuity in the circle,
the fire must leap over the vacancies; there is a certain distance which it
is able to leap over according to its strength; if a number of small
vacancies, though each be very minute, taken together exceed that distance,
it cannot leap over them, and so the shock is prevented.

26. From the before mentioned law of electricity, that points, as they are
more or less acute, draw on and throw off the electrical fluid with more or
less power, and at greater or less distances, and in larger or smaller
quantities in the same time, we may see how to account for the situation of
the leaf of gold suspended between two plates, the upper one continually
electrified, the under one in a person's hand standing on the floor. When
the upper plate is electrified, the leaf is attracted and raised towards
it, and would fly to that plate were it not for its own points. The corner
that happens to be uppermost when the leaf is rising, being a sharp point,
from the extream thinness of the gold, draws and receives at a distance a
sufficient quantity of the electrical fluid to give itself an electrical
atmosphere, by which its progress to the upper plate is stopt, and it
begins to be repelled from that plate, and would be driven back to the
under plate, but that its lowest corner is likewise a point, and throws off
or discharges the overplus of the leaf's atmosphere, as fast as the upper
corner draws it on. Were these two points perfectly equal in acuteness, the
leaf would take place exactly in the middle space, for its Weight is a
trifle, compared to the power acting on it: But it is generally nearest the
unelectrified plate, because, when the leaf is offered to the electrified
plate at a distance, the sharpest point is commonly first affected and
raised towards it; so that point, from its greater acuteness, receiving the
fluid faster than its opposite can discharge it at equal distances, it
retires from the electrified plate, and draws nearer to the unelectrified
plate, till it comes to a distance where the discharge can be exactly equal
to the receipt, the latter being lessened, and the former encreased; and
there it remains as long as the globe continues to supply fresh electrical
matter. This will appear plain, when the difference of acuteness in the
corners is made very great. Cut a piece of _Dutch_ gold (which is fittest
for these experiments on account of its greater strength) into the form of
FIG. 10 the upper corner a right angle, the two next obtuse angles, and the
lowest a very acute one; and bring this on your plate under the electrified
plate, in such a manner as that the right-angled part may be first raised
(which is done by covering the acute part with the hollow of your hand) and
you will see this leaf take place much nearer to the upper than to the
under plate; because, without being nearer, it cannot receive so fast at
its right-angled point, as it can discharge at its acute one. Turn this
leaf with the acute part uppermost, and then it takes place nearest the
unelectrified plate, because otherwise it receives faster at its acute
point than it can discharge at its right-angled one. Thus the difference of
distance is always proportioned to the difference of acuteness. Take care
in cutting your leaf to leave no little ragged particles on the edges,
which sometimes form points where you would not have them. You may make
this figure so acute below and blunt above, as to need no under plate, it
discharging fast enough into the air. When it is made narrower, as the
figure between the pricked lines, we call it the _Golden Fish_, from its
manner of acting. For if you take it by the tail, and hold it at a foot or
greater horizontal distance from the prime conductor, it will, when let go,
fly to it with a brisk but wavering motion, like that of an eel through the
water; it will then take place under the prime conductor, at perhaps a
quarter or half an inch distance, and keep a continual shaking of its tail
like a fish, so that it seems animated. Turn its tail towards the prime
conductor, and then it flies to your finger, and seems to nibble it. And if
you hold a plate under it at six or eight inches distance, and cease
turning the Globe, when the electrical atmosphere of the conductor grows
small, it will descend to the plate and swim back again several times with
the same fish-like motion, greatly to the entertainment of spectators. By a
little practice in blunting or sharpening the heads or tails of these
figures, you may make them take place as desired, nearer, or farther from
the electrified plate.

27. It is said in section 8, of this paper, that all kinds of common matter
are supposed not to attract the electrical fluid with equal strength; and
that those called electrics _per se_, as glass, &c. attract and retain it
strongest, and contain the greatest quantity. This latter position may seem
a paradox to some, being contrary to the hitherto received opinion; and
therefore I shall now endeavour to explain it.

28. In order to this, let it first be considered, _that we cannot, by any
means we are yet acquainted with, force the electrical fluid thro' glass_.
I know it is commonly thought that it easily pervades glass, and the
experiment of a feather suspended by a thread in a bottle hermetically
sealed, yet moved by bringing a nibbed tube near the outside of the bottle,
is alledged to prove it. But, if the electrical fluid so easily pervades
glass, how does the vial become _charged_ (as we term it) when we hold it
in our hands? Would not the fire thrown in by the wire pass through to our
hands, and so escape into the floor? Would not the bottle in that case be
left just as we found it, uncharged, as we know a metal bottle so attempted
to be charged would be? Indeed, if there be the least crack, the minutest
solution of continuity in the glass, though it remains so tight that
nothing else we know of will pass, yet the extremely subtile electrical
fluid flies through such a crack with the greatest freedom, and such a
bottle we know can never be charged: What then makes the difference between
such a bottle and one that is sound, but this, that the fluid can pass
through the one, and not through the other?[8]

29. It is true there is an experiment that at first sight would be apt to
satisfy a slight observer, that the fire thrown into the bottle by the
wire, does really pass thro' the glass. It is this: place the bottle on a
glass stand, under the prime conductor; suspend a bullet by a chain from
the prime conductor, till it comes within a quarter of an inch right over
the wire of the bottle; place your knuckle on the glass stand, at just the
same distance from the coating of the bottle, as the bullet is from its
wire. Now let the globe be turned, and you see a spark strike from the
bullet to the wire of the bottle, and the same instant you see and feel an
exactly equal spark striking from the coating on your knuckle, and so on
spark for spark. This looks as if the whole received by the bottle was
again discharged from it. And yet the bottle by this means is charged![9]
And therefore the fire that thus leaves the bottle, though the same in
quantity, cannot be the very same fire that entered at the wire; for if it
were, the bottle would remain uncharged.

30. If the fire that so leaves the bottle be not the same that is thrown in
through the wire, it must be fire that subsisted in the bottle, (that is,
in the glass of the bottle) before the operation began.

31. If so, there must be a great quantity in glass, because a great
quantity is thus discharged even from very thin glass.

32. That this electrical fluid or fire is strongly attracted by glass, we
know from the quickness and violence with which it is resumed by the part
that had been deprived of it, when there is an opportunity. And by this,
that we cannot from a mass of glass draw a quantity of electrical fire, or
electrify the whole mass _minus_, as we can a mass of metal. We cannot
lessen or increase its whole quantity, for the quantity it has it holds;
and it has as much as it can hold. Its pores are filled with it as full as
the mutual repellency of the particles will admit; and what is already in,
refuses, or strongly repels, any additional quantity. Nor have we any way
of moving the electrical fluid in glass, but one; that is, by covering part
of the two surfaces of thin glass with non-electrics, and then throwing an
additional quantity of this fluid on one surface, which spreading in the
non-electric, and being bound by it to that surface, acts by its repelling
force on the particles of the electrical fluid contained in the other
surface, and drives them out of the glass into the non-electric on that
side, from whence they are discharged, and then those added on the charged
side can enter. But when this is done, there is no more in the glass, nor
less than before, just as much having left it on one side as it received on
the other.



[Illustration]

33. I feel a want of terms here, and doubt much whether I shall be able to
make this part intelligible. By the word _surface_, in this case, I do not
mean mere length and breadth without thickness; but when I speak of the
upper or under surface of a piece of glass, the outer or inner surface of
the vial, I mean length, breadth, and half the thickness, and beg the
favour of being so understood. Now, I suppose, that glass in its first
principles, and in the Furnace, has no more of this electrical fluid than
other common matter: That when it is blown, as it cools, and the particles
of common fire leave it, its pores become a vacuum: That the component
parts of glass are extremely small and fine, I guess from its never showing
a rough face when it breaks, but always a polish; and from the smallness of
its particles I suppose the pores between them must be exceeding small,
which is the reason that Aqua-fortis, nor any other menstruum we have, can
enter to separate them and dissolve the substance; nor is any fluid we know
of, fine enough to enter, except common fire, and the electrical fluid. Now
the departing fire leaving a vacuum, as aforesaid, between these pores,
which air nor water are fine enough to enter and fill, the electrical fluid
(which is every where ready in what we call the non-electrics, and in the
non-electric Mixtures that are in the air,) is attracted in: yet does not
become fixed with the substance of the glass, but subsists there as water
in a porous stone, retained only by the attraction of the fixed parts,
itself still loose and a fluid. But I suppose farther, that in the cooling
of the glass, its texture becomes closest in the middle, and forms a kind
of partition, in which the pores are so narrow, that the particles of the
electrical fluid, which enter both surfaces at the same time, cannot go
through, or pass and repass from one surface to the other, and so mix
together; yet, though the particles of electrical fluid, imbibed by each
surface, cannot themselves pass through to those of the other, their
repellency can, and by this means they act on one another. The particles of
the electrical fluid have a mutual repellency, but by the power of
attraction in the glass they are condensed or forced nearer to each other.
When the glass has received and, by its attraction, forced closer together
so much of this electrified fluid, as that the power of attracting and
condensing in the one, is equal to the power of expansion in the other, it
can imbibe no more, and that remains its constant whole quantity; but each
surface would receive more, if the repellency of what is in the opposite
surface did not resist its entrance. The quantities of this fluid in each
surface being equal, their repelling action on each other is equal; and
therefore those of one surface cannot drive out those of the other: but, if
a greater quantity is forced into one surface than the glass would
naturally draw in; this increases the repelling power on that side, and
overpowering the attraction on the other, drives out part of the fluid that
had been imbibed by that surface, if there be any non-electric ready to
receive it: such there is in all cases where glass is electrified to give a
shock. The surface that has been thus emptied by having its electrical
fluid driven out, resumes again an equal quantity with violence, as soon as
the glass has an opportunity to discharge that over-quantity more than it
could retain by attraction in its other surface, by the additional
repellency of which the vacuum had been occasioned. For experiments
favouring (if I may not say confirming) this hypothesis, I must, to avoid
repetition, beg leave to refer you back to what is said of the electrical
phial in my former papers.

34. Let us now see how it will account for several other
appearances.--Glass, a body extremely elastic (and perhaps its elasticity
may be owing in some degree to the subsisting of so great a quantity of
this repelling fluid in its pores) must, when rubbed, have its rubbed
surface somewhat stretched, or its solid parts drawn a little farther
asunder, so that the vacancies in which the electrical fluid resides,
become larger, affording room for more of that fluid, which is immediately
attracted into it from the cushion or hand rubbing, they being supply'd
from the common stock. But the instant the parts of the glass so open'd and
fill'd have pass'd the friction, they close again, and force the additional
quantity out upon the surface, where it must rest till that part comes
round to the cushion again, unless some non electric (as the prime
conductor) first presents to receive it.[10] But if the inside of the globe
be lined with a non-electric, the additional repellency of the electrical
fluid, thus collected by friction on the rubb'd part of the globe's outer
surface, drives an equal quantity out of the inner surface into that
non-electric lining, which receiving it, and carrying it away from the
rubb'd part into the common mass, through the axis of the globe and frame
of the machine, the new collected electrical fluid can enter and remain in
the outer surface, and none of it (or a very little) will be received by
the prime conductor. As this charg'd part of the globe comes round to the
cushion again, the outer surface delivers its overplus fire into the
cushion, the opposite inner surface receiving at the same time an equal
quantity from the floor. Every electrician knows that a globe wet within
will afford little or no fire, but the reason has not before been attempted
to be given, that I know of.

34. So if a tube lined with a [11]non-electric, be rubb'd, little or no
fire is obtained from it. What is collected from the hand in the downward
rubbing stroke, entering the pores of the glass, and driving an equal
quantity out of the inner surface into the non-electric lining: and the
hand in passing up to take a second stroke, takes out again what had been
thrown into the outer surface, and then the inner surface receives back
again what it had given to the non-electric lining. Thus the particles of
electrical fluid belonging to the inside surface go in and out of their
pores every stroke given to the tube. Put a wire into the tube, the inward
end in contact with the non-electric lining, so it will represent the
_Leyden_ bottle. Let a second person touch the wire while you rub, and the
fire driven out of the inward surface when you give the stroke, will pass
through him into the common mass, and return through him when the inner
surface resumes its quantity, and therefore this new kind of _Leyden_
bottle cannot so be charged. But thus it may: after every stroke, before
you pass your hand up to make another, let the second person apply his
finger to the wire, take the spark, and then withdraw his finger; and so on
till he has drawn a number of sparks; thus will the inner surface be
exhausted, and the outer surface charged; then wrap a sheet of gilt paper
close round the outer surface, and grasping it in your hand you may receive
a shock by applying the finger of the other hand to the wire: for now the
vacant pores in the inner surface resume their quantity, and the
overcharg'd pores in the outer surface discharge that overplus; the
equilibrium being restored through your body, which could not be restored
through the glass.[12] If the tube be exhausted of air, a non electric
lining in contact with the wire is not necessary; for _in vacuo_, the
electrical fire will fly freely from the inner surface, without a
non-electric conductor: but air resists its motion; for being itself an
electric _per se_, it does not attract it, having already its quantity. So
the air never draws off an electric atmosphere from any body, but in
proportion to the non-electrics mix'd with it: it rather keeps such an
atmosphere confin'd, which from the mutual repulsion of its particles,
tends to dissipation, and would immediately dissipate _in vacuo_.--And thus
the experiment of the feather inclosed in a glass vessel hermetically
sealed, but moving on the approach of the rubbed tube, is explained: When
an additional quantity of the electrical fluid is applied to the side of
the vessel by the atmosphere of the tube, a quantity is repelled and driven
out of the inner surface of that side into the vessel, and there affects
the feather, returning again into its pores, when the tube with its
atmosphere is withdrawn; not that the particles of that atmosphere did
themselves pass through the glass to the feather.----And every other
appearance I have yet seen, in which glass and electricity are concern'd,
are, I think, explain'd with equal ease by the same hypothesis. Yet,
perhaps, it may not be a true one, and I shall be obliged to him that
affords me a better.

35. Thus I take the difference between non electrics and glass, an electric
_per se_, to consist in these two particulars. 1st, That a non-electric
easily suffers a change in the quantity of the electrical fluid it
contains. You may lessen its whole quantity by drawing out a part, which
the whole body will again resume; but of glass you can only lessen the
quantity contain'd in one of its surfaces; and not that, but by supplying
an equal quantity at the same time to the other surface; so that the whole
glass may always have the same quantity in the two surfaces, their two
different quantities being added together. And this can only be done in
glass that is thin; beyond a certain thickness we have yet no power that
can make this change. And, 2dly, that the electrical fire freely removes
from place to place, in and through the substance of a non-electric, but
not so through the substance of glass. If you offer a quantity to one end
of a long rod of metal, it receives it, and when it enters, every particle
that was before in the rod, pushes its neighbour quite to the further end,
where the overplus is discharg'd; and this instantaneously where the rod is
part of the circle in the experiment of the shock. But glass, from the
smallness of its pores, or stronger attraction of what it contains, refuses
to admit so free a motion; a glass rod will not conduct a shock, nor will
the thinnest glass suffer any particle entring one of its surfaces to pass
thro' to the other.

36. Hence we see the impossibility of success, in the experiments propos'd,
to draw out the effluvial virtues of a non-electric, as cinnamon for
instance, and mixing them with the electrical fluid, to convey them with
that into the body, by including it in the globe, and then applying
friction, etc. For though the effluvia of cinnamon, and the electrical
fluid should mix within the globe, they would never come out together
through the pores of the glass, and so go to the prime conductor; for the
electrical fluid itself cannot come through; and the prime conductor is
always supply'd from the cushion, and that from the floor. And besides,
when the globe is filled with cinnamon, or other non-electric, no
electrical fluid can be obtain'd from its outer surface, for the reason
before-mentioned. I have try'd another way, which I thought more likely to
obtain a mixture of the electrical and other effluvia together, if such a
mixture had been possible. I placed a glass plate under my cushion, to cut
off the communication between the cushion and floor; then brought a small
chain from the cushion into a glass of oil of turpentine, and carried
another chain from the oil of turpentine to the floor, taking care that the
chain from the cushion to the glass touch'd no part of the frame of the
machine. Another chain was fix'd to the prime conductor, and held in the
hand of a person to be electrised. The ends of the two chains in the glass
were near an inch distant from each other, the oil of turpentine between.
Now the globe being turn'd, could draw no fire from the floor through the
machine, the communication that way being cut off by the thick glass plate
under the cushion: it must then draw it through the chains whose ends were
dipt in the oil of turpentine. And as the oil of turpentine being an
electric _per se_, would not conduct what came up from the floor, was
obliged to jump from the end of one chain, to the end of the other, through
the substance of that oil, which we could see in large sparks; and so it
had a fair opportunity of seizing some of the finest particles of the oil
in its passage, and carrying them off with it: but no such effect followed,
nor could I perceive the least difference in the smell of the electrical
effluvia thus collected, from what it has when collected otherwise; nor
does it otherwise affect the body of a person electrised. I likewise put
into a phial, instead of water, a strong purgative liquid, and then charged
the phial, and took repeated shocks from it, in which case every particle
of the electrical fluid must, before it went through my body, have first
gone through the liquid when the phial is charging, and returned through it
when discharging, yet no other effect followed than if it had been charged
with water. I have also smelt the electrical fire when drawn through gold,
silver, copper, lead, iron, wood, and the human body, and could perceive no
difference; the odour is always the same where the spark does not burn what
it strikes; and therefore I imagine it does not take that smell from any
quality of the bodies it passes through. And indeed, as that smell so
readily leaves the electrical matter, and adheres to the knuckle receiving
the sparks, and to other things; I suspect that it never was connected with
it, but arises instantaneously from something in the air acted upon by it.
For if it was fine enough to come with the electrical fluid through the
body of one person, why should it stop on the skin of another?

But I shall never have done, if I tell you all my conjectures, thoughts,
and imaginations, on the nature and operations of this electrical fluid,
and relate the variety of little experiments we have try'd. I have already
made this paper too long, for which I must crave pardon, not having now
time to make it shorter. I shall only add, that as it has been observed
here that spirits will fire by the electrical spark in the summer time,
without heating them, when _Fahrenheit_'s thermometer is above 70; so, when
colder, if the operator puts a small flat bottle of spirits in his bosom,
or a close pocket, with the spoon, some little time before he uses them,
the heat of his body will communicate warmth more than sufficient for the
purpose.




  ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENT, _proving that the_ Leyden Bottle _has no more
  electrical Fire in it when charged, than before; nor less when
  discharged: That in discharging, the Fire does not issue from the Wire
  and the Coating at the same Time, as some have thought, but that the
  Coating always receives what is discharged by the Wire, or an equal
  Quantity; the outer Surface being always in a negative State of
  Electricity, when the inner Surface is in a positive State_.


Place a thick plate of glass under the rubbing cushion, to cut off the
communication of electrical fire from the floor to the cushion; then, if
there be no fine points or hairy threads sticking out from the cushion, or
from the parts of the machine opposite to the cushion, (of which you must
be careful) you can get but a few sparks from the prime conductor, which
are all the cushion will part with.

Hang a phial then on the prime conductor, and it will not charge, tho' you
hold it by the coating.----But

Form a communication by a chain from the coating to the cushion, and the
phial will charge.

For the globe then draws the electrical fire out of the outside surface of
the phial, and forces it, through the prime conductor and wire of the
phial, into the inside surface.

Thus the bottle is charged with its own fire, no other being to be had
while the glass plate is under the cushion.

Hang two cork balls by flaxen threads to the prime conductor; then touch
the coating of the bottle, and they will be electrified and recede from
each other.

For just as much fire as you give the coating, so much is discharged
through the wire upon the prime conductor, whence the cork balls receive an
electrical atmosphere. But

Take a wire bent in the form of a C, with a stick of wax fixed to the
outside of the curve, to hold it by; and apply one end of this wire to the
coating, and the other at the same time to the prime conductor, the phial
will be discharged; and if the balls are not electrified before the
discharge, neither will they appear to be so after the discharge, for they
will not repel each other.

Now if the fire discharged from the inside surface of the bottle through
its wire, remained on the prime conductor, the balls would be electrified
and recede from each other.

If the phial really exploded at both ends, and discharged fire from both
coating and wire, the balls would be _more_ electrified and recede
_farther_: for none of the fire can escape, the wax handle preventing.

But if the fire, with which the inside surface is surcharged, be so much
precisely as is wanted by the outside surface, it will pass round through
the wire fixed to the wax handle, restore the equilibrium in the glass, and
make no alteration in the state of the prime conductor.

Accordingly we find, that if the prime conductor be electrified, and the
cork balls in a state of repellency before the bottle is charged, they
continue so afterwards. If not, they are not electrified by that discharge.




CORRECTIONS _and_ ADDITIONS
_to the_ PRECEDING PAPERS.


Page 2, Sect. 1. We since find, that the fire in the bottle is not
contained in the non-electric, but _in the glass_. All that is after said
of the _top_ and _bottom_ of the bottle, is true of the _inside_ and
_outside_ surfaces, and should have been so expressed. _See Sect._ 16, p.
16.

Page 6, Line 13. The equilibrium will soon be restored _but silently_, etc.
This must have been a mistake. When the bottle is full charged, the crooked
wire cannot well be brought to touch the top and bottom so quick, but that
there will be a loud spark; unless the points be sharp, without loops.

Ibid. line ult. _Outside_: add, such moisture continuing up to the cork or
wire.

Page 12, line 14. _By candle-light_ etc. From some observations since made,
I am inclined to think, that it is not the light, but the smoke or
non-electric effluvia from the candle, coal, and red-hot iron, that carry
off the electrical fire, being first attracted and then repelled.

Page 13, line 15.  _Windmil wheels_, &c. We afterwards discovered, that the
afflux or efflux of the electrical fire, was not the cause of the motions
of those wheels, but various circumstances of attraction and repulsion.

Page 16, line 21. _Let_ A _and_ B _stand on wax_, &c. We soon found that it
was only necessary for one of them to stand on wax.

Page 19. in the title r. _on_.

Page 24, line 12. r. contact, line 24. confined.

Page 25, line 10. for _stand_ r. _hand_.

Page 28, line 2. _The consequence might perhaps be fatal_, &c. We have
found it fatal to small animals, but 'tis not strong enough to kill large
ones. The biggest we have killed is a hen.

Page 31, line 20. _Ringing of chimes_, &c. This is since done.

Page 33, line 22. _Fails after ten or twelve experiments._ This was by a
small bottle. And since found to fail after with a large glass.

Page 40, sect. 50, 51. _Spirits must be heated before we can fire them_,
&c. We have since fired spirits without heating, when the weather is warm.


_FINIS._




BOOKS Printed and Sold by EDWARD CAVE, at St. _John's Gate_.


I. Geography Reform'd: Or, A new System of General Geography according to
an accurate Analysis of the Science, augmented with several necessary
Branches omitted by former Authors. In four Parts.

1. Of the Nature and Principles of Geography; its ancient and present State
in all Nations, its Usefulness to Persons of all Professions, and the
Method of studying it; with its Analysis or Division into Species,
according to former Authors, and a new Plan, shewing the Errors and Defects
of those by Varenius, Sanson, la Mattiniere, Pere Castel, etc.

2. Of Mathematical Geography and its Branches, Astronomical and
Geometrical: Shewing the several Divisions of the Earth by Regions,
Hemispheres, Zones, Climates, Meridians and Parallels, etc.

3. Historical Geography and its Species, Natural; Civil; Ecclesiastical;
National; Periodical, ancient, middle, modern; Parallel and Critical.

4. Of Technical Geography and its Branches; Representatory, by Globes and
Maps; Synoptical, by Tables; and Explanatory, by Systems and Dictionaries.

Under each Branch is given an Account of its Object and Use, an Explanation
of the Terms, the History of its Rise and Progress, with Rules for
exhibiting it to the best Advantage. The whole illustrated with Notes and
References to the principal Geographers whose different Sentiments are
cited and examined. Designed for the Use of the Curious in general, and
Students in particular. There is added a copious Index of the Terms
contained in the Work, answering the End of a Dictionary of General
Geography. The Second Edition. Price 3s. 6d. bound.


II. Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Surgery at Paris.

Containing Remarks, with practical Observations, on Tumours of the Gall
Bladder, on the Thigh, and the Trachea Arteria; on the Use of the Trepan;
of Wounds in the Brain, Exfoliation of the Cranium, Cases of pregnant
Women, faulty Anus in new born Children, Abscesses in the Fundament, Stones
encysted in the Bladder, Obstructions to the Ejaculation of the Semen, an
inverted Eyelid, extraneous Bodies retained in the Oesophagus, discharged
through Abscesses; of Bronchotomy, Gastrotomy, native Hare-lips; of the
Cæsarean Operation; a new Method of extracting the Stone from the Bladder,
on a Cancer of the Breast, an elastic Truss for Hernias, remarkable Hernias
of the Stomach, and through the Foramen Ovale. Of a pulmonary Abscess, &c.
Translated from the Original, dedicated to the French King. In two Volumes,
Octavo. Price 8s.


III. A Treatise of Comets, containing, 1. An Explication of all the various
Appearances of the late Comet, both in its own Trajectory and the Firmament
of fixt Stars, to its setting in the Sun Beams: Illustrated with a Plan of
the Earth's and Comet's Orbits. 2. The History of Comets from the earliest
Account of those kinds of Planets to the present Time; wherein the
Sentiments of the Ancient and Modern Philosophers are occasionally
displayed. With Remarks on the Intentional End of Comets, and the Nature
and Design of Saturn's Ring. The Distance, Velocity, Size, Solidity, and
other Properties of those Bodies considered; and the wonderful Phænomena of
their Tails and Atmospheres accounted for. Illustrated also by a
Copper-Plate. By G. Smith. Price 1s.


IV. The Natural History of Mount Vesuvius, with the Explanation of the
various Phenomena that usually attend the Eruptions of this celebrated
Volcano. Translated from the original Italian, composed by the Royal
Academy of Sciences at Naples, by Order of the King of the Two Sicilies.
Price 2s. stitch'd, or 2s. 6d. bound.



I. _Reasons and Motives on which the Plan of Union was formed._


The commissioners from a number of the northern colonies being
met at Albany, and considering the difficulties that have always
attended the most necessary general measures for the common defence,
or for the annoyance of the enemy, when they were to be carried
through the several particular assemblies of all the colonies;
some assemblies being before at variance with their governors or
councils, and the several branches of the government not on terms of
doing business with each other; others taking the opportunity, when
their concurrence is wanted, to push for favourite laws, powers,
or points, that they think could not at other times be obtained,
and so creating disputes and quarrels; one assembly waiting to see
what another will do, being afraid of doing more than its share, or
desirous of doing less; or refusing to do any thing, because its
country is not at present so much exposed as others, or because
another will reap more immediate advantage; from one or other of
which causes, the assemblies of six (out of seven) colonies applied
to, had granted no assistance to Virginia, when lately invaded by
the French, though purposely convened, and the importance of the
occasion earnestly urged upon them; considering moreover, that one
principal encouragement to the French, in invading and insulting the
British American dominions, was their knowledge of our disunited
state, and of our weakness arising from such want of union; and that
from hence different colonies were, at different times, extremely
harassed, and put to great expence both of blood and treasure, who
would have remained in peace, if the enemy had had cause to fear the
drawing on themselves the resentment and power of the whole; the
said commissioners, considering also the present incroachments of
the French, and the mischievous consequences that may be expected
from them, if not opposed with our force, came to an unanimous
resolution,--_That an union of the colonies is absolutely necessary
for their preservation_.

The manner of forming and establishing this union was the next point.
When it was considered, that the colonies were seldom all in equal
danger at the same time, or equally near the danger, or equally
sensible of it; that some of them had particular interests to manage,
with which an union might interfere; and that they were extremely
jealous of each other; it was thought impracticable to obtain a joint
agreement of all the colonies to an union, in which the expence and
burthen of defending any of them should be divided among them all;
and if ever acts of assembly in all the colonies could be obtained
for that purpose, yet as any colony, on the least dissatisfaction,
might repeal its own act and thereby withdraw itself from the union,
it would not be a stable one, or such as could be depended on: for if
only one colony should, on any disgust withdraw itself, others might
think it unjust and unequal that they, by continuing in the union,
should be at the expence of defending a colony, which refused to
bear its proportionable part, and would therefore one after another,
withdraw, till the whole crumbled into its original parts. Therefore
the commissioners came to another previous resolution, viz. _That it
was necessary the union should be established by act of parliament_.

They then proceeded to sketch out a _plan of union_, which they
did in a plain and concise manner, just sufficient to show
their sentiments of the kind of union that would best suit the
circumstances of the colonies, be most agreeable to the people,
and most effectually promote his majesty's service and the general
interest of the British empire. This was respectfully sent to the
assemblies of the several colonies for their consideration, and to
receive such alterations and improvements as they should think fit
and necessary; after which it was proposed to be transmitted to
England to be perfected, and the establishment of it there humbly
solicited.

This was as much as the commissioners could do[3].

       *       *       *       *       *


II. _Reasons against partial Unions._

It was proposed by some of the commissioners, to form the colonies
into two or three distinct unions; but for these reasons that
proposal was dropped even by those that made it: [viz.]

1. In all cases where the strength of the whole was necessary to be
used against the enemy, there would be the same difficulty in degree,
to bring the several unions to unite together, as now the several
colonies; and consequently the same delays on our part and advantage
to the enemy.

2. Each union would separately be weaker than when joined by the
whole, obliged to exert more force, be oppressed by the expence, and
the enemy less deterred from attacking it.

3. Where particular colonies have _selfish views_, as New York with
regard to Indian trade and lands; or are less exposed, being covered
by others, as New Jersey, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Maryland; or
have particular whims and prejudices against warlike measures in
general, as Pensylvania, where the Quakers predominate; such colonies
would have more weight in a partial union, and be better able to
oppose and obstruct the measures necessary for the general good, than
where they are swallowed up in the general union.

4. The Indian trade would be better regulated by the union of the
whole than by partial unions. And as Canada is chiefly supported by
that trade, if it could be drawn into the hands of the English (as
it might be if the Indians were supplied on moderate terms, and by
honest traders appointed by and acting for the public) that alone
would contribute greatly to the weakening of our enemies.

5. The establishing of new colonies westward on the Ohio and the
lakes (a matter of considerable importance to the increase of British
trade and power, to the breaking that of the French, and to the
protection and security of our present colonies,) would best be
carried on by a joint union.

6. It was also thought, that by the frequent meetings-together
of commissioners or representatives from all the colonies, the
circumstances of the whole would be better known, and the good of
the whole better provided for; and that the colonies would by this
connection learn to consider themselves, not as so many independent
states, but as members of the same body; and thence be more ready to
afford assistance and support to each other, and to make diversions
in favour even of the most distant, and to join cordially in any
expedition for the benefit of all against the common enemy.

These were the principal reasons and motives for forming the plan of
union as it stands. To which may be added this, that as the union of
the *******

    The remainder of this article is lost.


III. _Plan of a proposed Union of the several Colonies of
Massachusett's Bay, New Hampshire, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New
York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
and South Carolina, for their mutual Defence and Security, and
for extending the British Settlements in North America, with the
Reasons and Motives for each Article of the Plan [as far as could be
remembered.]_

It is proposed--That humble application be made for an act of
parliament of Great Britain, by virtue of which one general
government may be formed in America, including all the said colonies,
within and under which government each colony may retain its present
constitution, except in the particulars wherein a change may be
directed by the said act, as hereafter follows[4].


PRESIDENT GENERAL, AND GRAND COUNCIL.

_That the said general government be administered by a president
general, to be appointed and supported by the crown; and a grand
council, to be chosen by the representatives of the people of the
several colonies met in their respective assemblies._

It was thought that it would be best the president general should be
supported as well as appointed by the crown; that so all disputes
between him and the grand council concerning his salary might be
prevented; as such disputes have been frequently of mischievous
consequence in particular colonies, especially in time of public
danger. The quit-rents of crown-lands in America might in a short
time be sufficient for this purpose.--The choice of members for the
grand council is placed in the house of representatives of each
government, in order to give the people a share in this new general
government, as the crown has its share by the appointment of the
president-general.

But it being proposed by the gentlemen of the council of New York,
and some other counsellors among the Commissioners, to alter the
plan in this particular, and to give the governors and council of
the several provinces a share in the choice of the grand council, or
at least a power of approving and confirming or of disallowing the
choice made by the house of representatives, it was said:

"That the government or constitution proposed to be formed by the
plan, consists of two branches; a president general appointed by
the crown, and a council chosen by the people, or by the people's
representatives, which is the same thing.

"That by a subsequent article, the council chosen by the people can
effect nothing without the consent of the president general appointed
by the crown; the crown possesses therefore full one half of the
power of this constitution.

"That in the British constitution, the crown is supposed to possess
but one third, the lords having their share.

"That this constitution seemed rather more favorable for the crown.

"That it is essential, to English liberty, [that] the subject should
not be taxed but by his own consent, or the consent of his elected
representatives.

"That taxes to be laid and levied by this proposed constitution will
be proposed and agreed to by the representatives of the people, if
the plan in this particular be preserved:

"But if the proposed alteration should take place, it seemed as if
matters may be so managed, as that the crown shall finally have the
appointment not only of the president general, but of a majority of
the grand council; for seven out of eleven governors and councils are
appointed by the crown:

"And so the people in all the colonies would in effect be taxed by
their governors.

"It was therefore apprehended, that such alterations of the plan
would give great dissatisfaction, and that the colonies could not be
easy under such a power in governors, and such an infringement of
what they take to be English liberty.

"Besides, the giving a share in the choice of the grand council would
not be equal with respect to all the colonies, as their constitutions
differ. In some, both governor and council are appointed by the
crown. In others, they are both appointed by the proprietors. In
some, the people have a share in the choice of the council; in
others, both government and council are wholly chosen by the people.
But the house of representatives is every where chosen by the people;
and therefore, placing the right of choosing the grand council in the
representatives is equal with respect to all.

"That the grand council is intended to represent all the several
houses of representatives of the colonies, as a house of
representatives doth the several towns or counties of a colony. Could
all the people of a colony be consulted and unite in public measures,
a house of representatives would be needless: and could all the
assemblies conveniently consult and unite in general measures, the
grand council would be unnecessary.

"That a house of commons or the house of representatives, and the
grand council, are thus alike in their nature and intention. And
as it would seem improper that the king or house of lords should
have a power of disallowing or appointing members of the house of
commons;--so likewise, that a governor and council appointed by
the crown should have a power of disallowing or appointing members
of the grand council (who, in this constitution, are to be the
representatives of the people.)

"If the governors and councils therefore were to have a share in the
choice of any that are to conduct this general government, it should
seem more proper that they chose the president-general. But this
being an office of great trust and importance to the nation, it was
thought better to be filled by the immediate appointment of the crown.

"The power proposed to be given by the plan to the grand council
is only a concentration of the powers of the several assemblies in
certain points for the general welfare; as the power of the president
general, is of the powers of the several governors in the same points.

"And as the choice therefore of the grand council by the
representatives of the people, neither gives the people any new
powers, nor diminishes the power of the crown, it was thought and
hoped the crown would not disapprove of it."

Upon the whole, the commissioners were of opinion, that the choice
was most properly placed in the representatives of the people.


ELECTION OF MEMBERS.

_That within [___] months after the passing such act, the house of
representatives, that happen to be sitting within that time, or that
shall be especially for that purpose convened, may and shall choose
members for the grand council, in the following proportion, that is
to say,_

  Massachussett's Bay                                       7
  New Hampshire                                             2
  Connecticut                                               5
  Rhode Island                                              2
  New York                                                  4
  New Jerseys                                               3
  Pennsylvania                                              6
  Maryland                                                  4
  Virginia                                                  7
  North Carolina                                            4
  South Carolina                                            4
                                                          ----
                                                           48

It was thought, that if the least colony was allowed two, and the
others in proportion, the number would be very great and the expence
heavy; and that less than two would not be convenient, as a single
person, being by any accident prevented appearing at the meeting, the
colony he ought to appear for would not be represented. That as the
choice was not immediately popular, they would be generally men of
good abilities for business, and men of reputation for integrity; and
that forty-eight such men might be a number sufficient. But, though
it was thought reasonable, that each colony should have a share in
the representative body in some degree, according to the proportion
it contributed to the general treasury: yet the proportion of wealth
or power of the colonies is not to be judged by the proportion here
fixed; because it was at first agreed, that the greatest colony
should not have more than seven members, nor the least less than two:
and the settling these proportions between these two extremes was not
nicely attended to, as it would find itself, after the first election
from the sums brought into the treasury, as by a subsequent article.


PLACE OF FIRST MEETING.

--_who shall meet for the first time at the city of Philadelphia
Pensylvania, being called by the president-general as soon as
conveniently may be after his appointment._

Philadelphia was named as being the nearer the centre of the
colonies, where the commissioners would be well and cheaply
accommodated. The high-roads, through the whole extent, are for
the most part very good, in which forty or fifty miles a day may
very well be and frequently are travelled. Great part of the way
may likewise he gone by water. In summer time, the passages are
frequently performed in a week from Charles Town to Philadelphia and
New York; and from Rhode Island to New York through the Sound, in two
or three days; and from New York to Philadelphia, by water and land,
in two days, by stage boats and wheel-carriages that set out every
other day. The journey from Charles Town to Philadelphia may likewise
be facilitated by boats running up Chesapeak Bay three hundred miles.
But if the whole journey be performed on horseback, the most distant
members (viz. the two from New Hampshire and from South Carolina) may
probably render themselves at Philadelphia in fifteen or twenty days;
the majority may be there in much less time.


NEW ELECTION.

_That there shall be a new election of the members of the grand
council every three years; and on the death or resignation of any
member, his place shall be supplied by a new choice at the next
silting of the assembly of the colony he represented._

Some colonies have annual assemblies, some continue during a
governor's pleasure; three years was thought a reasonable medium, as
affording a new member time to improve himself in the business, and
to act after such improvement; and yet giving opportunities, frequent
enough, to change him, if he has misbehaved.


PROPORTION OF MEMBERS AFTER THE FIRST THREE YEARS.

_That after the first three years, when the proportion of money
arising out of each colony to the general treasury can be known, the
number of members to be chosen for each colony shall from time to
time, in all ensuing elections, be regulated by that proportion (yet
so as that the number to be chosen by any one province be not more
than seven, nor less than two.)_

By a subsequent article it is proposed, that the general council
shall lay and levy such general duties, as to them may appear most
equal and least burthensome, &c. Suppose, for instance, they lay a
small duty or excise on some commodity imported into or made in the
colonies, and pretty generally and equally used in all of them; as
rum perhaps, or wine; the yearly produce of this duty or excise, if
fairly collected, would be in some colonies greater, in others less,
as the colonies are greater or smaller. When the collector's accounts
are brought in, the proportions will appear; and from them it is
proposed to regulate the proportion of representatives to be chosen
at the next general election, within the limits however of seven and
two. These numbers may therefore vary in course of years, as the
colonies may in the growth and increase of people. And thus the quota
of tax from each colony would naturally vary with its circumstances;
thereby preventing all disputes and dissatisfactions about the just
proportions due from each; which might otherwise produce pernicious
consequences, and destroy the harmony and good agreement that ought
to subsist between the several parts of the union.


MEETINGS OF THE GRAND COUNCIL, AND CALL.

_That the grand council shall meet once in every year, and oftener if
occasion require, at such time and place as they shall adjourn to at
the last preceding meeting, or as they shall be called to meet at by
the president general on any emergency; he having first obtained in
writing the consent of seven of the members to such call, and sent
due and timely notice to the whole._

It was thought, in establishing and governing new colonies or
settlements, regulating Indian trade, Indian treaties, &c. there
would be every year sufficient business arise to require at least one
meeting, and at such meeting many things might be suggested for the
benefit of all the colonies. This annual meeting may either be at a
time or place certain, to be fixed by the president general and grand
council at their first meeting; or left at liberty, to be at such
time and place as they shall adjourn to, or be called to meet at by
the president general.

In time of war it seems convenient, that the meeting should be in
that colony, which is nearest the seat of action.

The power of calling them on any emergency seemed necessary to be
vested in the president general; but that such power might not be
wantonly used to harass the members, and oblige them to make frequent
long journies to little purpose, the consent of seven at least to
such call was supposed a convenient guard.


CONTINUANCE.

_That the grand council have power to choose their speaker; and
shall neither be dissolved, prorogued, nor continued sitting longer
than six weeks at one time, without their own consent or the special
command of the crown._

The speaker should be presented for approbation; it being convenient,
to prevent misunderstandings and disgusts, that the mouth of the
council should be a person agreeable, if possible, both to the
council and president general.

Governors have sometimes wantonly exercised the power of proroguing
or continuing the sessions of assemblies, merely to harass the
members and compel a compliance; and sometimes dissolve them on
slight disgusts. This it was feared might be done by the president
general, if not provided against: and the inconvenience and hardship
would be greater in the general government than in particular
colonies, in proportion to the distance the members must be from
home, during sittings, and the long journies some of them must
necessarily take.


MEMBERS' ALLOWANCE.

_That the members of the grand council shall be allowed for their
service ten shillings sterling per diem, during their session and
journey to and from the place of meeting; twenty miles to be reckoned
a day's journey._

It was thought proper to allow _some_ wages, lest the expence might
deter some suitable persons from the service;--and not to allow _too
great_ wages, lest unsuitable persons should be tempted to cabal for
the employment, for the sake of gain. Twenty miles was set down as
a day's journey, to allow for accidental hinderances on the road,
and the greater expences of travelling than residing at the place of
meeting.


ASSENT OF PRESIDENT GENERAL AND HIS DUTY.

_That the assent of the president general be requisite to all acts of
the grand council; and that it be his office and duty to cause them
to be carried into execution._

The assent of the president general, to all acts of the grand council
was made necessary, in order to give the crown its due share of
influence in this government, and connect it with that of Great
Britain. The president general, besides one half of the legislative
power, hath in his hands the whole executive power.


POWER OF PRESIDENT GENERAL AND GRAND COUNCIL. TREATIES OF PEACE AND
WAR.

_That the president general, with the advice of the grand council,
hold or direct all Indian treaties in which the general interest of
the colonies may be concerned; and make peace or declare war with
Indian nations._

The power of making peace or war with Indian nations is at present
supposed to be in every colony, and is expressly granted to some
by charter, so that no new power is hereby intended to be granted
to the colonies. But as, in consequence of this power, one colony
might make peace with a nation that another was justly engaged in
war with; or make war on slight occasions without the concurrence or
approbation of neighbouring colonies, greatly endangered by it; or
make particular treaties of neutrality in case of a general war, to
their own private advantage in trade, by supplying the common enemy;
of all which there have been instances--it was thought better, to
have all treaties of a general nature under a general direction; that
so the good of the whole may be consulted and provided for.


INDIAN TRADE.

_That they make such laws as they judge necessary for regulating all
Indian trade._

Many quarrels and wars have arisen between the colonies and Indian
nations, through the bad conduct of traders, who cheat the Indians
after making them drunk, &c. to the great expence of the colonies
both in blood and treasure. Particular colonies are so interested in
the trade as not to be willing to admit such a regulation as might be
best for the whole; and therefore it was thought best under a general
direction.


INDIAN PURCHASES.

_That they make all purchases, from Indians for the crown, of lands
not now within the bounds of particular colonies, or that shall
not be within their bounds when some of them are reduced to more
convenient dimensions._

Purchases from the Indians, made by private persons, have been
attended with many inconveniences. They have frequently interfered,
and occasioned uncertainty of titles, many disputes and expensive
law-suits, and hindered the settlement of the land so disputed.
Then the Indians have been cheated by such private purchases, and
discontent and wars have been the consequence. These would be
prevented by public fair purchases.

Several of the colony charters in America extend their bounds to
the South Sea, which may be perhaps three or four thousand miles in
length to one or two hundred miles in breadth. It is supposed they
must in time be reduced to dimensions more convenient for the common
purposes of government[5].

Very little of the land in those grants is yet purchased of the
Indians.

It is much cheaper to purchase of them, than to take and maintain the
possession by force: for they are generally very reasonable in their
demands for land[6]; and the expence of guarding a large frontier
against their incursions is vastly great; because all must be
guarded, and always guarded, as we know not where or when _to expect
them_[7].


NEW SETTLEMENTS.

_That they make new settlements on such purchases, by granting lands
in the king's name, reserving a quit-rent to the crown for the use of
the general treasury._

It is supposed better that there should be one purchaser than many;
and that the crown should be that purchaser, or the union in the name
of the crown. By this means the bargains may be more easily made, the
price not inhanced by numerous bidders, future disputes about private
Indian purchases, and monopolies of vast tracts to particular persons
(which are prejudicial to the settlement and peopling of country)
prevented; and the land being again granted in small tracts to the
settlers, the quit-rents reserved may in time become a fund for
support of government, for defence of the country, ease of taxes, &c.

Strong forts on the lakes, the Ohio, &c. may, at the same time they
secure our present frontiers, serve to defend new colonies settled
under their protection; and such colonies would also mutually defend
and support such forts, and better secure the friendship of the far
Indians.

A particular colony has scarce strength enough to extend itself by
new settlements, at so great a distance from the old: but the joint
force of the union might suddenly establish a new colony or two in
those parts, or extend an old colony to particular passes, greatly to
the security of our present frontiers, increase of trade and people,
breaking off the French communication between Canada and Louisiana,
and speedy settlement of the intermediate lands.

The power of settling new colonies is therefore thought a valuable
part of the plan, and what cannot so well be executed by two unions
as by one.


LAWS TO GOVERN THEM.

_That they make laws for regulating and governing such new
settlements, till the crown shall think fit to form them into
particular governments._

The making of laws suitable for the new colonies, it was thought,
would be properly vested in the president general and grand council;
under whose protection they will at first necessarily be, and who
would be well acquainted with their circumstances, as having settled
them. When they are become sufficiently populous, they may by the
crown be formed into complete and distinct governments.

The appointment of a sub-president by the crown, to take place in
case of the death or absence of the president general, would perhaps
be an improvement of the plan; and if all the governors of particular
provinces were to be formed into a standing council of state, for the
advice and assistance of the president general, it might be another
considerable improvement.


RAISE SOLDIERS AND EQUIP VESSELS, &C.

_That they raise and pay soldiers and build forts for the defence of
any of the colonies, and equip vessels of force to guard the coasts
and protect the trade on the ocean, lakes[8], or great rivers; but
they shall not impress men in any colony, without the consent of the
legislature._

It was thought, that quotas of men, to be raised and paid by the
several colonies, and joined for any public service, could not always
be got together with the necessary expedition. For instance, suppose
one thousand men should be wanted in New Hampshire on any emergency;
to fetch them by fifties and hundreds out of every colony, as far as
South Carolina, would be inconvenient, the transportation chargeable
and the occasion perhaps passed before they could be assembled;
and therefore, that it would be best to raise them (by offering
bounty-money and pay) near the place where they would be wanted, to
be discharged again when the service should be over.

Particular colonies are at present backward to build forts at
their own expence, which they say will be equally useful to their
neighbouring colonies; who refuse to join, on a presumption that such
forts _will_ be built and kept up, though they contribute nothing.
This unjust conduct weakens the whole; but the forts being for the
good of the whole, it was thought best they should be built and
maintained by the whole, out of the common treasury.

In the time of war, small vessels of force are sometimes necessary
in the colonies to scour the coast of small privateers. These being
provided by the union will be an advantage in turn to the colonies
which are situated on the sea, and whose frontiers on the land-side,
being covered by other colonies, reap but little immediate benefit
from the advanced forts.


POWER TO MAKE LAWS, LAY DUTIES, &C.

_That for these purposes they have power to make laws, and lay
and levy such general duties, imports, or taxes, as to them shall
appear most equal and just (considering the ability and other
circumstances of the inhabitants in the several colonies,) and such
as may be collected with the least inconvenience to the people;
rather discouraging luxury, than loading industry with unnecessary
burthens._

The laws which the president general and grand council are impowered
to make _are such only_ as shall be necessary for the government of
the settlements; the raising, regulating, and paying soldiers for
the general service; the regulating of Indian trade; and laying and
collecting the general duties and taxes. (They should also have a
power to restrain the exportation of provisions to the enemy from
any of the colonies, on particular occasions, in time of war.) But
is it not intended that they may interfere with the constitution and
government of the particular colonies; who are to be left to their
own laws, and to lay, levy, and apply their own taxes as before.


GENERAL TREASURER AND PARTICULAR TREASURER.

_That they may appoint a general treasurer and particular treasurer
in each government when necessary; and from time to time may order
the sums in the treasuries of each government into the general
treasury; or draw on them for special payments, as they find most
convenient._

The treasurers here meant are only for the general funds, and not for
the particular funds of each colony, which remain in the hands of
their own treasurers at their own disposal.


MONEY HOW TO ISSUE.

_Yet no money to issue but by joint orders of the president general
and grand council; except where sums have been appropriated to
particular purposes, and the president general is previously
impowered by an act to draw for such sums._

To prevent misapplication of the money, or even application that
might be dissatisfactory to the crown or the people, it was thought
necessary, to join the president general and grand council in all
issues of money.


ACCOUNTS.

_That the general accounts shall be yearly settled and reported to
the several assemblies._

By communicating the accounts yearly to each assembly, they will be
satisfied of the prudent and honest conduct of their representatives
in the grand council.


QUORUM.

_That a quorum of the grand council, impowered to act with the
president general, do consist of twenty-five members; among whom
there shall be one or more from a majority of the colonies._

The quorum seems large, but it was thought it would not be
satisfactory to the colonies in general, to have matters of
importance to the whole transacted by a smaller number, or even by
this number of twenty-five, unless there were among them one at least
from a majority of the colonies; because otherwise, the whole quorum
being made up of members from three or four colonies at one end of
the union, something might be done that would not be equal with
respect to the rest, and thence dissatisfactions and discords might
rise to the prejudice of the whole.


LAWS TO BE TRANSMITTED.

_That the laws made by them for the purposes aforesaid shall not be
repugnant, but, as near as may be, agreeable to the laws of England,
and shall be transmitted to the king in council for approbation as
soon as may be after their passing; and if not disapproved within
three years after presentation, to remain in force._

This was thought necessary for the satisfaction of the crown, to
preserve the connection of the parts of the British empire with the
whole, of the members with the head, and to induce greater care and
circumspection in making of the laws, that they be good in themselves
and for the general benefit.


DEATH OF THE PRESIDENT GENERAL.

_That in case of the death of the president general, the speaker of
the grand council for the time being shall succeed, and be vested
with the same powers and authorities, to continue till the king's
pleasure be known._

It might be better, perhaps, as was said before, if the crown
appointed a vice president, to take place on the death or absence of
the president general; for so we should be more sure of a suitable
person at the head of the colonies. On the death or absence of both,
the speaker to take place (or rather the eldest king's-governor) till
his majesty's pleasure be known.


OFFICERS HOW APPOINTED.

_That all military commission officers, whether for land or
sea-service, to act under this general constitution, shall be
nominated by the president general; but the approbation of the grand
council is to be obtained, before they receive their commissions. And
all civil officers are to be nominated by the grand council, and to
receive the president general's approbation before they officiate._

It was thought it might be very prejudicial to the service, to have
officers appointed unknown to the people, or unacceptable, the
generality of Americans serving willingly under officers they know:
and not caring to engage in the service under strangers, or such as
are often appointed by governors through favour or interest. The
service here meant, is not the stated settled service in standing
troops; but any sudden and short service, either for defence of
our own colonies, or invading the enemies country; (such as, the
expedition to Cape Breton in the last war; in which many substantial
farmers and tradesmen engaged as common soldiers under officers of
their own country, for whom they had an esteem and affection; who
would not have engaged in a standing army, or under officers from
England.)--It was therefore thought best, to give the council the
power of approving the officers, which the people will look upon
as a great security of their being good men. And without some such
provision as this, it was thought the expence of engaging men in the
service on any emergency would be much greater, and the number who
could be induced to engage much less; and that therefore it would be
most for the king's service and general benefit of the nation, that
the prerogative should relax a little in this particular throughout
all the colonies in America; as it had already done much more in the
charters of some particular colonies, viz. Connecticut and Rhode
Island.

The civil officers will be chiefly treasurers and collectors of
taxes; and the suitable persons are most likely to be known by the
council.


VACANCIES HOW SUPPLIED.

_But in case of vacancy by death, or removal of any officer civil
or military under this constitution, the governor of the province
in which such vacancy happens may appoint, till the pleasure of the
president general and grand council can be known._

The vacancies were thought best supplied by the governors in each
province, till a new appointment can be regularly made; otherwise the
service might suffer before the meeting of the president general and
grand council.


EACH COLONY MAY DEFEND ITSELF ON EMERGENCY, &C.

_That the particular military as well as civil establishments in
each colony remain in their present state, the general constitution
notwithstanding; and that on sudden emergencies any colony may
defend itself, and lay the accounts of expence thence arising before
the president general and general council, who may allow and order
payment of the same, as far as they judge such accounts just and
reasonable._

Otherwise the union of the whole would weaken the parts, contrary
to the design of the union. The accounts are to be judged of by the
president general and grand council, and allowed if found reasonable:
this was thought necessary to encourage colonies to defend
themselves, as the expence would be light when borne by the whole;
and also to check imprudent and lavish expence in such defences.[9]

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The reader must be informed here, that this plan was intended for
all the colonies; but, commissioners from some of them not attending
(from causes which I cannot specify) their consent to it was not,
in this respect, universally expressed. Governor Pownall, however,
says, "That he had an opportunity of conversing with, and knowing
the sentiments of the commissioners appointed by their respective
provinces, to attend this congress, to which they were called by the
crown; of learning from their experience and judgment, the actual
state of the American business and interest; and of hearing amongst
them, the grounds and reasons of that American union, which they then
had under deliberation, and transmitted the plan of to England;" and
he adds, in another place, "that the sentiments of our colonies were
collected in an authentic manner on this subject in the plan proposed
by Dr. Franklin, and unanimously agreed to in congress." See Governor
Pownall's Administration of the British Colonies. Vol. I. p. 13.
Edit. 4, 1774, and Vol. II. p. 86. B. V.

[2] "Mr. [since Governor] Hutchinson was one of the commissioners
for Massachusetts Bay." Governor Pownall as above, Vol. II. p. 144.
"Thomas Pownall, Esq.; brother to John Pownall, Esq.; one of the
secretaries to the board of trade, and afterwards Governor of the
Massachusetts, was upon the spot." History of the British Empire in
North America, p. 25. B. V.

[3] Dr. Davenant was so well convinced of the expediency of an union
of the colonies, that he recites, at full length, a plan contrived,
as he says, with good judgment for the purpose. Davenant, Vol. I. p.
40, 41, of Sir C. Whitworth's Edition. B. V.

[4] The reader may perceive, by the difference of the type, which is
the text of the plan, and which the _reasons and motives_ mentioned
in the title. They are thus consolidated for his convenience. The
editor has taken one or two farther liberties in _transposing_ these
Albany papers; but the sense remains as before. B. V.

[5] Mr. Baron M----, in page 200 of his account of the Proceedings at
Quebec, for obtaining an Assembly, has the following hint: "The vast
enlargement of the province of Quebec by adding to it a new territory
that contains, according to Lord Hillsborough's estimation, of it,
five hundred and eleven millions of acres (that is, more land than
Spain, Italy, France, and Germany put together, and most of it good
land) is a measure that would require an ample discussion."----That
the reader may not suspect that these dimensions were convenient
for uncommon purposes of government, I shall quote the motives
assigned upon this occasion by the act regulating the government
of Quebec. "By the arrangements made by the royal proclamation, a
very large extent of [outlying] country, within which there were
several colonies and settlements of the subjects of France, who
claimed to remain therein under the faith of the said treaty, was
left without any provision being made for the administration of civil
government therein:" _i. e._ a few Indian traders were a pretext for
this appropriation of a tract of country, which, according to the
minister's estimate, was more than thirteen times larger than England
and Wales united, nearly one hundred and twenty eight times larger
than Jamaica, almost one-eighth part of Europe, and considerably more
than one-thirty-eighth part of the whole habitable earth (comparing
it with the several calculations in The Political Survey of Great
Britain, by Dr. Campbell, and in that of Jamaica, by Mr. Long.) "Now
_all_ the inhabitants of the province of Quebec," says this very
act, "amounted at the conquest to above sixty-five thousand [only,]
professing the religion of the church of Rome, and enjoying an
established form of constitution and system of laws." B.V.

[6] "Dr. Franklin (says Mr. Kalm the Swede,) and several other
gentlemen, frequently told me, that a powerful Indian, who possessed
Rhode Island, had sold it to the English for a pair of spectacles:
it is large enough for a prince's domain, and makes a peculiar
government at present. This Indian knew how to set a true value upon
a pair of spectacles: for undoubtedly if those glasses were not so
plentiful, and only a few of them could be found, they would, on
account of their great use, bear the same price with diamonds."
See Kalm's Travels into North America, Vol. I. p. 386, 387. "At
the time when the Swedes first arrived, they bought land at a very
inconsiderable price. For a piece of baize, or a pot full of brandy,
or the like, they could get a piece of ground, which at present would
be worth more than 290_l._ sterling." Ib. Vol. II. p. 118.--The truth
is, that the Indians considered their lands as mere _hunting-manors_,
and not as farms. B. V.

[7] To guard against the incursions of the Indians, a plan was
sent over to America (and, as I think, by authority) suggesting
the expediency of clearing away the woods and bushes from a tract
of land, a mile in breadth, and extending along the back of
the colonies. Unfortunately, besides the large expence of this
undertaking (which, if one acre cost 2_l._ sterling, and six hundred
and forty acres make a square mile, is 128,000_l._ _first cost_ for
every 100 miles) it was forgotten, that the Indians, like other
people, knew the difference between day and night, and that a mile of
advance and another of retreat were nothing to the celerity of such
an enemy.--This plan, it is said, was the work of Dean Tucker; and
possibly might contain many other particulars. The plans of Doctor
Franklin and Governor Pownall appear much more feasible. B. V.

[8] "According to a plan which had been proposed by Governor Pownall,
and approved of by congress."--Administration of the Colonies, Vol.
II. p. 143. B. V.

[9] This plan of union, it will appear from the next page, was
rejected; and another proposed to be substituted by the English
minister, which had for its chief object, the taking power from the
_people_ in the colonies in order to give it to the _crown_. B. V.




ALBANY PAPERS CONTINUED.


  I. LETTER _to Governor Shirley, concerning the Imposition of direct
  Taxes upon the Colonies, without their Consent_.[10]

  _Tuesday Morning._

  SIR,

I return you the loose Sheets of the plan, with thanks to your
excellency for communicating them.

I apprehend, that excluding the people of the colonies from all share
in the choice of the grand council will give extreme dissatisfaction;
as well as the taxing them by act of parliament, where they have no
representation. It is very possible, that this general government
might be as well and faithfully administered without the people, as
with them; but where heavy burdens are to be laid upon them, it has
been found useful, to make it as much as possible their own act; for
they bear better, when they have, or think they have, some share in
the direction; and when any public measures are generally grievous,
or even distasteful, to the people, the wheels of government move
more heavily.

FOOTNOTE:

[10] These letters to Governor Shirley first appeared in the London
Chronicle for Feb. 6-8, 1766, with an introduction signed _A Lover of
Britain_. In the beginning of the year 1776, they were republished
in Almon's Remembrancer, with an additional prefatory piece, under
the signature of _A Mourner over our Calamities_.--I shall explain
the subject of them in the words of one of these writers. "The Albany
Plan of Union was sent to the government here for approbation: had
it been approved and established by authority from hence, English
America thought itself sufficiently able to cope with the French,
without other assistance; several of the colonies having alone, in
former wars, withstood the whole power of the enemy, unassisted
not only by the mother-country, but by any of the neighbouring
provinces.--The plan, however, was not approved here; but a _New
one_ was formed instead of it; by which it was proposed, that 'the
governors of all the colonies, attended by one or two members of
their respective councils, should assemble, and concert measures
for the defence of the whole, erect forts where they judged proper,
and raise what troops they thought necessary, with power to draw
on the treasury here for the sums that should be wanted, and the
treasury to be reimbursed by a _tax laid on the colonies by act of
parliament_.'--This _New plan_ being communicated by Governor Shirley
to a gentleman of Philadelphia (Dr. Franklin) then in Boston (who
hath very eminently distinguished himself, before and since that
time, in the literary world, and whose judgment, penetration, and
candor, as well as his readiness and ability to suggest, forward,
or carry into execution, every scheme of public utility, hath most
deservedly endeared him, not only to our fellow-subjects throughout
the continent of North America, but to his numberless friends on
this side the Atlantic) occasioned the following remarks from him,
which perhaps may contribute in some degree to its being laid aside.
As they very particularly show the then sentiments of the Americans
on the subject of a parliamentary tax, before the French power in
that country was subjected, and before the late restraints on their
commerce; they satisfy me, and I hope they will convince your readers
(contrary to what has been advanced by some of your correspondents)
that those particulars have had no share in producing the present
opposition to such a tax, nor in disturbances occasioned by it,
which these papers indeed do almost prophetically foretel. For
this purpose, having accidentally fallen into my hands, they are
communicated to you by one who is, not _partially_, but in the _most
enlarged sense_,

  "A LOVER OF BRITAIN." B. V.




  II. LETTER _to the same; concerning direct Taxes in the Colonies
  imposed without Consent, indirect Taxes, and the Albany Plan of
  Union_.

  _Wednesday Morning._

  SIR,

I mentioned it yesterday to your excellency as my opinion, that
excluding the people of the colonies from all share in the choice
of the grand council would probably give extreme dissatisfaction,
as well as the taxing them by act of parliament, where they have
no representation. In matters of general concern to the people, and
especially where burdens are to be laid upon them; it is of use to
consider, as well what they will be apt to think and say, as what
they ought to think: I shall therefore, as your excellency requires
it of me, briefly mention what of either kind occurs to me on this
occasion.

First, they will say, and perhaps with justice, that the body of the
people in the colonies are as loyal, and as firmly attached to the
present constitution, and reigning family, as any subjects in the
king's dominions.

That there is no reason to doubt the readiness and willingness of
the representatives they may choose, to grant from time to time
such supplies for the defence of the country, as shall be judged
necessary, so far as their abilities will allow.

That the people in the colonies, who are to feel the immediate
mischiefs of invasion and conquest by an enemy, in the loss of their
estates, lives, and liberties, are likely to be better judges of the
quantity of forces necessary to be raised and maintained, forts to be
built and supported, and of their own abilities to bear the expence
than the parliament of England, at so great a distance.

That governors often come to the colonies merely to make fortunes,
with which they intend to return to Britain; are not always men of
the best abilities or integrity; have many of them no estates here,
nor any natural connections with us, that should make them heartily
concerned for our welfare; and might possibly be fond of raising and
keeping up more forces than necessary, from the profits accruing to
themselves, and to make provision for their friends and dependents.

That the counsellors in most of the colonies, being appointed by
the crown, on the recommendation of governors, are often persons of
small estates, frequently dependent on the governors for offices, and
therefore too much under influence.

That there is therefore great reason to be jealous of a power, in
such governors and councils, to raise such sums as they shall judge
necessary, by drafts on the lords of the treasury, to be afterwards
laid on the colonies by act of parliament, and paid by the people
here; since they might abuse it, by projecting useless expeditions,
harassing the people, and taking them from their labour to execute
such projects, merely to create offices and employments, and gratify
their dependents, and divide profits.

That the parliament of England is at a great distance, subject to
be misinformed and misled by such governors and councils, whose
united interests might probably secure them against the effect of any
complaint from hence.

That it is supposed an undoubted right of Englishmen, not to be taxed
but by their own consent, given through their representatives:

That the colonies have no representatives in parliament.

That to propose taxing them by parliament, and refuse them the
liberty of choosing a representative council, to meet in the
colonies, and consider and judge of the necessity of any general tax,
and the quantum, shows a suspicion of their loyalty to the crown,
or of their regard for their country, or of their common sense and
understanding; which they have not deserved.

That compelling the colonies to pay money without their consent,
would be rather like raising contributions in an enemy's country,
than taxing of Englishmen for their own public benefit.

That it would be treating them as a conquered people, and not as true
British subjects.

That a tax laid by the representatives of the colonies might be
easily lessened as the occasions should lessen; but, being once laid
by parliament under the influence of the representations made by
governors, would probably be kept up, and continued for the benefit
of governors; to the grievous burthen and discontentment of the
colonies, and prevention of their growth and increase.

That a power in governors, to march the inhabitants from one end of
the British and French colonies to the other, being a country of at
least one thousand five hundred miles long, without the approbation
or the consent of their representatives first obtained to such
expeditions, might be grievous and ruinous to the people, and would
put them upon a footing with the subjects of France in Canada, that
now groan under such oppression from their governor, who for two
years past has harrassed them with long and destructive marches to
Ohio.

That if the colonies in a body may be well governed by governors and
councils appointed by the crown, without representatives; particular
colonies may as well, or better be so governed; a tax may be laid
upon them all by act of parliament for support of government;
and their assemblies may be dismissed as an useless part of the
constitution.

That the powers proposed by the Albany plan of union, to be vested
in a grand council representative of the people, even with regard to
military matters, are not so great, as those which the colonies of
Rhode Island and Connecticut are entrusted with by their charters,
and have never abused; for by this plan, the president general is
appointed by the crown, and controls all by his negative; but in
those governments, the people choose the governor, and yet allow him
no negative.

That the British colonies bordering on the French are properly
frontiers of the British empire; and the frontiers of an empire are
properly defended at the joint expence of the body of the people in
such empire:--it would now be thought hard by act of parliament to
oblige the Cinque ports or sea coasts of Britain, to maintain the
whole navy, because they are more immediately defended by it, not
allowing them at the same time a vote in choosing members of the
parliament; and, as the frontiers of America bear the expence of
their own defence, it seems hard to allow them no share in voting the
money, judging of the necessity and sum, or advising the measures.

That besides the taxes necessary for the defence of the frontiers,
the colonies pay yearly great sums to the mother-country
unnoticed:--for 1. Taxes paid in Britain by the landholder or
artificer must enter into and increase the price of the produce of
land and manufactures made of it; and great part of this is paid by
consumers in the colonies, who thereby pay a considerable part of the
British taxes.

2. We are restrained in our trade with foreign nations; and where we
could be supplied with any manufacture cheaper from them, but must
buy the same dearer from Britain, the difference of price is a clear
tax to Britain.

3. We are obliged to carry a great part of our produce directly to
Britain; and where the duties laid upon it lessen its price to the
planter, or it sells for less than it would in foreign markets, the
difference is a tax paid to Britain.

4. Some manufactures we could make, but are forbidden, and must take
them of British merchants: the whole price is a tax paid to Britain.

5. By our greatly encreasing the demand and consumption of British
manufactures, their price is considerably raised of late years; the
advantage is clear profit to Britain, and enables its people better
to pay great taxes; and much of it being paid by us, is clear tax to
Britain.

6. In short, as we are not suffered to regulate our trade, and
restrain the importation and consumption of British superfluities
(as Britain can the consumption of foreign superfluities) our whole
wealth centers finally amongst the merchants and inhabitants of
Britain; and if we make them richer, and enable them better to pay
their taxes, it is nearly the same as being taxed ourselves, and
equally beneficial to the crown.

These kind of secondary taxes, however, we do not complain of, though
we have no share in the laying or disposing of them: but to pay
immediate heavy taxes, in the laying, appropriation, and disposition
of which, we have no part, and which perhaps we may know to be as
unnecessary as grievous, must seem hard measure to Englishmen, who
cannot conceive, that by hazarding their lives and fortunes in
subduing and settling new countries, extending the dominion, and
increasing the commerce of the mother-nation, they have forfeited
the native rights of Britons; which they think ought rather to be
given to them, as due to such merit, if they had been before in a
state of slavery. -- -- --

These, and such kinds of things as these, I apprehend, will be
thought and said by the people, if the proposed alteration of the
Albany plan should take place. Then the administration of the board
of governors and council so appointed, not having the representative
body of the people to approve and unite in its measures, and
conciliate the minds of the people to them, will probably become
suspected and odious; dangerous animosities and feuds will arise
between the governors and governed; and every thing go into confusion.

Perhaps I am too apprehensive in this matter; but having freely given
my opinion and reasons, your excellency can judge better than I,
whether there be any weight in them, and the shortness of the time
allowed me will I hope in some degree excuse the imperfections of
this scrawl.

With the greatest respect and fidelity, I have the honour to be

  your excellency's most obedient,

  and most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




  III. LETTER _to the same, on the Subject of uniting the
  Colonies more intimately with Great Britain, by allowing them
  Representatives in Parliament_.


  _Boston, Dec. 22, 1754._

  SIR,

Since the conversation your excellency was pleased to honour me
with, on the subject of _uniting the colonies_ more intimately with
Great Britain, by allowing them _representatives in parliament_, I
have something further considered that matter, and am of opinion,
that such an union would be very acceptable to the colonies,
provided they had a reasonable number of representatives allowed
them; and that all the old acts of parliament restraining the trade
or cramping the manufactures of the colonies be at the same time
repealed, and the British subjects _on this side the water_ put, in
those respects, on the same footing with those in Great Britain,
till the new parliament, representing the whole, shall think it
for the interest of the whole to re-enact some or all of them: it
is not that I imagine so many representatives will be allowed the
colonies, as to have any great weight by their numbers; but I think
there might be sufficient to occasion those laws to be better and
more impartially considered, and perhaps to overcome the interest
of a petty corporation, or of any particular set of artificers or
traders in England, who heretofore seem, in some instances, to have
been more regarded than all the colonies, or than was consistent with
the general interest, or best natural good. I think too, that the
government of the colonies by a parliament, in which they are fairly
represented, would be vastly more agreeable to the people, than the
method lately attempted to be introduced by royal instruction; as
well as more agreeable to the nature of an English constitution, and
to English liberty; and that such laws, as now seem to bear hard on
the colonies, would (when judged by such a parliament for the best
interest of the whole) be more cheerfully submitted to, and more
easily executed.

I should hope too, that by such an union, the people of Great
Britain, and the people of the colonies, would learn to consider
themselves, as not belonging to different communities with different
interest, but to one community with one interest; which I imagine
would contribute to strengthen the whole, and greatly lessen the
danger of future separations.

It is, I suppose, agreed to be the general interest of any state,
that its people be numerous and rich; men enow to fight in its
defence, and enow to pay sufficient taxes to defray the charge;
for these circumstances tend to the security of the state, and
its protection from foreign power. But it seems not of so much
importance, whether the fighting be done by John or Thomas, or the
tax paid by William or Charles. The iron manufacture employs and
enriches British subjects, but is it of any importance to the state,
whether the manufacturer lives at Birmingham or Sheffield, or both;
since they are still within its bounds, and their wealth and persons
still at its command? Could the Goodwin Sands be laid dry by banks,
and land equal to a large country thereby gained to England, and
presently filled with English inhabitants, would it be right to
deprive such inhabitants of the common privileges enjoyed by other
Englishmen, the right of vending their produce in the same ports,
or of making their own shoes; because a merchant or a shoemaker,
living on the old land, might fancy it more for his advantage to
trade or make shoes for them? Would this be right, even if the land
were gained at the expence of the state? And would it not seem less
right, if the charge and labour of gaining the additional territory
to Britain had been borne by the settlers themselves? and would not
the hardship appear yet greater, if the people of the new country
should be allowed no representatives in the parliament enacting
such impositions? Now I look on the colonies as so many countries
gained to Great Britain, and more advantageous to it, than if they
had been gained out of the seas around its coasts, and joined to its
lands; for being in different climates, they afford greater variety
of produce, and materials for more manufactures; and being separated
by the ocean, they increase much more its shipping and seamen: and,
since they are all included in the British empire, which has only
extended itself by their means; and the strength and wealth of the
parts is the strength and wealth of the whole; what imports it to the
general state, whether a merchant, a smith, or a hatter, grow rich in
Old or New England? and if, through increase of people, two smiths
are wanted for one employed before, why may not the _new_ smith be
allowed to live and thrive in the _new_ country, as well as the _old_
one in the _old_? In fine, why should the countenance of a state be
_partially_ afforded to its people, unless it be most in favour of
those who have most merit? and if there be any difference, those
who have most contributed to enlarge Britain's empire and commerce,
increase her strength, her wealth, and the numbers of her people, at
the risque of their own lives and private fortunes in new and strange
countries, methinks ought rather to expect some preference. With the
greatest respect and esteem, I have the honour to be

  Your Excellency's most obedient

  and humble Servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Plan for settling two Western Colonies in North America, with
  Reasons for the Plan, 1754[11]._


The great country back of the Apalachian mountains, on both sides
the Ohio, and between that river and the lakes is now well known,
both to the English and French, to be one of the finest in North
America, for the extreme richness and fertility of the land; the
healthy temperature of the air, and mildness of the climate; the
plenty of hunting, fishing, and fowling; the facility of trade
with the Indians; and the vast convenience of inland navigation or
water-carriage by the lakes and great rivers, many hundred of leagues
around.

From these natural advantages it must undoubtedly (perhaps in less
than another century) become a populous and powerful dominion; and a
great accession of power, either to England or France.

The French are now making open encroachments on these territories, in
defiance of our known rights; and, if we longer delay to settle that
country, and suffer them to possess it,--these _inconveniences and
mischiefs_ will probably follow:

1. Our people, being confined to the country between the sea and the
mountains, cannot much more increase in number; people increasing
in proportion to their room and means of subsistence. (See the
Observations on the Increase of Mankind, &c. Vol. II.)

2. The French will increase much more, by that acquired room and
plenty of subsistence, and become a great people behind us.

3. Many of our debtors, and loose English people, our German
servants, and slaves, will probably desert to them, and increase
their numbers and strength, to the lessening and weakening of ours.

4. They will cut us off from all commerce and alliance with the
western Indians, to the great prejudice of Britain, by preventing the
sale and consumption of its manufactures.

5. They will both in time of peace and war (as they have always done
against New England) set the Indians on to harrass our frontiers,
kill and scalp our people, and drive in the advanced settlers; and
so, in preventing our obtaining more subsistence by cultivating of
new lands, they discourage our marriages, and keep our people from
increasing; thus (if the expression may be allowed) killing thousands
of our children before they are born. -- -- --

If two strong colonies of English were settled between the Ohio and
lake Erie, in the places hereafter to be mentioned,--these advantages
might be expected:

1. They would be a great security to the frontiers of our other
colonies; by preventing the incursions of the French and French
Indians of Canada, on the back parts of Pensylvania, Maryland,
Virginia, and the Carolinas; and the frontiers of such new colonies
would be much more easily defended, than those of the colonies last
mentioned now can be, as will appear hereafter.

2. The dreaded junction of the French settlements in Canada with
those of Louisiana would be prevented.

3. In case of a war, it would be easy, from those new colonies, to
annoy Louisiana, by going down the Ohio and Mississippi; and the
southern part of Canada, by sailing over the lakes; and thereby
confine the French within narrower limits.

4. We should secure the friendship and trade of the Miamis or
Twigtwees (a numerous people, consisting of many tribes, inhabiting
the country between the west end of lake Erie, and the south end
of lake Hurons, and the Ohio) who are at present dissatisfied with
the French, and fond of the English, and would gladly encourage and
protect an infant English settlement in or near their country, as
some of their chiefs have declared to the writer of this memoir.
Further, by means of the lakes, the Ohio, and the Mississippi, our
trade might be extended through a vast country, among many numerous
and distant nations, greatly to the benefit of Britain.

5. The settlement of all the intermediate lands, between the present
frontiers of our colonies on one side, and the lakes and Mississippi
on the other, would be facilitated and speedily executed, to the
great increase of Englishmen, English trade, and English power.

The grants to most of the colonies are of long narrow slips of land,
extending west from the Atlantic to the South Sea. They are much too
long for their breadth; the extremes at too great a distance; and
therefore unfit to be continued under their present dimensions.

Several of the old colonies may conveniently be limited westward by
the Allegeny or Apalachian mountains; and new colonies formed west of
those mountains.

A single old colony does not seem strong enough to extend itself
otherwise than inch by inch: it cannot venture a settlement far
distant from the main body, being unable to support it: but if the
colonies were united under one governor-general and grand council,
agreeable to the Albany plan, they might easily, by their joint
force, establish one or more new colonies, whenever they should judge
it necessary or advantageous to the interest of the whole.

But if such union should not take place, it is proposed that two
charters be granted, _each_ for some considerable part of the lands
west of Pensylvania and the Virginian mountains, to a number of the
nobility and gentry of Britain; with such Americans as shall join
them in contributing to the settlement of those lands, either by
paying a proportion of the expence of making such settlements, or
by actually going thither in person, and settling themselves and
families.

That by such charters it be granted, that every actual settler be
intitled to a tract of [___] acres for himself, and [___] acres
for every poll in the family he carries with him; and that every
contributor of [___] guineas be intitled to a quantity of acres,
equal to the share of a single settler, for every such sum of [___]
guineas contributed and paid to the colony treasurer; a contributor
for [___] shares to have an additional share _gratis_; that settlers
may likewise be contributors, and have right of land in both
capacities.

That as many and as great privileges and powers of government be
granted to the contributors and settlers, as his majesty in his
wisdom shall think most fit for their benefit and encouragement,
consistent with the general good of the British empire; for
extraordinary privileges and liberties, with lands on easy terms,
are strong inducements to people to hazard their persons and
fortunes in settling new countries; and such powers of government as
(though suitable to the circumstances, and fit to be trusted with an
infant colony) might be judged unfit, when it becomes populous and
powerful; these might be granted for a term only; as the choice of
their own governor for ninety-nine years; the support of government
in the colonies of Connecticut and Rhode Island (which _now_ enjoy
that and other like privileges) being much less expensive, than in
the colonies under the immediate government of the crown, and the
constitution more inviting.

That the first contributors to the amount of [___] guineas be
empowered to choose a treasurer to receive the contribution.

That no contributions be paid till the sum of [___] thousand guineas
be subscribed.

That the money thus raised be applied to the purchase of the lands
from the Six Nations and other Indians, and of provisions, stores,
arms, ammunition, carriages, &c. for the settlers; who, after having
entered their names with the treasurer, or person by him appointed
to receive and enter them, are, upon public notice given for that
purpose, to rendezvous at a place to be appointed, and march in a
body to the place destined for their settlement, under the [charge]
of the government to be established over them. Such rendezvous and
march however not to directed, till the number of names of settlers
entered, capable of bearing arms, amount at least to [___] thousand.
-- -- --


It is apprehended, that a great sum of money might be raised in
America on such a scheme as this; for there are many who would be
glad of any opportunity, by advancing a small sum at present, to
secure land for their children, which might in a few years become
very valuable; and a great number it is thought of actual settlers
might likewise be engaged (some from each of our present colonies)
sufficient to carry it into full execution by their strength and
numbers; provided only, that the crown would be at the expence
of removing the little forts the French have erected in their
incroachments on his majesty's territories, and supporting a strong
one near the falls of Niagara, with a few small armed vessels, or
half-galleys to cruize on the lakes. * * * * * -- -- --


For the security of this colony in its infancy, a small fort might
be erected and for some time maintained at Buffalonic on the Ohio,
above the settlement; and another at the mouth of the Hioaga, on
the south side of lake Erie, where a port should be formed, and a
town erected, for the trade of the lakes.--The colonists for _this
settlement_ might march by land through Pensylvania. -- -- --


The river Siotha, which runs into the Ohio about two hundred miles
below Logs Town, is supposed the fittest seat for the _other colony_;
there being for forty miles on each side of it and quite up to its
heads a body of all rich land; the finest spot of its bigness in
all North America, and has the particular advantage of sea-coal in
plenty (even above ground in two places) for fuel, when the woods
shall be destroyed. This colony would have the trade of the Miamis or
Twigtwees; and should, at first, have a small fort near Hock-kockin,
at the head of the river; and another near the mouth of Wabash.
Sandoski, a French fort near the lake Erie, should also be taken; and
all the little French forts south and west of the lakes, quite to the
Mississippi, be removed, or taken and garrisoned by the English.--The
colonists for this settlement might assemble near the heads of the
rivers in Virginia, and march over land to the navigable branches
of the Kanhawa, where they might embark with all their baggage and
provisions, and fall into the Ohio, not far above the mouth of
Siotha. Or they might rendezvous at Will's Creek, and go down the
Mohingahela to the Ohio.

The fort and armed vessels at the strait of Niagara would be a vast
security to the frontiers of these new colonies against any attempts
of the French from Canada. The fort at the mouth of the Wabash would
guard that river, the Ohio, and Cutava river, in case of any attempt
from the French of Mississippi. (Every fort should have a small
settlement round it; as the fort would protect the settlers, and the
settlers defend the fort and supply it with provisions.) -- -- --


The difficulty of settling the first English colonies in America,
at so great a distance from England, must have been vastly greater,
than the settling these proposed new colonies: for it would be the
interest and advantage of all the present colonies to support these
new ones; as they would cover their frontiers, and prevent the growth
of the French power behind or near their present settlements; and the
new country is nearly at equal distance from all the old colonies,
and could easily be assisted from all of them.

And as there are already in the old colonies many thousands of
families that are ready to swarm, wanting more land; the richness
and natural advantage of the Ohio country would draw most of them
thither, were there but a tolerable prospect of a safe settlement.
So that the new colonies would soon be full of people; and from
the advantage of their situation, become much more terrible to the
French settlements, than those are now to us. The gaining of the
back Indian trade from the French, by the navigation of the lakes,
&c. would of itself greatly weaken our enemies:--it being now their
principal support, it seems highly probable, that in time they must
be subjected to the British crown, or driven out of the country.

Such settlements may better be made now, than fifty years hence,
because it is easier to settle ourselves, and thereby prevent the
French settling there as they seem now to intend, than to remove them
when strongly settled.

If these settlements are postponed, then more forts and stronger,
and more numerous and expensive garrisons must be established, to
secure the country, prevent their settling, and secure our present
frontiers; the charge of which may probably exceed the charge of the
proposed settlements, and the advantage nothing near so great.

The fort at Oswego should likewise be strengthened, and some armed
half-gallies, or other small vessels, kept there to cruise on lake
Ontario, as proposed by Mr. Pownall in his paper laid before the
commissioners at the Albany treaty[12].

If a fort was also built at Tirondequat on lake Ontario and a
settlement made there near the lake side, where the lands are said to
be good, (much better than at Oswego;) the people of such settlements
would help to defend both forts on any emergency[13]

FOOTNOTES:

[11] For the occasion which produced this plan, see what follows. I
apprehend it was given to Governor Pownall, 1754, for the purpose of
being inserted in his memorial; but this point of anecdote I cannot
sufficiently ascertain.

"Extract of a Memorial drawn up by Order of, and presented to his
Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland, 1756, by T. Pownall.

"In other parts of our frontier, that are not the immediate residence
and country of Indians, some other species of barrier should be
thought of, of which nothing can be more effectual than a barrier
colony: but even this cannot be carried ... into execution and
effect, without the previous measure of _entrepôts_ in the country
between us and the enemy.... All mankind must know, that no body of
men, whether as an army, or as an emigration of colonists, can march
from one country to another, through an inhospitable wilderness,
without magazines; nor with any safety, without posts communicating
among each other by practicable roads, to which to retire in case of
accidents, repulse, or delay.

"It is a fact, which experience evinces the truth of, that we have
always been able to outsettle the French; and have driven the Indians
out of the country more by settling than fighting; and that whenever
our settlements have been wisely and completely made, the French,
neither by themselves nor their dogs of war, the Indians, have been
able to remove us. It is upon this fact I found the propriety of the
measure of settling a barrier colony in those parts of our frontiers,
_which are not the immediate residence or hunting-grounds of our_
Indians. This is a measure that will be effectual; and will not only
in time pay its expence, but make as great returns as any of our
present colonies do; will give a strength and unity to our dominions
in North America; and give us possession of the country, as well as
settlement in it. But above all this, the state and circumstances of
our settlements render such a measure not only proper and eligible,
but absolutely necessary. The English settlements, as they are at
present circumstanced, are absolutely at a stand; they are settled
up to the mountains: and in the mountains there is no where together
land sufficient for a settlement large enough to subsist by itself,
and to defend itself, and preserve a communication with the present
settlements.

"If the English would advance one step further, or cover themselves
where they are, it must be at once, by one large step over the
mountains, with a numerous and military colony. Where such should
be settled, I do not take upon me to say: at present I shall only
point out the measure and the nature of it, by inserting two schemes,
one of Mr. Franklin's, the other of your memorialist; and if I
might indulge myself with scheming, I should imagine that two such
were sufficient, and only requisite and proper: one at the back of
Virginia, filling up the vacant space between the five nations and
southern confederacy, and connecting, into one system, our barrier;
the other somewhere in the Cohass or Connecticut river, or wherever
best adapted to cover the New England colonies. These, with the
little settlements mentioned above in the Indian countries, complete
my idea of this branch." See Governor Pownall's Administration of the
Colonies. Vol. II. p. 228-231, 5th edition.

The reader must carry along with him a distinction between the plans
of Dr. Franklin and Governor Pownall here referred to. The first
(which is before him) is particular, and proposes a plan for _two_
settlements in the unlocated lands to the westward of Pensylvania
and the Virginian mountains, and is totally silent with respect to a
settlement in New England: the other treats of the mode of settling
new colonies in North America in general, leaving the precise
situation to be in some measure pointed out by the foregoing extract.

The copy from which this paper is printed, has appearances of being
rather incorrectly taken from the original. B. V.

[12] See his work above quoted, Vol. II. p. 234. _et seq._ and p.
179. _et seq._ B. V.

[13] This whole proposal was neglected, though the French thought
a considerable settlement very practicable, in order to get at the
Ohio. See Governor Pownall, Vol. II. p. 236.

Dr. Franklin also failed in another proposal for settling to the
south of the Ohio. B. V.




  _Report of the Committee of Aggrievances of the Assembly of
  Pensylvania, dated Feb. 22, 1757[14]._


In obedience to the order of the house, we have drawn up the heads
of the most important aggrievances that occur to us, which the
people of this province with great difficulty labour under; the many
infractions of the constitution (in manifest violation of the royal
grant, the proprietary charter, the laws of this province, and of the
laws, usages, and customs of our mother-country) and other matters;
which we apprehend call aloud for redress.

They are as follow:


_First_, By the royal charter (which has ever been, ought to be,
and truly is, the principal and invariable fundamental of this
constitution) King Charles the Second did give and grant unto William
Penn, his heirs and assigns, the province of Pensylvania; and also to
him and his heirs, and his or their _deputies_ or lieutenants, free,
full, and absolute power, for the good and happy government thereof,
to make and enact any laws, "according to their best discretion;
by and with the advice, assent, and approbation of the _freemen_
of the said country, or of their delegates or deputies;" for the
raising of money, or any other end appertaining to the public state,
peace, or safety of the said country. By the words of this grant,
it is evident, that full powers are granted to the _deputies_ and
lieutenants of William Penn and his heirs, to concur with the people
in framing laws for their protection and the safety of the province,
according to their best discretion; independent of any instructions
or directions they should receive from their _principals_. And it is
equally obvious to your committee, that the _people_ of this province
and their representatives were interested in this royal grant; and
by virtue thereof have an original right of legislation inherent in
them; which neither the proprietors nor any other person whatsoever
can divest them of, restrain, or abridge, without manifestly
violating and destroying the letter, spirit, and design of this grant.

Nevertheless we unfortunately find, that the proprietaries of this
province, regardless of this sacred fundamental of our rights and
liberties, have so abridged and restricted their late and present
_governor's_ discretion in matters of legislation, by their illegal,
impracticable, and unconstitutional instructions and prohibitions;
that no bill for granting aids and supplies to our most gracious
sovereign (be it ever so reasonable, expedient, and necessary for
the defence of this his majesty's colony, and safety of his people)
unless it be agreeable thereto, can meet with his approbation: by
means whereof the many considerable sums of money which have been
offered for those purposes, by the assemblies of this province (ever
anxious to maintain his honour and rights,) have been rejected; to
the great encouragement of his majesty's enemies, and the imminent
danger of the loss of this colony.


_Secondly_, The representatives of the people in general assembly
met, by virtue of the said royal grant, and the charter of privileges
granted by the said William Penn, and a law of this province, have
right to, and ought to enjoy all the powers and privileges of an
assembly, according to the rights of the free-born subjects of
England, and as is usual in any of the plantations in America: [also]
it is an indubitable and now an incontested right of the commons of
England, to _grant aids_ and supplies to his majesty in any manner
they think most easy to themselves and the people; and they [also]
are the sole judges of the _measure_, _manner and time_ of granting
and raising the same.

Nevertheless the proprietaries of this province, in contempt of the
said royal grant, proprietary charter, and law of their colony,
designing to subvert the fundamentals of this constitution, to
deprive the assembly and people of their rights and privileges, and
to assume an arbitrary and tyrannical power over the liberties and
properties of his majesty's liege subjects, have so restrained their
governors by the _despotic instructions_ (which are not to be varied
from, and are particularly directory in the framing and passing of
money-bills and supplies to his majesty, as to the mode, measure,
and time) that it is impossible for the assembly, should they lose
all sense of their most essential rights, and comply with those
instructions, to grant sufficient aids for the defence of this his
majesty's province from the common enemy.


_Thirdly_, In pursuance of sundry acts of general assembly, approved
of by the crown, [and] a natural right inherent in every man
antecedent to all laws, the assemblies of this province have had the
power of _disposing_ of the _public_ monies, that have been raised
for the encouragement of trade and support of government, by the
interest money arising by the loan of the bills of credit and the
excise. No part of these monies was ever paid by the _proprietaries_,
or ever raised on their estates; and therefore they can have no
pretence of right to a voice in the disposition of them. They
have ever been applied with prudent frugality to the honour and
advantage of the public, and the king's immediate service, to the
general approbation of the people: the credit of the government has
been preserved, and the debts of the public punctually discharged.
In short, no inconveniencies, but great and many advantages have
accrued, from the assembly's prudent care and management of these
funds.

Yet the proprietaries resolved to deprive the assemblies of the power
and means of _supporting an agent_ in England, and of prosecuting
their complaints and remonstrating their aggrievances, when injured
and oppressed, to his majesty and his parliament: and to rob them
of this natural right (which has been so often approved of by their
gracious sovereign) have, by their said instructions, prohibited
their governor from giving his assent to any laws emitting or
re-emitting any paper-currency or bills of credit, or for raising
money by excise or any other method; unless the governor or commander
in chief for the time being, by clauses to be inserted therein, has
_a negative in the disposition_ of the monies arising thereby; let
the languishing circumstances of our trade be ever so great, and a
further or greater medium be ever so necessary for its support.


_Fourthly_, By the laws and statutes of England, the chief rents,
honours, and castles of the crown are taxed, and _pay their
proportion_ to the supplies that are granted to the king for the
defence of the realm and support of government: his majesty,
the nobility of the realm, and all the British subjects, do now
actually contribute their proportion towards the defence of America
in general, and this province in particular: and it is in a more
especial manner the duty of the _proprietaries_ to pay their
proportion of a tax, for the immediate preservation of their own
estates, in this province. To exempt therefore any part of their
estates from their reasonable part of this necessary burthen, it is
unjust as it is illegal, and as new as it is arbitrary.

Yet the proprietaries, notwithstanding the general danger to which
the nation and its colonies are exposed, and great distress of this
province in particular, by their said instructions, have prohibited
their governors from passing laws for the raising supplies for its
defence; _unless_ all their located, unimproved, and unoccupied
lands, quit-rents, fines, and purchase monies on interest (the much
greater part of their enormous estates in this colony) are expressly
exempted from paying any part of the tax.


_Fifthly_, By virtue of the said royal charter, the proprietaries are
invested with a power of doing every thing "which unto a compleat
establishment of justice, unto courts and tribunals, forms of
judicature, and manner of proceedings, do belong." It was certainly
the import and design of this grant, that the courts of judicature
should be formed, and the _judges_ and officers thereof hold their
commissions, in a manner not repugnant, but agreeable to the laws
and customs of England: that thereby they might remain free from
the influence of persons in power, the rights of the people might
be preserved, and their properties effectually secured. That the
guarantee, William Penn (understanding the said grant in this light)
did, by his original frame of government, covenant and grant with
the people, that the judges and other officers should hold their
commissions during their _good behaviour, and no longer_.

Notwithstanding which, the governors of this province have, for
many years past, granted all the commissions to the judges of the
king's bench or supreme court of this province, and to the judges
of the court of common pleas of the several counties, to be held
during their _will and pleasure_; by means whereof, the said judges
being subject to the influence and directions of the proprietaries
and their governors, their favourites and creatures, the laws may
not be duly administered or executed, but often wrested from their
true sense; to serve particular purposes, the foundation of justice
may be liable to be destroyed; and the lives, laws, liberties,
privileges, and properties of the people thereby rendered precarious
and altogether insecure; to the great disgrace of our laws, and the
inconceivable injury of his majesty's subjects.


Your committee further beg leave to add, that besides these
aggrievances, there are other hardships the people of this province
have experienced, that call for redress.--The _inlistment of
servants, without the least satisfaction_ being made to the masters,
has not only prevented the cultivation of our lands, and diminished
the trade and commerce of the province, but is a burthen extremely
unequal and oppressive to individuals. And should the practice
continue, the consequence must prove very discouraging to the further
settlement of this colony, and prejudicial to his majesty's future
service.--Justice, therefore, demands, that satisfaction should be
made to the masters of such inlisted servants; and that the right of
masters to their servants be confirmed and settled.--But as those
servants have been inlisted into his majesty's service for the
general defence of America, and not of this province only, but all
the colonies, and the nation in general, have and will receive equal
benefit from their service; this satisfaction should be made at the
expence of the nation, and not of the province only.

That the people now labour under _a burthen of taxes_, almost
insupportable by so young a colony, for the defence of its
long-extended frontier, of about two hundred miles from New Jersey
to Maryland; without either of those colonies, or the three lower
counties on Delaware, contributing their proportion thereto; though
their frontiers are in a great measure covered and protected by our
forts. And should the war continue, and with it this unequal burthen,
many of his majesty's subjects in this province will be reduced to
want, and the province, if not lost to the enemy, involved in debt,
and sunk under its load.

That notwithstanding this weight of taxes, the assemblies of this
province _have given to the general service_ of the nation, five
thousand pounds to purchase provisions for the troops under General
Braddock; 2,985_l._ 0_s._ 11_d._ for clearing a road by his orders;
10,514_l._ 10_s._ 1_d._ to General Shirley, for the purchasing
provisions for the New England forces; and expended the sum of
2,385_l._ 0_s._ 2½_d._ in supporting the inhabitants of Nova Scotia;
which likewise we conceive ought to be a national expence.

And that his majesty's subjects, the merchants and insurers in
England, as well as the merchants here and elsewhere, did during
the last, and will during the present war, greatly suffer in their
property, trade, and commerce, by the _enemy's privateers_ on this
coast, and at our capes, unless some method be fallen on to prevent
it.


Wherefore your committee are of opinion, That the commissioners
intended to be sent to England[15], to solicit a memorial and
redress of the many infractions and violations of the constitution;
should also have it in charge, and be instructed to represent
to our most gracious sovereign and his parliaments, the several
unequal burthens and hardships before-mentioned;--and endeavour to
procure satisfaction to the masters of such servants as have been
inlisted, and the right of masters to their servants established and
confirmed;--and obtain a repayment of the said several sums of money,
some assistance towards defending our extensive frontier, and a
vessel of war to protect the trade and commerce of this province.

  Submitted to the correction of the house.

  _Feb. 22, 1757._

FOOTNOTES:

[14] The English colony-governments seem to have been considered
as of three sorts. First, _provincial_ governments; where the
constitution originally depends on the king's commission, and
instructions given to his governors; and the assemblies, held under
that authority, have their share in making local ordinances not
repugnant to English law. Next, _proprietary_ governments; where a
district of country is given by the crown to individuals, attended
with certain legislative powers in the nature of a fief; with a
provision for the sovereignty at home, and also for the fulfilment
of the terms and end of the grant. Lastly, _charter_ governments,
where the fundamentals of the government are previously prescribed
and made known to the settlers, being in no degree left subject to a
governor's commission or proprietor's will. (See Blackstone, Vol. I.
Introd. § 4.)--Good faith however to mankind seemed to require, that
the constitutions, once begun under the provincial or proprietary
governments, should remain unaltered (except for improvement) to the
respective settlers, equally as in charter-governments. B. V.

[15] Dr. Franklin was afterwards appointed to present this address,
as agent for the province of Pensylvania, and departed from America
for the purpose in June 1757. See his life, Vol. I. p. 134. While in
England, the more effectually to accomplish the business upon which
he was sent, he wrote the article that follows in the next page,
entitled An historical Review, &c. _Editor._




  _An historical Review of the Constitution and Government of
  Pensylvania, from its Origin; so far as regards the several Points
  of Controversy which have, from Time to Time, arisen between the
  several Governors of that Province, and their several Assemblies.
  Founded on authentic Documents._

  Those who would give up _essential liberty_, to purchase a little
  _temporary safety_, deserve neither _liberty_ nor _safety_.

  Griffiths, 1759[16].


  DEDICATION.

  To the right honourable Arthur Onslow, speaker of the honourable
  House of Commons.

  SIR,

The subject of the following sheets is an unhappy one: the
controversy between the proprietaries and successive assemblies of
Pensylvania: a controversy which has often embarrassed, if not
endangered the public service: a controversy which has been long
depending, and which still seems to be as far from an issue as ever.

Our blessed saviour reproaches the Pharisees with laying heavy
burdens on men's shoulders, which they themselves would not stir with
a single finger.

Our proprietaries, sir, have done the same; and, for the sake of the
commonwealth, the province has hitherto submitted to the imposition:
not indeed, without the most strenuous endeavours to lay the load
equally, the fullest manifestations, and the strongest protestations
against the violence put upon them.

Having been most injuriously misrepresented and traduced in print,
by the known agents and dependents of those gentlemen their fellow
subjects, they at last find themselves obliged to set forth an
historical state of their case, and to make their appeal to the
public upon it.

With the public opinion in their favour, they may with the more
confidence lift up their eyes to the wisdom of parliament and the
majesty of the crown, from whence alone they can derive an effectual
remedy.

To your hands, sir, these papers are most humbly presented, for
considerations so obvious, that they scarce need any explanation.

The Roman provinces did not stand more in need of patronage than
ours: and such clients as we are would have preferred the integrity
of Cato to the fortune of Cæsar.

The cause we bring is in fact the cause of all the provinces in one:
it is the cause of every British subject in every part of the British
dominions: it is the cause of every man who deserves to be free every
where.

The propriety, therefore, of addressing these papers to a gentleman,
who, for so many successive parliaments, with so much honour to
himself and satisfaction to the public, has been at the head of the
commons of Great Britain, cannot be called in question.

You will smile, sir, perhaps, as you read the references of a
provincial assembly to the rights and claims of parliament; but we
humbly conceive, it will be without the least mixture of resentment;
those assemblies having nothing more in view, than barely to
establish their privileges on the most rational and solid basis they
could find, for the security and service of their constituents.

And you are humbly besought, sir, not to think the worse of this
address, because it has been made without your permission or privity.

Nobody asks leave to pay a debt: every Briton is your debtor, sir:
and all we have said, or can say, is but a poor composition for what
we owe you.

You have conferred as much honour on the chair you fill, as the chair
has conferred on you.

Probity and dignity are your characteristics.

May that seat always derive the same lustre from the same qualities!

This at least ought to be our prayer, whether it is or not within our
expectations.

For the province of Pensylvania, as well as in my own private
capacity, I have the honour to be, with the most profound respect,

  Sir,

  your most obedient humble servant,

  THE EDITOR.


INTRODUCTION.

To obtain an infinite variety of purposes by a few plain principles
is the characteristic of nature. As the eye is affected so is the
understanding: objects at distance strike it according to their
dimensions, or the quantity of light thrown upon them; near,
according to their novelty or familiarity as they are in motion or
at rest. It is the same with actions. A battle is all motion; a hero
all glare: while such images are before us, we can attend to nothing
else. Solon and Lycurgus would make no figure in the same scene with
the king of Prussia; and we are at present so lost in a military
scramble on the continent next us, in which it must be confessed we
are deeply interested, that we have scarce time to throw a glance
towards America, where we have also much at stake, and where, if any
where, our account must be made up at last.

We love to stare more than to reflect, and to be indolently amused
at our leisure, than to commit the smallest trespass on our patience
by winding a painful tedious maze, which would pay us in nothing but
knowledge.

But then as there are some eyes that can find nothing marvellous but
what is marvellously great, so there are others equally disposed to
marvel at what is marvellously little; and who can derive as much
entertainment from this microscope in examining a mite, as Dr. ----
in ascertaining the geography of the moon, or measuring the tail of a
comet.

Let this serve as an excuse for the author of these sheets, if he
needs any, for bestowing them on the transactions of a colony, till
of late hardly mentioned in our annals; in point of establishment
one of the last upon the British list, and in point of rank one of
the most subordinate, as being not only subject, in common with the
rest, to the crown, but also to the claims of a _proprietary_, who
thinks he does them _honour_ enough in governing them by _deputy_;
consequently so much further removed from the royal eye, and so much
the more exposed to the pressure of self-interested _instructions_.

Considerable, however, as most of them, for happiness of situation,
fertility of soil, product of valuable commodities, number of
inhabitants, shipping, amount of exportations, latitude of rights and
privileges, and every other requisite for the being and well-being of
society, and more considerable than any of them all for the celerity
of its growth, unassisted by any human help but the vigour and virtue
of its own excellent constitution.

A father and his family, the latter united by interest and affection,
the former to be revered for the wisdom of his institutions and
the indulgent use of his authority, was the form it was at first
presented in. Those who were only ambitious of repose found it
here; and as none returned with an evil report of the land, numbers
followed: all partook of the leaven they found: the community still
wore the same equal face: nobody aspired: nobody was oppressed:
industry was sure of profit, knowledge of esteem, and virtue of
veneration.

An assuming _landlord_, strongly disposed to convert free tenants
into abject vassals, and to reap what he did not sow, countenanced
and abetted by a few desperate and designing dependents, on the one
side; and on the other, all who have sense enough to know their
rights, and spirit enough to defend them, combined as one man against
the said landlord and his encroachment in the form it has since
assumed.

And surely a nation born to liberty like this, bound to leave it
unimpaired as they received it from their fathers in perpetuity
to their heirs, and interested in the conservation of it in every
appendix to the British empire, the particulars of such a contest
cannot be wholly indifferent.

On the contrary, it is reasonable to think, the first workings of
power against liberty, and the natural efforts of unbiassed men
to secure themselves against the first approaches of oppression,
must have a captivating power over every man of sensibility and
discernment amongst us.

Liberty it seems thrives best in the woods. America best cultivates
what Germany brought forth. And were it not for certain ugly
comparisons, hard to be suppressed, the pleasure arising from such a
research would be without alloy.

In the feuds of Florence recorded by Machiavel, we find more to
lament and less to praise. Scarce can we believe the first citizens
of the ancient republics had such pretensions to consideration,
though so highly celebrated in ancient story. As to ourselves, we
need no longer have recourse to the late glorious stand of the French
parliament to excite our emulation.

It is a known custom among farmers, to change their corn from season
to season, for the sake of filling the bushel: and in case the wisdom
of the age should condescend to make the like experiment in another
shape, from hence we may learn, whither to repair for the proper
species.

It is not however to be presumed, that such as have long been
accustomed to consider the colonies in general as only so many
dependencies on the council board, the board of trade, and the board
of customs; or, as a hot-bed for causes, jobs and other pecuniary
emoluments, and as formed as effectually by _instructions_ as by
_laws_, can be prevailed on to consider those patriot rustics with
any degree of respect.

But how contemptibly soever these gentlemen may talk of the colonies,
how cheap soever they may hold their assemblies, or how insignificant
the planters and traders who compose them, truth will be truth, and
principle, principle, notwithstanding.

Courage, wisdom, integrity, and honour are not to be measured by the
place assigned them to act in, but by the trials they undergo and
the vouchers they furnish: and if so manifested, need neither robes
or titles to set them off.


CONTENTS.

List of governors of Pensylvania, and dates of the several charters,
&c. of that province.

Abstract of the charter granted to William Penn.

Certain conditions or concessions of Mr. Penn to the first
adventurers in, and settlers of, Pensylvania.

Mr. Penn's first frame of government.

His reservation of quit rents.

His second frame of government.

The province of Pensylvania and the territory of the three lower
counties united by his management.

Remonstrance of a subsequent assembly against the said union.

Motives of the planters, assigned by the said assembly, for accepting
the second frame of government.

Mr. Penn's return to England, and appointment of commissioners to
administer the government.

Disorders which ensued during his absence.

Captain Blackwell's government.

The government assumed into the lands of the crown in 1693, and
administered by colonel Fletcher, governor of New York.

He declares the constitution of Mr. Penn's government, and that of
their majesties, to be directly opposite to each other.

He menaces the assembly with an annexion of their province to that of
New York.

Protestation against passing of bills, amended by the governor
and council, without the previous assent of the assembly to those
amendments, and of money-bills before grievances have been redressed.

Remonstrance to Mr. Penn concerning this period.

The governor admits the principles of the quakers, not to carry arms,
or levy money to make war; and solicits a supply to feed the hungry
and clothe the naked (Indians).

The assembly insist on their right to appropriate as well as to raise
money.

The government of William Markham, Esq.

A new act of settlement or frame of government.

The government resumed by Mr. Penn.

The province purged from the odium of favouring pirates, and carrying
on an illicit trade.

A new model of elections agreed to.

The assembly formed thereon dissolved.

Another assembly called upon another model, to meet at Newcastle
instead of Philadelphia.

Aids granted for the proprietary-governor, in exchange for a
conformation of property.

An aid of 350_l._ sterling to the crown on this account.

Mr. Penn's plausible speech to a new assembly.

Three of the requisitions they made to him, with his answers and
their replies.

A breach between the province and the territory.

The last charter of privileges, which, under the royal charter, is
_now_ the rule of government.

It is unanimously rejected by the freemen of the territory.

Mr. Penn's departure for England.

Andrew Hamilton, Esq. deputy-governor, in vain endeavours to unite
the territory with the province.

John Evans, Esq. succeeds Hamilton, and makes the like endeavour,
also in vain.

Controversy between him and the assembly concerning the bill to
confirm the charter.

Nine several heads of complaint entered in the minutes of the
assembly, as the ground of a representation to the proprietary; being
the representation several times before cited.

The remainder of that representation.

A copy of it demanded by the governor and refused by the assembly.

The latter make a merit of having forborne to make their
representation public.

The governor obtains an assembly to his wish, by undue practices.

Animosities between Lloyd, speaker of the assembly, and Logan,
secretary to the governor and council.

The governor censures the proprietary's charter of property.

The draughtman's defence of it.

The governor declares the proprietary's high resentment of the
assembly's representation.

The assembly's reply.

The governor refers to the charter of privileges as the only rule of
government.

The assembly complains of infractions made in it.

Their representation to the proprietary against the governor.

Logan impeached by the assembly.

An unanimous vote of thanks to the proprietary for recalling Evans.

General view of Gookin's government.

Assembly's character of themselves.

A proprietary-governor a wretched thing.

Artful conduct of governor Keith.

Mr. Penn's death.

The province left in the hands of trustees.

Logan, one of those trustees, obtains a majority in the council
against the governor.

Logan makes a voyage to England, and returns with private
instructions to Keith, which Keith communicates to the assembly.

The governor and assembly in concert pay no regard to the said
instructions.

A controversy in print, between the governor and Logan thereon.

A breach between the governor and speaker.

The province in a state of tranquillity for nine years under his
administration.

A pathetic reflection on the melancholy case of governors recalled.

Pensylvania easy to be governed, if well governed.

Private instructions from the proprietary in two several instances
declared void.

The proprietary of Pensylvania too inconsiderable here at home to be
a patron to the province, and too unsizeably great there.

The proprietaries the sole purchasers of Indian lands:--the people
at the sole expence of Indian affairs:--treaties and purchases
concomitant.

The quit-rents of Pensylvania, paid to the proprietary, first
demanded and granted to defray the charge of government.

Notwithstanding which the people now pay taxes for that purpose, and
the proprietaries insist on holding their estates tax-free.

Paper-money first issued in Pensylvania.

Precautions taken to secure it from depreciation.

Mr. Penn's trustees averse to the said issue, till a provision was
made, at the expence of the province, to render his heirs gainers by
it.

Room left in the constitution of the province for self defence by
force of arms, though the use of arms was not consistent with the
principles of quakers.

In consequence of complaints to parliament, of the mischiefs arising
from excessive issues of paper-money by the eastern governments (that
is to say those of New England) a general instruction was sent to
_all_ the governors of North America, not to give their assent to any
farther bills of that nature, without a suspending clause, till his
majesty's pleasure should be known.

The assembly grants money in aid of the expedition against Carthagena.

The governor inlists indented servants upon that occasion; and the
assembly apply the money they had given to indemnify the masters.

They give 3,000_l._ towards the public service, to be applied as his
majesty should direct.

Also another sum of 4,000_l._ to furnish necessaries to the troops in
Louisburgh.

And yet another sum of 5,000_l._ towards the intended expedition
against Canada in the year 1746, by an addition of the like sum to
their paper currency, and notwithstanding the above instruction, the
governor gave his assent to the bill for that purpose.

The proprietaries of Pensylvania oppose the bill brought into
parliament for restraining the northern colonies from issuing paper
bills of credit, and make a merit of it in the province.

The assembly call upon the proprietaries to contribute to the expence
of Indian affairs, which they decline.

The assembly's representation thereon.

A bill for increasing the provincial paper-currency in proportion to
the increase of the province, by an addition of 20,000_l._ thereto.

Rejected by the governor for being unseasonably timed.

And petitioned by the inhabitants.

A message from the governor (Hamilton) preparing the house to expect
incursions from the French among the Indians in alliance with them,
and requiring assistance on their behalf.

The answer of the proprietaries to the representation of the assembly
concerning the expence of Indian affairs.

The assembly's message sent to the governor, together with the
currency-bill he had before rejected.

Another message to him concerning Indian affairs, and notifying a
present of condolence to the Twigtwee tribe.

Governor's message, importing his assent to the currency-bill, with a
suspending clause.

Resolution of the assembly not to accept this clause, with their
reasons.

A note of regret, that some temperament had not been found out at
home, to prevent the controversy, which was now on the point of
breaking out.

Remonstrance of the assembly against the said clause.

The governor's message of adherence thereto.

The assembly's reply.

Their reply to the proprietary's answer to the representation on
Indian expences.

Unanimous resolution of the assembly concerning the necessity of a
remission of their paper-currency.

Lord Holdernesse's letter and other papers laid before them, together
with a written message from the governor thereon.

The assembly's answer, accompanied with their currency-bill.

The governor rejects it; but offers to pass a bill for striking a
farther sum on a proper fund for sinking the same in a few years.

The assembly prudently avail themselves of the cautions in lord
Holdernesse's letter concerning _undoubted limits_, to decline taking
any part in the broil, till the government of Virginia, as first
concerned, should set the first example.

The governor revives the old controversy concerning the paper-money
instruction.

Declares in another paper he had _undoubted assurance_, that part
of his majesty's dominions _within_ his government was at that time
invaded, and demands supplies to arm the province, &c.

The assembly demur, and desire a short adjournment.

The governor not only persists in his former declaration, but
maintains, that the case was the same, whether the invasion of the
enemy was made in Virginia or Pensylvania.

The assembly adjourn to May 6, and are assembled by the governor
April 2, in order to lay before them papers from governor Dinwiddie;
and demand a supply.

Debates in the assembly on the _quantum_, and a new adjournment.

Another session, and a message from the governor, accompanied with
intelligence, that the French were before the fort built by the
Virginians on the Ohio; with dispatches and a proposition from the
governors of Boston and New York, for an union of the colonies, &c.

A joint bill for granting an aid of 10,000_l._ to the king, and
20,000_l._ for replacing torn and ragged bills, offered.

Amendments proposed by the governor.

Unanimously rejected by the assembly, and for what reasons.

The governor's reply.

A reflection thereon.

Resolutions of the assembly.

And message to the governor before their adjournment.

They are re-convened by special summons on the occasion of
Washington's defeat, and required to form chearful and vigorous
resolutions for dislodging the enemy, in concurrence with Virginia.

The proceedings of the commissioners at Albany laid before them.

They prepare and present a bill for striking 35,000_l._ in bills of
credit, and the rest for replacing defective bills.

Which the governor evades for want of sufficient powers to pass it.

Governor Morris's arrival at Philadelphia, and first speech to a new
assembly.

The assembly's answer and adjournment.

Being assembled again, a letter from Sir Thomas Robinson, secretary
of state, is laid before them; and the governor in his speech
requires them to raise and keep up a considerable body of troops.

They present a bill for raising 40,000_l._ on the former plan; half
of this sum for the public service; with a message, expressing their
concern at a paragraph in the secretary of state's letter, by which
it appeared their conduct had not been fairly represented at home.

The old instruction, and an opinion of the attorney-general's,
pleaded by the governor in bar of his assent, unless the money was
raised in a five-years fund.

A letter from Sir Thomas Robinson to the governor of Pensylvania,
dispatched at the same time with others of similar tendency to the
other governors of the northern colonies.

Which the governor, in his comment upon it, endeavours to narrow the
application of, to Pensylvania only.

A message from the assembly, fully demonstrating, that Pensylvania
was not comprehended in the instruction insisted upon; and that in
case it was, the present emergency was one of those, which, according
to the very letter of that instruction, might be provided for
notwithstanding: also desiring a sight of the instructions he himself
had received from his principals.

A second message, in which they call upon the governor to give his
assent to the bill, as what would answer all the purposes recommended
to them in Sir Thomas Robinson's letter.

The governor's reply, declining the bill as before; because the
supply might be otherwise raised, and evading the communication of
his instructions.

The assembly's rejoinder, justifying the requisition they made of his
instructions; and intimating, that an appeal to the crown was the
only method left them of being continued in the use and benefit of
their birthright, and charter liberties.

The governor questions their right to have these instructions laid
before them, and endeavours to put them beside their point, by
magnifying the preparations of the French, &c.

The assembly order the papers which had passed between the
proprietaries and them to be printed, which till then they had
avoided.

Their unanimous resolutions concerning the proprietary instructions,
in which they declare it as their opinion, that the said instructions
were the principal if not the sole obstruction to their bill: also
the most essential points contained in their reply to the governor's
charges against them.

A brief of the governor's sur-rejoinder.

Some general remarks.

The assembly make their appeal to the crown, inform the governor
thereof, signify their inclination to adjourn till May, and give his
instructions the _coup de grace_.

The governor's expostulatory message thereon.

He demands a copy of their minutes; they order him one when the
printed copies were _finished_, and adjourn.

Upon Braddock's arrival in Virginia, they are re-assembled by special
summons: the demands made by message on that occasion.

The governor reprimands them for having published Sir Thomas
Robinson's letter in their minutes, and for not delivering him a copy
of those minutes so soon as he had required them.

The assembly's answer thereto.

Orders and counter-orders to the printer of these minutes.

Two messages from the governor; one communicating a design of
general Shirley to build a fort _within the limits_ of his majesty's
territories near _Crown Point_, to which the assembly is required
to contribute; and the other, notifying first the arrival of
Braddock's forces, and then the expectations entertained at home,
that the colonies would raise an additional number of forces,
furnish provisions, &c. all terminated with a kind of menace of
the resentment of his majesty and the parliament, in case of a
disappointment.

_Twenty five thousand pounds_ granted to the king's use, to be raised
by an emission of paper-bills to the same amount, and to be sunk by
an extension of the excise for ten years.

Refused by the governor, on the old pretence of a contrary
instruction.

A provision demanded for the expence of an Indian treaty.

A memorial to the assembly from Mr. Quincy, a commissioner from the
government of Massachusett's Bay, expressing both his concern, that
the governor could not be induced to pass the said money-bill, and
his acknowledgments of the _chearfulness_ shown by them in granting
10,000_l._ for victualling the forces to be employed in New England;
being part of the money so granted; and urging them to find out some
other means of rendering their purpose effectual.

The assembly resolve to raise the said sum on the credit of the
province.

Another paper of acknowledgment from the said Mr. Quincy.

The governor refuses to return the said bill to the assembly; informs
them the French had fitted out fifteen sail of the line, with six
thousand land forces, and calls upon them to put the province into a
state of defence, as the enemy could not be ignorant how plentiful
and defenceless it was; yet advises a short adjournment.

They meet again, and a squabble arising between them about a bill
merely provincial, he revives the former controversy.

The assembly's spirited answer to this captious message.

A remark thereon.

They are re-assembled.

A hardy assertion, concerning the paper-money act passed by governor
Thomas, refuted by a fact.

An acknowledgment from the officers of the regular forces of certain
presents made to them by the assembly.

The governor's message to the assembly, said to be founded on a
representation of general Braddock's, requiring them to enable him to
furnish the said general with provisions under proper convoys, &c. &c.

The assembly desire to have the general's letter laid before them,
which the governor declines, and thereby occasions a new controversy.

The assembly send up two other bills; one of 10,000_l._ for
exchanging old bills, and one of 15,000_l._ for the king's use, on
the model of that formerly passed by governor Thomas, and confirmed
at home by the royal authority, since the instruction so often cited
had been sent to the said governor.

Such amendments offered to it by the governor, as he could not but be
pre-convinced would not be allowed.

The assembly adjourn till September; but are again convoked in July,
on occasion of Braddock's defeat.

The governor's speech.

The assembly vote an aid of 50,000_l._ by a tax on all real and
personal estates.

The governor makes a pompous offer in the proprietary's name, of
certain lands west of Allegheny mountains, to such adventurers as
would fight for them, and calls upon the assembly to afford some
assistance to such as should accept the same.

A remonstrance which certain inhabitants of certain places were
induced to present to the assembly.

The address of the assembly to the governor.

Their 50,000_l._ money-bill returned, with an amendment, by which the
WHOLE _proprietary estate_ was to be _exempted_ from tax.

The message of the assembly to the governor on that occasion,
desiring his reasons for that exemption.

The governor's reply, containing four curious reasons.

The assembly's rejoinder, refuting those reasons.

Other papers which passed between them at the same crisis.

The residue of Braddock's troops being recalled from the frontiers,
notwithstanding an application of the assembly to the governor
requesting their continuance, he calls upon the house to provide for
the security of the Back-inhabitants.

A remark thereon.

The governor alarms and embarrasses them with petitions from certain
persons requiring to be armed; _intelligence_ of Indians actually
set out, to fall upon their frontiers; recommendations to provide
by law against exporting provisions to the enemy, as a requisite to
facilitate the reduction of Louisburgh; and _demands_ of all manner
of _things_ for the assistance of colonel Dunbar, who, by orders from
general Shirley, was again to proceed towards Fort Duquesne.

A proposal from certain gentlemen of Philadelphia to subscribe
500_l._ in lieu of the proprietary proportion of the tax in question,
and upon a presumption that the proprietaries would honourably
reimburse them.

The assembly send up their bill to the governor again, together with
the said proposal, as containing by implication an acknowledgment
that the tax was founded in equity, and also a farther security to
the governor, in case he should give his assent to the bill.

Their message to the governor, correcting his manner of stating the
Louisburgh point, and observing, that all required of them from New
England was to prolong the excellent laws they had already made.

Some seasonable remarks.

The governor's verbal answer to the assembly's message concerning the
money-bill, adhering to his amendment.

He contends for a militia.

The assembly order 1,000_l._ if so much remain in their treasury, to
arm the Back-inhabitants.

They signify their purpose to adjourn, and refer the affair of a
militia-bill to a new assembly.

Their proceedings at the next meeting: the governor demands an
additional supply of provision to be sent to Albany, at the
requisition of governor Phipps, for the use of the forces of
Massachusett's Bay: and another supply for the provisional troops of
Connecticut and Rhode Island, which he was _informed_ were raised in
addition to those already employed in the reduction of Crown-Point.

The assembly apply for a sight of Phipps's letter, which is refused.

The old controversy renewed.

A new one concerning the roads opened at the expence of the province
for the convenience of the king's forces, which is carried on with
much acrimony on both sides.

As a last effort for the public service the assembly authorize by
vote a loan, or voluntary subscription, of 10,000_l._ to be raised in
a fortnight, and refer the lenders to the next assembly for payment.

An apology for the length of this treatise; and a brief state of the
province at this period.

The new assembly, after a session of four days, suffered to adjourn
themselves without proceeding to business, for want of having the
intelligence then in the governor's hands in due form imparted to
them.

Being re-convoked, the governor informs them, that a party of French
and Indians had passed the mountains, and were encamped within
eight miles of the capital, and, after a liberal intermixture of
upbraidings and self-sufficiencies, demands a supply; premising, that
it might be raised by an emission of any sum in paper, provided funds
were found for sinking it in five years, &c.

A reference to the only act of parliament extant, and that an
ineffectual one, to prevent the oppressions practised by provincial
governors.

Politics of various kinds, and from various quarters, presented to
the assembly.

The assembly reduce and rectify the matter of alarm communicated by
the governor; and advise such measures as might reclaim the Indians,
&c.

A new message concerning the depredations of the Indians.

_Sixty thousand pounds_ granted, to be struck in bills of credit,
which were to be sunk by a tax of _six-pence_ in the pound; and a
poll-tax of _ten shillings_ a head, yearly, for four years; which the
governor refuses, and talks of _setting off_ for the back counties.

A new message, reporting, that the Susquehanna Indians had offered
their service to the province, provided it was accepted without delay.

Two messages from the assembly to the governor; the first concerning
peace with the Indians, and the money bill; the other an answer to
his concerning the Susquehanna Indians.

They send up a bill for regulating the Indian trade.

The famous Kentish petition to the house of commons, in 1701, outdone
by the mayor of Philadelphia, and one hundred and thirty three other
inconsiderates, in a demand on their assembly to constitute a militia
forthwith.

A petition of certain of the people called Quakers, for peaceable
measures.

Progress of the controversy concerning the bill, which the governor
offers to pass with a suspending clause.

Resolutions of the assembly hereupon.

Message from the governor concerning another Indian massacre, and
demanding an immediate supply, &c.

Another from the assembly to him, justifying their bill both in
matter and manner.

They send him up a militia bill.

The governor's invective against their whole conduct.

He passes the militia bill, under the specific declaration that it
was an improper one.

He communicates to the assembly a discussion of Indian affairs, as
prepared by his council; calls upon them to provide for a swarm
of French banished out of Nova Scotia; and signifies, that the
proprietaries had sent an order upon their receiver-general, for
5000_l._ as a free gift to the public.

Another remonstrance from the mayor of Philadelphia and his posse.

The assembly's reply to the governor's invective, which for the
present they declined making use of.

The answer they did make use of.

Parley between the speaker and twenty-nine petitioners, or rather
prescribers to the assembly.

Unanimous resolutions concerning the right of granting supplies to
the crown; and a new money bill, out of which the proprietary estate
was excepted, in consideration of the late grant of 5000_l._

The assembly's message to the governor, explaining the use and
pressing the dispatch of the Indian trade bill.

The governor's evasive answer.

His message desiring the advice of the house.

The assembly's answer.

Their message relative to the complaint of the Shawanese Indians.

Their resolution concerning the Indian trade bill; also concerning
irregular and improper petitions.

They adjourn; and two months after re-assemble by special summons.

The governor's message on that occasion.

The message of the assembly in regard to the inlisting purchased
servants.

General Shirley's letter of acknowledgment for a voluntary present of
clothing sent by the province to his troops.

The assembly remind the governor of the Indian trade bill.

He returns it with amendments; as also their bill for extending the
excise.

They adhere to their bills and assign their reasons.

The governor goes to Newcastle and the assembly adjourn.

Sir William Johnson's treaty with the six nations laid before them at
their next meeting.

The governor appearing strongly inclined to involve the province in
a war with the Delawares and Shawanese, some of the people called
Quakers petition for specific measures.

The governor on the other hand alarms the house with an account of a
number of people coming in a body to make _demands_ upon them.

Their unanimity on that occasion.

The governor takes advantage of this incident to declare war against
the said two Indian nations.

He also demands farther supplies, and intimates, that certain
Indians, long subsisted by the province, were retiring in discontent,
&c.

The assembly's answer.

The return made by the governor.

The resolutions of the assembly concerning a plan of military
operations communicated to them by the governor.

They adjourn and are re-assembled.

The governor's message to them from a place called _Harris's Ferry_.

A petition of the association companies in Philadelphia, concerning
the insufficiency of the militia law.

The reply of the assembly to the governor's message, accompanied with
a bill for prohibiting provisions.

Another session, and two other messages from the governor, who was
still posted at Harris's Ferry.

A money bill ordered, but postponed on the receipt of intelligence
from Sir Charles Hardy and Sir William Johnson, that the Delawares
and Shawanese were disposed to renew their alliance.

The governor proclaims a suspension of arms.

The assemblies' message to him, in which they again press him to pass
the Indian trade bill; he promises to reconsider it; and a second
time calls upon them to make some (additional) provision for his
support.

Six members desire leave upon the adjournment to quit their seats,
and at the next session present a written paper to the house as a
testimonial thereof.

The resignation accepted and new writs issued.

The governor's message notifying the appointment of Lord Loudoun to
be commander in chief in America; as also the act of parliament for
raising a regiment of foreigners; recommending particularly, that the
masters of such indented servants as should engage in the service
might be indemnified; and that, as by the expiration of an act passed
in the Lower Counties, the Pensylvanian act, lately passed, would
expire also, they would prepare a proper bill for continuing the
embargo, &c.

The assembly's reply; in which they show, the governor had
invalidated the acts of all the other colonies by the law he had
passed in the Lower Counties.

Their message concerning the excise and Indian trade bills; and his
answer, that he would not recede from his amendments because of his
proprietary instruction.

The instruction itself.

A remark; and the resolution of the house on the said instruction.

An act for emitting 4000_l._ in bills of credit, on behalf of the
proprietaries, to supply so far the public occasions, till their
receiver-general should be enabled by his receipts to make good their
order.

An act, for striking and issuing the sum of 40,000_l._ for the king's
use, sent up to the governor.

His message concerning an attack to be apprehended from the Indians
about harvest time.

The assembly's answer.

A bill to permit the exportation of provisions for the king's
service, notwithstanding the act of prohibition.

The governor's evasive conduct in relation thereto.

The assembly apprise him, July 5, of their intention to adjourn till
August 2; and are told that he has no objection.

Notwithstanding which, he re-assembles them a fortnight afterwards,
in the midst of their harvest, under the pretence of continuing the
prohibition act.

Petition of the merchants in relation to the embargo.

The assembly's answer to the governor's message.

Another message to him concerning the preamble to the 4000_l._ bill
on behalf of the proprietaries.

The governor's answer.

He sends down another preamble, which is not relished; refuses to
pass the excise bill, and expunges the clause in the 40,000_l._ bill
for taxing the proprietary estate.

His message concerning Indian affairs, and the expence of conducting
them.

The assembly's answer.

The governor's reply.

A parting compliment from general Shirley to the province.

A new session, and the governor's message thereon.

The assembly's answer.

Governor Morris is superseded by governor Denny.

The governor complimented on his arrival.

The first speech a continuation of the old system.

The business of the assembly at a stand for a few days.

Their address; and message, requesting copies of his proprietary
instructions.

Certain of the said instructions communicated.

A short comment upon them.

A message to the governor.

The governor's answer.

A bill prepared for striking the sum of 60,000_l._ for the king's
use, to be sunk by an excise.

A conference on the said bill.

The assembly's answer to the governor's objections.

The governor's answer, signifying, that he _would not_ give his
assent to it.

Resolutions of the assembly after a _protest_ against the
_instructions_, and a _salvo_ for their own _rights_, to prepare a
new bill.

A new bill prepared and passed.

A brief apology for the conduct of the assembly on this occasion.

A remonstrance voted.

Conclusion; with a testimonial of commodore Sprag in behalf of the
assembly.


AN APPENDIX, containing sundry original papers relative to the
several points in controversy between the governors and assemblies of
Pensylvania, viz.

1. The representation of the assembly to the proprietaries,
requesting them to bear a proportionable part of Indian expences.

2. The proprietaries' answer; and assembly's remarks thereon.

3. A message from governor Morris, containing his additional
arguments to show the _unreasonableness_ of taxing the proprietary
estate for its defence, and in support of the restrictions he was
under in that respect.

4. The assembly's answer thereto.

5. The governor's reply.

6. The assembly's rejoinder.


  [Note. _In the above four messages great part of the points in
  dispute between the proprietaries and people of the province are
  fully litigated; and the perusal of them is necessary to those who
  would have a thorough knowledge of the controversy._]


7. The speaker of the Pensylvanian assembly's paper of authorities
relating to the rights of the commons over money-bills, and in
support of the 50,000_l._ bills passed by the assembly, so far as it
relates to the taxing the proprietary estate within that province.

8. Report of a committee of assembly on the proprietary
_instructions_ relative to _money-bills_; clearly demonstrating, that
though the proprietaries would at length appear to be willing to
have their estates taxed in common with other estates, yet that were
laws passed pursuant to these instructions, much the greatest part
of their estate would be exempted, and that the sums necessary to be
granted for his majesty's service in that province could not possibly
be raised thereby, &c. &c. _A paper of importance._

9. Mr. Thomas Penn's estimate of the _value_ of the proprietary
estate in Pensylvania, upwards of twenty years ago; with remarks
thereon, showing its prodigious increase since that time, the profits
arising to the HOUSE OF PENN from their Indian purchases, and the
huckstering manner in which they dispose of lands to the king's
subjects in that province.

10. A specimen of the anonymous abuses continually published against
the inhabitants of Pensylvania, by the proprietaries and their
agents, with Mr. W. Franklin's refutation thereof.

11. Some remarks on the conduct of the last and present governor,
with regard to their employing the provincial forces as _regulars_,
rather than as _rangers_; and showing the secret reason why that
province is at present without a _militia-law_, notwithstanding the
several bills which have been lately passed by the assembly for that
purpose.

12. An account of sundry sums of money paid by the province for his
majesty's service, _since the commencement of the present troubles in
America_.

13. An extract from an original letter of Mr. Logan, containing,
among other things, his opinion of the proprietary right to the
government of the three Delaware counties; and which serves to
account for the particular favour shown that government from time to
time.

FOOTNOTE:

[16] This is the title of an octavo volume, consisting of nearly
five hundred pages closely printed. It was written, as mentioned in
the preceding note, while Dr. Franklin was in England as agent for
the province of Pensylvania, to further the ends of his mission, by
removing the unfavourable impressions which had taken place to the
prejudice of the Pensylvanians: and "it must be confessed," as a
reviewer of the work observes, "they had in our author a most zealous
and able advocate. His sentiments are manly, liberal, and spirited;
his style close, nervous, and rhetorical. By a forcible display of
the oppressions his clients have sustained, he inclines us to pity
their condition; by an enumeration of their virtues he endeavours to
remove the idea, which many have entertained, of their unimportance,
and, abstracted from their consideration in a political light, they
claim our regard by reason of their own personal merits." Interesting
however as the controversy between the governors and the assembly
of Pensylvania may have been at the time, it is too little so now
to justify the insertion of so voluminous an account of it in the
present collection, and we shall content ourselves therefore with
extracting the dedication, preface, and contents. It is singular,
that neither the editor of Dr. Franklin's works, whom we have
designated by the letters B. V.; nor Dr. Stuber, the continuator of
his life, should have mentioned this publication. The work is indeed
anonymous, but it is so well known to have been Dr. Franklin's, that
in the common library catalogue of the British Museum it is ranked
under his name. _Editor._




  _The Interest of Great Britain considered, with Regard to her
  Colonies, and the Acquisitions of Canada and Guadaloupe[17]._

I have perused with no small pleasure the Letter addressed to Two
Great Men, and the Remarks on that letter. It is not merely from
the beauty, the force and perspicuity of expression, or the general
elegance of manner conspicuous in both pamphlets, that my pleasure
chiefly arises; it is rather from this, that I have lived to see
subjects of the greatest importance to this nation publicly discussed
without party views, or party heat, with decency and politeness, and
with no other warmth, than what a zeal for the honour and happiness
of our king and country may inspire; and this by writers, whose
understanding (however they may differ from each other) appears not
unequal to their candour and the uprightness of their intention.

But, as great abilities have not always the best information, there
are, I apprehend, in the Remarks, some opinions not well founded,
and some mistakes of so important a nature, as to render a few
observations on them necessary for the better information of the
public.

The author of the Letter, who must be every way best able to support
his own sentiments, will, I hope, excuse me, if I seem officiously
to interfere; when he considers, that the spirit of patriotism, like
other qualities good and bad, is catching; and that his long silence
since the Remarks appeared has made us despair of seeing the subject
farther discussed by his masterly hand. The ingenious and candid
remarker, too, who must have been misled himself before he employed
his skill and address to mislead others, will certainly, since he
declares he _aims at no seduction_[18], be disposed to excuse even
the weakest effort to prevent it.

And surely, if the general opinions that possess the minds of the
people may possibly be of consequence in public affairs, it must be
fit to set those opinions right. If there is danger, as the remarker
supposes, that "extravagant expectations" may embarrass "a virtuous
and able ministry," and "render the negotiation for peace a work of
infinite difficulty[19];" there is no less danger that expectations
too low, through want of proper information, may have a contrary
effect, may make even a virtuous and able ministry less anxious,
and less attentive to the obtaining points, in which the honour and
interest of the nation are essentially concerned; and the people less
hearty in supporting such a ministry and its measures.

The people of this nation are indeed respectable, not for their
numbers only, but for their understanding and their public spirit:
they manifest the first, by their universal approbation of the
late prudent and vigorous measures, and the confidence they so
justly repose in a wise and good prince, and an honest and able
administration; the latter they have demonstrated by the immense
supplies granted in parliament unanimously, and paid through the
whole kingdom with chearfulness. And since to this spirit and
these supplies our "victories and successes[20]" have in great
measure been owing, is it quite right, is it generous to say, with
the remarker, that the people "had no share in acquiring them?"
The mere mob he cannot mean, even where he speaks of the madness
of the people; for the madness of the mob must be too feeble and
impotent, armed as the government of this country at present is, to
"overrule[21]," even in the slightest instances, the virtue "and
moderation" of a firm and steady ministry.

While the war continues, its final event is quite uncertain. The
victorious of this year may be the vanquished of the next. It may
therefore be too early to say, what advantages we ought absolutely
to insist on, and make the _sine quibus non_ of a peace. If the
necessity of our affairs should oblige us to accept of terms less
advantageous than our present successes seem to promise us; an
intelligent people, as ours is, must see that necessity, and will
acquiesce. But as a peace, when it is made, may be made hastily; and
as the unhappy continuance of the war affords us time to consider,
among several advantages gained or to be gained, which of them may
be most for our interest to retain, if some and not all may possibly
be retained; I do not blame the public disquisition of these points,
as premature or useless. Light often arises from a collision of
opinions, as fire from flint and steel; and if we can obtain the
benefit of the _light_, without danger from the _heat_ sometimes
produced by controversy, why should we discourage it?

Supposing then, that heaven may still continue to bless his majesty's
arms, and that the event of this just war may put it in our power
to retain some of our conquests at the making of a peace; let us
consider,

  [1. _The security of a dominion, a justifiable and prudent ground
  upon which to demand cessions from an enemy._]

_Whether we are_ to confine ourselves to those possessions only
_that were "the objects for which we began the war[22]."_ This the
remarker seems to think right, when the question relates to "_Canada,
properly so called_; it having never been mentioned as one of those
objects, in any of our memorials or declarations, or in any national
or public act whatsoever." But the gentleman himself will probably
agree, that if the cession of Canada would be a real advantage to
us; we may demand it under his second head, as an "_indemnification_
for the charges incurred" in recovering our just rights; otherwise,
according to his own principles, the demand of Guadaloupe can have no
foundation.--That "our claims before the war were large enough for
possession and for security too[23]," though it seems a clear point
with the ingenious remarker, is, I own, not so with me. I am rather
of the contrary opinion, and shall presently give my reasons.

But first let me observe, that we did not make those claims
because they were large enough for security, but because we could
rightfully claim no more. Advantages gained in the course of this
war may increase the extent of our rights. Our claims before
the war contained _some_ security; but that is no reason why we
should neglect acquiring _more_, when the demand of more is become
reasonable. It may be reasonable in the case of America, to ask for
the security recommended by the author of the Letter[24], though it
would be preposterous to do it in many other cases. His proposed
demand is founded on the little value of Canada to the French;
the right we have to ask, and the power we may have to insist on
an indemnification for our expences; the difficulty the French
themselves will be under of restraining their restless subjects in
America from encroaching on our limits and disturbing our trade; and
the difficulty on our parts of preventing encroachments, that may
possibly exist many years without coming to our knowledge.

But the remarker "does not see why the arguments, employed concerning
a security for a peaceable behaviour in Canada, would not be equally
cogent for calling for the same security in Europe[25]." On a
little farther reflection, he must I think be sensible, that the
circumstances of the two cases are widely different.--_Here_ we are
separated by the best and clearest of boundaries, the ocean, and we
have people in or near every part of our territory. Any attempt to
encroach upon us, by building a fort even in the obscurest corner of
these islands, must therefore be known and prevented immediately.
The aggressors also must be known, and the nation they belong to
would be accountable for their aggression. In America it is quite
otherwise. A vast wilderness, thinly or scarce at all peopled,
conceals with ease the march of troops and workmen. Important passes
may be seized within our limits, and forts built in a month, at a
small expence, that may cost us an age, and a million, to remove.
Dear experience has taught this. But what is still _worse_, the wide
extended forests between our settlements and theirs, are inhabited
by barbarous tribes of savages, that delight in war, and take pride
in murder; subjects properly neither of the French nor English,
but strongly attached to the former by the art and indefatigable
industry of priests, similarity of superstitions, and frequent family
alliances. These are easily, and have been continually, instigated
to fall upon and massacre our planters, even in times of full peace
between the two crowns; to the certain diminution of our people and
the contraction of our settlements[26]. And though it is known they
are supplied by the French, and carry their prisoners to them, we
can, by complaining, obtain no redress; as the governors of Canada
have a ready excuse, that the Indians are an independent people, over
whom they have no power, and for whose actions they are therefore not
accountable. Surely circumstances so widely different may reasonably
authorise different demands of security in America, from such as are
usual or necessary in Europe.

The remarker however thinks, that our real dependance for keeping
"France or any other nation true to her engagements, must not be in
demanding securities which no nation whilst _independent_ can give;
but on our own strength and our own vigilance[27]." No nation that
has carried on a war with disadvantage, and is unable to continue
it, can be said, under such circumstances, to be _independent_;
and while either side thinks itself in a condition to demand an
indemnification, there is no man in his senses, but will, cæteris
paribus, prefer an indemnification, that is a cheaper and more
effectual security than any other he can think of. Nations in this
situation demand and cede countries by almost every treaty of peace
that is made. The French part of the island of St. Christophers was
added to Great Britain in circumstances altogether similar to those
in which a few months may probably place the country of Canada.
Farther security has always been deemed a motive with a conqueror to
be less moderate; and even the _vanquished_ insist upon security as a
reason for demanding what they acknowledge they could not otherwise
properly ask. The security of the frontier of France _on the side
of the Netherlands_ was always considered in the negotiation, that
began at Gertrudenburgh, and ended with that war. For the same
reason they demanded and had Cape Breton. But a war, concluded to
the advantage of France, has always added something to the power,
either of France, or the house of Bourbon. Even that of 1733, which
she commenced with declarations of her having no ambitious views,
and which finished by a treaty, at which the ministers of France
repeatedly declared, that she desired nothing for herself, in effect
gained for her Lorrain, an indemnification ten times the value of
all her North American possessions. In short, security and quiet of
princes and states have ever been deemed sufficient reasons, when
supported by power, for disposing of rights; and such disposition
has never been looked on as want of moderation. It has always been
the foundation of the most general treaties. The security of Germany
was the argument for yielding considerable possessions there to the
Swedes: and the security of Europe divided the Spanish monarchy by
the partition-treaty, made between powers who had no other right
to dispose of any part of it. There can be no cession that is not
supposed at least, to increase the power of the party to whom it is
made. It is enough that he has a right to ask it, and that he does
it not merely to serve the purposes of a dangerous ambition.

Canada, in the hands of Britain, will endanger the kingdom of
France as little as any other cession; and from its situation and
circumstances cannot be hurtful to any other state. Rather, if
peace be an advantage, this cession may be such to all Europe. The
present war teaches us, that disputes arising in America may be an
occasion of embroiling nations; who have no concerns there. If the
French remain in Canada and Louisiana, fix the boundaries as you
will between us and them, we must border on each other for more
than fifteen hundred miles. The people that inhabit the frontiers
are generally the refuse of both nations, often of the worst morals
and the least discretion; remote from the eye, the prudence, and
the restraint of government. Injuries are therefore frequently, in
some part or other of so long a frontier, committed on both sides,
resentment provoked, the colonies first engaged, and then the mother
countries. And two great nations can scarce be at war in Europe,
but some other prince or state thinks it a convenient opportunity
to revive some ancient claim, seize some advantage, obtain some
territory, or enlarge some power at the expence of a neighbour. The
flames of war, once kindled, often spread far and wide, and the
mischief is infinite. Happy it proved to both nations, that the
Dutch were prevailed on finally to cede the New Netherlands (now
the province of New York) to us at the peace of 1674; a peace that
has ever since continued between us, but must have been frequently
disturbed, if they had retained the possession of that country,
bordering several hundred miles on our colonies of Pensylvania
westward, Connecticut and the Massachusetts eastward. Nor is it
to be wondered at, that people of different language, religion,
and manners, should in those remote parts engage in frequent
quarrels; when we find, that even the people of our _own colonies_
have frequently been so exasperated against _each other_, in their
disputes about boundaries, as to proceed to open violence and
bloodshed.

  [2. _Erecting forts in the back settlements, almost in no instance
  a sufficient security against the Indians and the French; but the
  possession of Canada implies every security, and ought to be had,
  while in our power._]

But the remarker thinks _we shall be_ sufficiently _secure in
America, if we "raise English forts at such passes as may at once
make us respectable to the French and to the Indian nations[28]."_
The security desirable in America may be considered as of three
kinds. 1. A security of possession, that the French shall not drive
us out of the country. 2. A security of our planters from the inroads
of savages, and the murders committed by them. 3. A security that
the British nation shall not be obliged, on every new war, to repeat
the immense expence occasioned by this, to defend its possessions in
America. Forts, in the most important passes, may, I acknowledge,
be of use to obtain the _first_ kind of security: but as those
situations are far advanced beyond the inhabitants, the expence of
maintaining and supplying the garrisons will be very great even in
time of full peace, and immense on every interruption of it; as it is
easy for skulking-parties of the enemy, in such long roads through
the woods, to intercept and cut off our convoys, unless guarded
continually by great bodies of men.--The _second_ kind of security
will not be obtained by such forts, unless they were connected by
a wall like that of China, from one end of our settlements to the
other. If the Indians, when at war, marched like the Europeans,
with great armies, heavy cannon, baggage, and carriages; the passes
through which alone such armies could penetrate our country, or
receive their supplies, being secured, all might be sufficiently
secure; but the case is widely different. They go to war, as they
call it, in small parties; from fifty men down to five. Their hunting
life has made them acquainted with the whole country, and scarce any
part of it is impracticable to such a party. They can travel through
the woods even by night, and know how to conceal their tracks. They
pass easily between your forts undiscovered; and privately approach
the settlements of your frontier inhabitants. They need no convoys
of provisions to follow them; for whether they are shifting from
place to place in the woods, or lying in wait for an opportunity to
strike a blow, every thicket and every stream furnishes so small
a number with sufficient subsistence. When they have surprised
separately, and murdered and scalped a dozen families, they are gone
with inconceivable expedition through unknown ways; and it is very
rare that pursuers have any chance of coming up with them[29]. In
short, long experience has taught our planters, that they cannot
rely upon forts as a security against Indians: the inhabitants of
Hackney might as well rely upon the tower of London, to secure them
against highwaymen and housebreakers.--As to the _third_ kind of
security, that we shall not, in a few years, have all we have now
done, to do over again in America, and be obliged to employ the same
number of troops, and ships, at the same immense expence, to defend
our possessions there, while we are in proportion weakened here: such
forts I think, cannot prevent this. During a peace, it is not to be
doubted the French, who are adroit at fortifying, will likewise erect
forts in the most advantageous places of the country we leave them;
which will make it more difficult than ever to be reduced in case of
another war. We know by the experience of this war, how extremely
difficult it is to march an army through the American woods, with its
necessary cannon and stores, sufficient to reduce a very slight fort.
The accounts at the treasury will tell you, what amazing sums we have
necessarily spent in the expeditions against two very trifling forts,
Duquesne, and Crown Point. While the French retain their influence
over the Indians, they can easily keep our long extended frontier
in continual alarm, by a very few of those people; and with a small
number of regulars and militia, in such a country, we find they can
keep an army of ours in full employ for several years. We therefore
shall not need to be told by our colonies, that if we leave Canada,
however circumscribed, to the French, "we have done nothing[30];" we
shall soon be made sensible _ourselves_ of this truth, and to our
cost.

I would not be understood to deny, that even if we subdue and
retain Canada, some _few forts_ may be of use to secure the goods
of the traders, and protect the commerce, in case of any sudden
misunderstanding with any tribe of Indians: but these forts will be
best under the care of the colonies interested in the Indian trade,
and garrisoned by their provincial forces, and at their own expence.
Their own interest will then induce the American governments to
take care of such forts in proportion to their importance, and see
that the officers keep their corps full, and mind their duty. But
any troops of ours placed there, and accountable here, would, in
such remote and obscure places, and at so great a distance from the
eye and inspection of superiors, soon become of little consequence,
even though the French were left in possession of Canada. If the
four independent companies, maintained by the crown in New York
more than forty years, at a great expence, consisted, for most part
of the time, of faggots chiefly; if their officers enjoyed their
places as sinecures, and were only, as a writer[31] of that country
styles them, a kind of military monks; if this was the state of
troops posted in a populous country, where the imposition could
not be so well concealed; what may we expect will be the case of
those, that shall be posted two, three, or four hundred miles from
the inhabitants, in such obscure and remote places as Crown Point,
Oswego, Duquesne, or Niagara? they would scarce be even faggots; they
would dwindle to mere names upon paper, and appear no where but upon
the muster-rolls.

Now _all the kinds_ of security we have mentioned are obtained
by subduing and _retaining_ Canada. Our present possessions in
America are secured; our planters will no longer be massacred by the
Indians, who, depending absolutely on us for what are now become the
necessaries of life to them (guns, powder, hatchets, knives, and
clothing) and having no other Europeans near, that can either supply
them, or instigate them against us; there is no doubt of their being
always disposed, if we treat them with common justice, to live in
perpetual peace with us. And with regard to France, she cannot, in
case of another war, put us to the immense expence of defending that
long extended frontier; we shall then, as it were, have our backs
against a wall in America; the sea coast will be easily protected by
our superior naval power: and here "our own watchfulness and our own
strength" will be properly, and cannot but be successfully employed.
In this situation, the force, now employed in that part of the world,
may be spared for any other service here or elsewhere; so that both
the offensive and defensive strength of the British empire, on the
whole, will be greatly increased.

But to leave the French in possession of Canada, _when it is in our
power to remove them, and depend_ (as the remarker proposes) _on
our own_ "strength and watchfulness[32]" _to prevent the mischiefs
that may attend it, seems neither safe nor prudent_. Happy as we now
are, under the best of kings, and in the prospect of a succession
promising every felicity a nation was ever blessed with; happy too in
the wisdom and vigour of every part of the administration; we cannot,
we ought not to promise ourselves the uninterrupted continuance of
those blessings. The safety of a considerable part of the state, and
the interest of the whole, are not to be trusted to the wisdom and
vigour of _future administrations_; when a security is to be had
more effectual, more constant, and much less expensive. They, who
can be moved by the apprehension of dangers so remote, as that of
the future independence of our colonies (a point I shall hereafter
consider) seem scarcely consistent with themselves, when they
suppose we may rely on the wisdom and vigour of an administration
for their safety.--I should indeed think it less material whether
Canada were ceded to us or not, if I had in view only the security
of _possession_ in our colonies. I entirely agree with the remarker,
that we are in North America "a far greater continental as well
as naval power;" and that only cowardice or ignorance can subject
our colonies there to a French conquest. But for the same reason I
disagree with him widely upon another point.

  [3. _The blood and treasure spent in the American wars, not spent
  in the cause of the colonies alone._]

I do not think, that our "blood and treasure has been expended," as
he intimates, "_in the cause of the colonies_," and that we are
"making conquests for _them_[33];" yet I believe this is too common
an error. I do not say, they are altogether unconcerned in the event.
The inhabitants of them are, in common with the other subjects of
Great Britain, anxious for the glory of her crown, the extent of
her power and commerce, the welfare and future repose of the whole
British people. They could not therefore but take a large share in
the affronts offered to Britain; and have been animated with a truly
British spirit to exert themselves beyond their strength, and against
their evident interest. Yet so unfortunate have they been, that their
virtue has made against them; for upon no better foundation than this
have they been supposed the authors of a war, carried on for their
advantage only. It is a great mistake to imagine, that the American
country in question between Great Britain and France is claimed as
the property of any _individuals or public body in America_; or that
the possession of it by Great Britain is likely, in any lucrative
view, to redound at all to the advantage of any person there.
On the other hand, the bulk of the inhabitants of North America
are _land-owners_, whose lands are inferior in value to those of
Britain, only by the want of an equal number of people. It is true,
the accession of the large territory claimed before the war began
(especially if that be secured by the possession of Canada) will
tend to the increase of the British subjects faster, than if they
had been confined within the mountains: yet the increase within the
mountains only would evidently make the comparative population equal
to that of Great Britain much sooner than it can be expected, when
our people are spread over a country six times as large. I think this
is the only point of light in which this question is to be viewed,
and is the only one in which any of the colonies are concerned.--No
colony, no possessor of lands in any colony, therefore wishes for
conquests, or can be benefitted by them, otherwise than as they may
be a means of _securing peace on their borders_. No considerable
advantage has resulted to the colonies by the conquests of this
war, or can result from confirming them by the peace, but what they
must enjoy in common with the rest of the British people; with this
evident drawback from their share of these advantages, that they will
necessarily lessen, or at least prevent the increase of the value of
what makes the principal part of their private property [their land].
A people, spread through the whole tract of country on this side
the Mississippi, and secured by Canada in our hands, would probably
for some centuries find employment in agriculture, and thereby free
us at home effectually from our fears of American manufactures.
Unprejudiced men well know, that all the penal and prohibitory
laws that ever were thought on will not be sufficient to prevent
manufactures in a country, whose inhabitants surpass the number that
can subsist by the husbandry of it. That this will be the case in
America soon, if our people remain confined within the mountains, and
almost as soon should it be unsafe for them to live beyond, though
the country be ceded to us, no man acquainted with political and
commercial history can doubt. Manufactures are founded in poverty:
it is the multitude of poor without land in a country, and who must
work for others at low wages or starve, that enables undertakers to
carry on a manufacture, and afford it cheap enough to prevent the
importation of the same kind from abroad, and to bear the expence of
its own exportation.--But no man, who can have a piece of land of
his own, sufficient by his labour to subsist his family in plenty,
is poor enough to be a manufacturer, and work for a master. Hence,
while there is land enough in America for our people, there can never
be manufactures to any amount or value. It is a striking observation
of a very _able pen_[34], that the natural livelihood of the thin
inhabitants of a forest country is hunting; that of a greater number,
pasturage: that of a middling population, agriculture; and that of
the greatest, manufactures; which last must subsist the bulk of the
people in a full country, or they must be subsisted by charity, or
perish. The extended population, therefore, that is most advantageous
to Great Britain, will be best effected, because only effectually
secured, by our possession of Canada.

So far as the _being_ of our present colonies in North America is
concerned, I think indeed with the remarker, that the French there
are not _"an enemy to be apprehended[35];"_--but the expression is
too vague to be applicable to the present, or indeed to any other
case. Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, unequal as they are to this nation
in power and numbers of people, are enemies to be still apprehended;
and the Highlanders of Scotland have been so for many ages, by the
greatest princes of Scotland and Britain. The wild Irish were able
to give a great deal of disturbance even to Queen Elizabeth, and
cost her more blood and treasure than her war with Spain. Canada, in
the hands of France, has always stinted the growth of our colonies,
in the course of this war, and indeed before it, has disturbed
and vexed even the best and strongest of them; has found means to
murder thousands of their people, and unsettle a great part of their
country. Much more able will it be to starve the growth of an infant
settlement. Canada has also found means to make this nation spend two
or three millions a year in America; and a people, how small soever,
that in their present situation, can do this as often as we have a
war with them, is, methinks, "an enemy to be apprehended."

Our North American colonies are to be considered as the _frontier
of the British empire_ on that side. The frontier of any dominion
being attacked, it becomes not merely "the cause" of the people
immediately attacked (the inhabitants of that frontier) but properly
"the cause" of the whole body. Where the frontier people owe and
pay obedience, there they have a right to look for protection:
no political proposition is better established than this. It is
therefore invidious, to represent the "blood and treasure" spent in
this war, as spent in "the cause of the colonies" only; and that they
are "absurd and ungrateful," if they think we have done nothing,
unless we "make conquests for them," and reduce Canada to gratify
their "vain ambition," &c. It will not be a conquest for _them_,
nor gratify any vain ambition of theirs. It will be a conquest for
the _whole_; and all our people will, in the increase of trade, and
the ease of taxes, find the advantage of it. Should we be obliged
at any time, to make a war for the protection of our commerce, and
to secure the exportation of our manufactures, would it be fair to
represent such a war, merely as blood and treasure spent in the
cause of the weavers of Yorkshire, Norwich, or the West; the cutlers
of Sheffield, or the button-makers of Birmingham? I hope it will
appear before I end these sheets, that if ever there was a national
war, this is truly such a one: a war in which the interest of the
whole nation is directly and fundamentally concerned. Those, who
would be thought deeply skilled in human nature, affect to discover
self-interested views every where at the bottom of the fairest, the
most generous conduct. Suspicions and charges of this kind meet
with ready reception and belief in the minds even of the multitude,
and therefore less acuteness and address, than the remarker is
possessed of, would be sufficient to persuade the nation generally,
that all the zeal and spirit, manifested and exerted by the colonies
in this war, was only in "their own cause," to "make conquests for
themselves," to engage us to make more for them, to gratify their own
"vain ambition."

But should they now humbly address the mother-country in the terms
and the sentiments of the remarker; return her their grateful
acknowledgments for the blood and treasure she had spent in "their
cause;" confess that enough had not been done "for them;" allow that
"English forts, raised in proper passes, will, with the wisdom and
vigour of her administration," be a sufficient future protection;
express their desires that their people may be confined within
the mountains, lest [if] they are suffered to spread and extend
themselves in the fertile and pleasant country on the other side,
they should "increase infinitely from all causes," "live wholly
on their own labour" and become independent; beg therefore that
the French may be suffered to remain in possession of Canada, as
their neighbourhood may be useful to prevent our increase, and the
removing them may "in its consequences be even dangerous[36]:"--I
say, should such an address from the colonies make its appearance
here (though, according to the remarker, it would be a most just
and reasonable one) would it not, might it not with more justice
be answered:--We understand you, gentlemen, perfectly well: you
have only your own interest in view: you want to have the people
confined within your present limits, that in a few years the lands
you are possessed of may increase tenfold in value! you want to
reduce the price of labour, by increasing numbers on the same
territory, that you may be able to set up manufactures and vie with
your mother-country! you would have your people kept in a body,
that you may be more able to dispute the commands of the crown, and
obtain an independency. You would have the French left in Canada, to
exercise your military virtue, and make you a warlike people, that
you may have more confidence to embark in schemes of disobedience,
and greater ability to support them! You have tasted too, the sweets
of TWO OR THREE MILLIONS sterling per annum spent among you by our
fleets and forces, and you are unwilling to be without a pretence
for kindling up another war, and thereby occasioning a repetition of
the same delightful doses! But, gentlemen, allow us to understand
_our_ interest a little likewise: we shall remove the French from
Canada, that you may live in peace, and we be no more drained by your
quarrels. You shall have land enough to cultivate, that you may have
neither necessity nor inclination to go into manufactures; and we
will manufacture for you, and govern you.

A reader of the Remarks may be apt to say, if this writer would
have us restore Canada, on principles of moderation, how can we,
consistent with those principles, retain Guadaloupe, which he
represents of so much greater value!--I will endeavour to explain
this, because by doing it I shall have an opportunity of showing the
truth and good sense of the answer to the interested application I
have just supposed: The author then is only apparently and not really
inconsistent with himself. If we can obtain the credit of moderation
by restoring Canada, it is well: but we should, however, restore it
at _all events_; because it would not only be of no use to us; but
"the possession of it (in his opinion) may in its consequences be
dangerous[37]." As how? Why, plainly, (at length it comes out) if the
French are not left there to check the growth of our colonies, "they
will extend themselves almost without bounds into the inland parts,
and increase infinitely from all causes; becoming a numerous, hardy,
independent people; possessed of a strong country, communicating
little or not at all with England, living wholly on their own labour,
and in process of time knowing little and enquiring little about the
mother-country." In short, according to this writer, our present
colonies are large enough and numerous enough; and the French ought
to be left in North America to prevent their increase, lest they
become not only useless, but dangerous to Britain. I agree with the
Gentleman, that with Canada in our possession, our people in America
will increase amazingly. I know, that their common rate of increase,
where they are not molested by the enemy, is doubling their numbers
every twenty-five years, by natural generation only; exclusive of the
accession of foreigners[38]. I think this increase continuing would
probably, in a century more, make the number of British subjects on
that side the water more numerous than they now are on this; But,

  [4. _Not necessary that the American colonies should_ cease being
  useful to the _mother-country_. _Their_ preference _over the
  West-Indian colonies stated_.]

_I am far from entertaining on that account, any fears of their
becoming either useless or dangerous to us; and I look on those fears
to be merely imaginary, and without any probable foundation._--The
remarker is reserved in giving his reasons; as in his opinion this
"is not a fit subject for discussion."--I shall give mine, because
I conceive it a subject necessary to be discussed; and the rather,
as those fears, how groundless and chimerical soever, may, by
possessing the multitude, possibly induce the ablest ministry to
conform to them against their own judgment; and thereby prevent the
assuring to the British name and nation a stability and permanency,
that no man acquainted with history durst have hoped for, till our
American possessions opened the pleasing prospect. The remarker
thinks, that our people in America, "finding no check from Canada,
would extend themselves almost without bounds into the inland parts,
and increase infinitely from all causes." The very reason he assigns
for their so extending, and which is indeed the true one (their
being "invited to it by the pleasantness, fertility, and plenty of
the country,") may satisfy us, that this extension will continue to
proceed, as long as there remains any pleasant fertile country within
their reach. And if we even suppose them confined by the waters
of the Mississippi westward, and by those of St. Laurence and the
lakes to the northward; yet still we shall leave them room enough
to increase, even in the manner of settling now practised there,
till they amount to perhaps a hundred millions of souls. This must
take some centuries to fulfil: and in the _mean time_, this nation
must necessarily supply them with the manufactures they consume;
because the new settlers will be employed in agriculture; and the
new settlements will so continually draw off the spare hands from
the old, that our present colonies will not, during the period we
have mentioned, find themselves in a condition to manufacture, even
for their own inhabitants, to any considerable degree, much less for
those who are settling behind them.

Thus our trade must, till that country becomes as fully peopled as
England (that is for centuries to come) be continually increasing,
and with it our naval power; because the ocean is between us
and them, and our ships and seamen must increase as that trade
increases.--The human body and the political differ in this;
that the first is limited by nature to a certain stature, which,
when attained, it cannot ordinarily exceed: the other, by better
government and more prudent police, as well as by change of manners
and other circumstances, often takes fresh starts of growth, after
being long at a stand; and may add tenfold to the dimensions it
had for ages been confined to. The mother, being of full stature,
is in a few years equalled by a growing daughter: but in the case
of a mother-country and her colonies, it is quite different. The
growth of the children tends to increase the growth of the mother,
and so the difference and superiority is longer preserved. Were the
inhabitants of this island limited to their present number by any
thing in nature, or by unchangeable circumstances, the equality
of population between the two countries might indeed sooner come
to pass: but sure experience, in those parts of the island where
manufactures have been introduced, teaches us; that people increase
and multiply in proportion as the means and facility of gaining a
livelihood increase; and that this island, if they could be employed,
is capable of supporting ten times its present number of people. In
proportion, therefore, as the demand increases for the manufactures
of Britain, by the increase of people in her colonies, the number
of her people at home will increase; and with them, the strength as
well as the wealth of the nation. For satisfaction in this point, let
the reader compare in his mind the number and force of our present
fleets, with our fleet in Queen Elizabeth's time[39], before we had
colonies. Let him compare the ancient, with the present state of our
towns on or near our western coast (Manchester, Liverpool, Kendal,
Lancaster, Glasgow, and the countries round them) that trade with
any manufacture for our colonies (not to mention Leeds, Halifax,
Sheffield, and Birmingham,) and consider what a difference there is
in the numbers of people, buildings, rents, and the value of land
and of the produce of land; even if he goes back no farther than is
within man's memory. Let him compare those countries with others on
the same island, where manufactures have not yet extended themselves;
observe the present difference, and reflect how much greater our
strength may be (if numbers give strength) when our manufacturers
shall occupy every part of the island where they can possibly be
subsisted.

But, say the objectors, "there is a _certain distance from the
sea_, in America, beyond which the expence of carriage will put a
stop to the sale and consumption of your manufactures; and this,
with the difficulty of making returns for them, will oblige the
inhabitants to manufacture for themselves; of course, if you suffer
your people to extend their settlements beyond that distance, your
people become useless to you:" and this distance is limited by some
to two hundred miles, by others to the Apalachian mountains.--Not
to insist on a very plain truth, that no part of a dominion, from
whence a government may on occasion draw supplies and aids both of
men and money (though at too great a distance to be supplied with
manufactures from some other part) is therefore to be deemed useless
to the whole; I shall endeavour to show, that these imaginary limits
of utility, even in point of commerce, are much too narrow. The
inland parts of the continent of Europe are farther from the sea,
than the limits of settlement proposed for America. Germany is full
of tradesmen and artificers of all kinds, and the governments there
are not all of them always favourable to the commerce of Britain; yet
it is a well-known fact, that our manufactures find their way even
into the heart of Germany. Ask the great manufacturers and merchants
of the Leeds, Sheffield, Birmingham, Manchester, and Norwich
goods; and they will tell you, that some of them send their riders
frequently through France or Spain, and Italy, up to Vienna, and back
through the middle and northern parts of Germany, to show samples of
their wares, and collect orders, which they receive by almost every
mail, to a vast amount. Whatever charges arise on the carriage of
goods are added to the value, and all paid by the consumer. If these
nations, over whom we have no government, over whose consumption
we can have no influence, but what arises from the cheapness and
goodness of our wares, whose trade, manufactures, or commercial
connections are not subject to the control of our laws, as those of
our colonies certainly are in some degree; I say, if these nations
purchase and consume such quantities of our goods, notwithstanding
the remoteness of their situation from the sea; how much less likely
is it, that the settlers in America, who must for ages be employed
in agriculture chiefly, should make cheaper for themselves the goods
our manufacturers at present supply them with: even if we suppose the
carriage five, six, or seven hundred miles from the sea as difficult
and expensive, as the like distance into Germany: whereas in the
latter, the natural distances are frequently doubled by political
obstructions; I mean the intermixed territories and clashing
interests of princes[40]. But when we consider, that the inland
parts of America are penetrated by great navigable rivers; that
there are a number of great lakes, communicating with each other,
with those rivers, and with the sea, very small portages here and
there excepted[41]; that the sea-coasts (if one may be allowed the
expression) of those lakes only amount at least to two thousand seven
hundred miles, exclusive of the rivers running into them (many of
which are navigable to a great extent for boats and canoes, through
vast tracts of country); how little likely is it that the expence on
the carriage of our goods into those countries should prevent the
use of them. If the poor Indians in those remote parts are now able
to pay for the linen, woollen, and iron wares they are at present
furnished with by the French and English traders (though Indians have
nothing but what they get by hunting, and the goods are loaded with
all the impositions fraud and knavery can contrive to inhance their
value) will not industrious English farmers, hereafter settled in
those countries, be much better able to pay for what shall be brought
them in the way of fair commerce?

If it is asked, _What_ can such farmers raise, wherewith to pay
for the manufactures they may want from us? I answer, that the
inland parts of America in question are well known to be fitted for
the production of hemp, flax, pot-ash, and above all, silk; the
southern parts may produce olive-oil, raisins, currants, indigo, and
cochineal. Not to mention horses and black cattle, which may easily
be driven to the maritime markets, and at the same time assist in
conveying other commodities. That the commodities first mentioned
may easily, by water and land-carriage, be brought to the sea-ports
from interior America, will not seem incredible, when we reflect,
that _hemp_ formerly came from the Ukraine and most southern parts of
Russia to Wologda, and down the Dwina to Archangel; and thence, by a
perilous navigation, round the North Cape to England, and other parts
of Europe. It now comes from the same country up the Dnieper, and
down the Duna[42], with much land-carriage. Great part of the Russia
_iron_, no high-priced commodity, is brought three hundred miles by
land and water from the heart of Siberia. _Furs_ [the produce too of
America] are brought to Amsterdam from all parts of Siberia, even
the most remote, Kamstchatka. The same country furnishes me with
another instance of extended inland commerce. It is found worth while
to keep up a mercantile communication between Pekin in China, and
Petersburgh. And none of these instances of inland commerce _exceed_
those of the courses by which, at several periods, _the whole trade
of the East_ was carried on. Before the prosperity of the Mameluke
dominion in Egypt fixed the staple for the riches of the East at
Cairo and Alexandria (whither they were brought from the Red Sea)
great part of those commodities were carried to the cities of Cashgar
and Balk. (This gave birth to those towns, that still subsist upon
the remains of their ancient opulence, amidst a people and country
equally wild.) From thence those goods were carried down the Amû (the
ancient Oxus) to the Caspian Sea, and up the Wolga to Astrachan; from
whence they were carried over to, and down the Don, to the mouth of
that river; and thence again the Venetians directly, and the Genoese
and Venetians indirectly (by way of Kaffa and Trebisonde) dispersed
them through the Mediterranean and some other parts of Europe.
Another part of those goods was carried over-land from the Wolga to
the rivers Duna and Neva; from both they were carried to the city
of Wisbuy in the Baltic (so eminent for its sea-laws); and from the
city of Ladoga on the Neva, we are told they were even carried by the
Dwina to Archangel; and from thence round the North Cape.--If iron
and hemp will bear the charge of carriage from this inland country,
_other metals_ will, as well as iron; and certainly _silk_, since
3_d._ per _lb._ is not above 1 per cent on the value, and amounts to
28_l._ per ton. If the _growths_ of a country find their way out of
it; the _manufactures_ of the country where they go will infallibly
find their way into it.

They, who understand the economy and principles of manufactures,
know, that it is impossible to establish them in places not populous:
and even in those that are populous, hardly possible to establish
them to the prejudices of the places _already in possession of them_.
Several attempts have been made in France and Spain, countenanced by
the government, to draw from us, and establish in those countries,
our hard-ware and woollen manufactures; but without success. The
reasons are various. A manufacture is part of a great system of
commerce, which takes in conveniencies of various kinds; methods
of providing materials of all sorts, machines for expediting and
facilitating labour, all the channels of correspondence for vending
the wares, the credit and confidence necessary to found and support
this correspondence, the mutual aid of different artizans, and a
thousand other particulars, which time and long experience have
_gradually_ established. A part of such a system cannot support
itself without the whole: and before the whole can be obtained the
part perishes. Manufactures, where they are in perfection, are
carried on by a multiplicity of hands, each of which is expert only
in his own part; no one of them a master of the whole; and, if by
any means spirited away to a foreign country, he is lost without his
fellows. Then it is a matter of the extremest difficulty to persuade
a complete set of workmen, skilled in all parts of a manufactory,
to leave their country together, and settle in a foreign land.
Some of the idle and drunken may be enticed away; but these only
disappoint their employers, and serve to discourage the undertaking.
If by royal munificence, and an expence that the profits of the
trade alone would not bear, a complete set of good and skilful
hands are collected and carried over, they find so much of the
system imperfect, so many things wanting to carry on the trade to
advantage, so many difficulties to overcome, and the knot of hands
so easily broken by death, dissatisfaction, and desertion; that
they and their employers are discouraged together, and the project
vanishes into smoke. Hence it happens, that established manufactures
are hardly ever lost, but by foreign conquest, or by some eminent
interior fault in manners or government; a bad police oppressing and
discouraging the workmen, or religious persecutions driving the sober
and industrious out of the country. There is, in short, scarce a
single instance in history of the contrary, where manufactures have
once taken firm root. They sometimes start up in a new place; but
are generally supported, like exotic plants, at more expence than
they are worth for any thing but curiosity; until these new seats
become the refuge of the manufacturers driven from the old ones.
The conquest of Constantinople, and final reduction of the Greek
empire, dispersed many curious manufacturers into different parts
of Christendom. The former conquests of its provinces, had _before_
done the same. The loss of liberty in Verona, Milan, Florence, Pisa,
Pistoia, and other great cities of Italy, drove the manufacturers
of woollen cloths into Spain and Flanders. The latter first lost
their trade and manufactures to Antwerp and the cities of Brabant;
from whence, by persecution for religion, they were sent into
Holland and England: [while] the civil wars, during the minority of
Charles the First of Spain, which ended in the loss of the liberty
of their great towns, ended too in the loss of the manufactures of
Toledo, Segovia, Salamanca, Medina del campo, &c. The revocation of
the _edict of Nantes_ communicated, to all the protestant part of
Europe, the paper, silk, and other valuable manufacturers of France;
almost peculiar at that time to that country, and till then in
vain attempted elsewhere. To be convinced, that it is not soil and
climate, or even freedom from taxes, that determines the residence
of manufacturers, we need only turn our eyes on Holland; where a
multitude of manufactures are still carried on (perhaps more than on
the same extent of territory any where in Europe) and sold on terms
upon which they cannot be had in any other part of the world. And
this too is true of those _growths_, which, by their nature and the
labour required to raise them, come the nearest to manufactures.

As to the common-place objection to the North-American settlements,
that they are _in the same climate, and their produce the same
as that of England_;--in the first place it is not true; it is
particularly not so of the countries now likely to be added to our
settlements; and of our present colonies, the products, lumber,
tobacco, rice, and indigo, great articles of commerce, do not
interfere with the products of England: in the next place, a man must
know very little of the trade of the world, who does not know, that
the greater part of it is carried on between countries whose climate
differs very little. Even the trade between the different parts of
these British islands is greatly superior to that between England and
all the West India Islands put together.

If I have been successful in proving that a considerable commerce may
and will subsist between us and our future most inland settlements
in North America, notwithstanding their distance; I have more than
half proved no _other inconveniency will arise_ from their distance.
Many men in such a country must "know," must "think," and must "care"
about the country they chiefly trade with. The juridical and other
connections of government are yet a faster hold than even commercial
ties, and spread, directly and indirectly, far and wide. Business to
be solicited and causes depending create a great intercourse, even
where private property is _not_ divided in different countries;--yet
this division _will_ always subsist, where different countries are
ruled by the same government. Where a man has landed property both
in the mother country and a province, he will almost always live
in the mother country: this, though there were no trade, is singly
a sufficient gain. It is said, that Ireland pays near a million
sterling annually to its absentees in England: the balance of trade
from Spain, or even Portugal, is scarcely equal to this.

Let it not be said we have _no absentees_ from North America. There
are many, to the writer's knowledge; and if there are at present but
few of them, that distinguish themselves here by great expence, it
is owing to the mediocrity of fortune among the inhabitants of the
Northern colonies, and a more equal division of landed property,
than in the West India islands, so that there are as yet but few
large estates. But if those, who have such estates, reside upon
and take care of them themselves, are they worse subjects than they
would be if they lived idly in England?--Great merit is assumed for
the gentlemen of the West Indies,[43] on the score of their residing
and spending their money in England. I would not depreciate that
merit; it is considerable; for they might, if they pleased, spend
their money in France: but the difference between their spending it
here and at home is not so great. What do they spend it in when they
are here, but the produce and manufactures of this country;--and
would they not do the same if they were at home? Is it of any great
importance to the English farmer, whether the West India gentleman
comes to London and eats his beef, pork, and tongues, fresh; or has
them brought to him in the West Indies salted? whether he eats his
English cheese and butter, or drinks his English ale, at London or
in Barbadoes? Is the clothier's, or the mercer's, or the cutler's,
or the toyman's profit less, for their goods being worn and consumed
by the same persons residing on the other side of the ocean? Would
not the profits of the merchant and mariner be rather greater, and
some addition made to our navigation, ships and seamen? If the North
American gentleman stays in his own country, and lives there in
that degree of luxury and expence with regard to the use of British
manufactures, that his fortune entitles him to; may not his example
(from the imitation of superiors, so natural to mankind) spread the
use of those manufactures among hundreds of families around him, and
occasion a much greater demand for them, than it would do if he
should remove and live in London?--However this may be, if in our
views of immediate advantage, it seems preferable, that the gentlemen
of large fortunes in North America should reside much in England; it
is what may surely be expected, as fast as such fortunes are acquired
there. Their having "colleges of their own for the education of their
youth," will not prevent it: a little knowledge and learning acquired
increases the appetite for more, and will make the conversation of
the learned on this side the water more strongly desired. Ireland
has its university likewise; yet this does not prevent the immense
pecuniary benefit we receive from that kingdom. And there will always
be, in the conveniencies of life, the politeness, the pleasures, the
magnificence of the reigning country, many other attractions besides
those of learning, to draw men of substance there, where they can
(apparently at least) have the best bargain of happiness for their
money.

Our _trade to the West India islands_ is undoubtedly a valuable one:
but whatever is the amount of it, it _has long been at a stand_.
Limited as our sugar planters are by the scantiness of territory,
they cannot increase much beyond their present number; and this is
an evil, as I shall show hereafter, that will be little helped by
our keeping Guadaloupe.--The trade to our Northern Colonies is not
only greater, but yearly increasing with the increase of people: and
even in a greater proportion, as the people increase in wealth and
the ability of spending, as well as in numbers.[44]--I have already
said, that _our people in the northern colonies_ double in about 25
years, exclusive of the accession of strangers. That I speak within
bounds, I appeal to the authentic accounts frequently required by
the board of trade, and transmitted to that board by the respective
governors; of which accounts I shall select one as a sample, being
that from the colony of Rhode-Island;[45] a colony that of all the
others receives the least addition from strangers.--For the increase
of our _trade to those colonies_, I refer to the accounts frequently
laid before Parliament, by the officers of the customs, and to the
custom-house books: from which I have also selected one account, that
of the trade from England (exclusive of Scotland) to Pensylvania[46];
a colony most remarkable for the plain frugal manner of living of
its inhabitants, and the most suspected of carrying on manufactures,
on account of the number of German artizans, who are known to have
transplanted themselves into that country; though even these,
in truth, when they come there, generally apply themselves to
agriculture, as the surest support and most advantageous employment.
By this account it appears, that the exports to that province have in
28 years, increased nearly in the proportion of 17 to 1; whereas the
people themselves, who by other authentic accounts appear to double
their numbers (the strangers who settle there included) in about 16
years, cannot in the 28 years have increased in a greater proportion
than as 4 to 1. The additional demand then, and consumption of goods
from England, of 13 parts in 17 more than the additional number
would require, must be owing to this; that the people having by
their industry mended their circumstances, are enabled to indulge
themselves in finer clothes, better furniture, and a more general use
of all our manufactures than heretofore.

In fact, the occasion for English goods in North America, and the
inclination to have and use them, is, and must be for ages to come,
much greater than the ability of the people to pay for them; they
must therefore, as they now do, deny themselves many things they
would otherwise chuse to have, or increase their industry to obtain
them. And thus, if they should at any time manufacture some coarse
article, which on account of its bulk or some other circumstance,
cannot so well be brought to them from Britain; it only enables them
the better to pay for finer goods, that _otherwise_ they could not
indulge themselves in: so that the exports thither are not diminished
by such manufacture, but rather increased. The single article of
manufacture in these colonies, mentioned by the remarker, is _hats_
made in New-England. It is true, there have been, ever since the
first settlement of that country, a few hatters there; drawn thither
probably at first by the facility of getting beaver, while the woods
were but little cleared, and there was plenty of those animals. The
case is greatly altered now. The beaver skins are not now to be had
in New-England, but from very remote places and at great prices. The
trade is accordingly declining there; so that, far from being able
to make hats in any quantity for exportation, they cannot supply
their home demand; and it is well known, that some thousand dozens
are sent thither yearly from London, Bristol, and Liverpool, and sold
there cheaper than the inhabitants can make them of equal goodness.
In fact, the colonies are so little suited for establishing of
manufactures, that they are continually losing the few branches they
accidentally gain. The working brasiers, cutlers, and pewterers, as
well as hatters, who have happened to go over from time to time and
settle in the colonies, gradually drop the working part of their
business, and import their respective goods from England, whence
they can have them cheaper and better than they can make them. They
continue their shops indeed, in the same way of dealing; but become
_sellers_ of brasiery, cutlery, pewter, hats, &c. brought from
England, instead of being _makers_ of those goods.

  [5. _The American colonies_ not dangerous _in their nature to Great
  Britain_.]

Thus much to the apprehension of our colonies becoming useless to
us. I shall next consider the other supposition, that their growth
may render them _dangerous_.--Of this, I own, I have not the least
conception, when I consider that we have already _fourteen separate
governments_ on the maritime coast of the continent; and, if we
extend our settlements, shall probably have as many more behind them
on the inland side. Those we now have are not only under different
governors, but have different forms of government, different laws,
different interests, and some of them different religious persuasions
and different manners.--Their jealousy of each other is so great,
that however necessary an union of the colonies has long been, for
their common defence and security against their enemies, and how
sensible soever each colony has been of that necessity; yet they
have never been able to effect such an union among themselves; nor
even to agree in requesting the mother country to establish it for
them. Nothing but the immediate command of the crown has been able
to produce even the imperfect union, but lately seen there, of
the forces of some colonies. If they could not agree to unite for
their defence against the French and Indians, who were perpetually
harassing their settlements, burning their villages, and murdering
their people; can it reasonably be supposed there is any danger of
their uniting against their own nation, which protects and encourages
them, with which they have so many connections and ties of blood,
interest and affection, and which, it is well known, they all love
much more than they love one another?

In short, there are so many causes that must operate to prevent
it, that I will venture to say, an union amongst them for such a
purpose is not merely improbable, it is impossible. And if the
union of the whole is impossible, the attempt of a part must be
madness; as those colonies that did not join the rebellion would
join the mother-country in suppressing it. When I say such an
union is impossible, I mean, without the most grievous tyranny and
oppression. People who have property in a country which they may
lose, and privileges which they may endanger, are generally disposed
to be quiet, and even to bear much, rather than hazard all. While
the government is mild and just, while important civil and religious
rights are secure, such subjects will be dutiful and obedient. The
waves do not rise but when the winds blow.

What such an administration as the Duke of Alva's in the Netherlands
might produce, I know not; but this I think I have a right to deem
impossible. And yet there were two very manifest differences between
that case, and ours; and both are in our favour. The _first_, that
Spain had already united the seventeen provinces under one visible
government, though the states continued independent: the _second_,
that the inhabitants of those provinces were of a nation, not only
different from, but utterly unlike the Spaniards. Had the Netherlands
been peopled from Spain, the worst of oppression had probably not
provoked them to wish a separation of government. It might, and
probably would, have ruined the country; but would never have
produced an independent sovereignty. In fact, neither the very worst
of governments, the worst of politics in the last century, nor the
total abolition of their remaining liberty, in the provinces of Spain
itself, in the present, have produced any independency [in Spain]
that could be supported. The same may be observed of France.

And let it not be said, that the neighbourhood of these to the seat
of government has prevented a separation. While our strength at sea
continues, the banks of the Ohio (in point of easy and expeditious
conveyance of troops) are nearer to London, than the remote parts of
France and Spain to their respective capitals; and much nearer than
Connaught and Ulster were in the days of Queen Elizabeth. No body
foretels the dissolution of the Russian monarchy from its extent; yet
I will venture to say, the eastern parts of it are already much more
inaccessible from Petersburgh, than the country on the Mississippi is
from London; I mean, more men, in less time, might be conveyed the
latter than the former distance. The rivers Oby, Jenesea, and Lena,
do not facilitate the communication half so well by their course,
nor are they half so practicable as the American rivers. To this I
shall only add the observation of Machiavel, in his Prince; that a
government seldom long preserves its dominion over those who are
foreigners to it; who, on the other hand, fall with great ease, and
continue inseparably annexed to the government of their own nation:
which he proves by the fate of the English conquests in France. Yet
with all these disadvantages, so difficult is it to overturn an
established government, that it was not without the assistance of
France and England, that the United Provinces supported themselves:
which teaches us, that

  [6. _The French remaining in Canada, an encouragement to
  disaffections in the British Colonies_.--_If they prove a_ check,
  _that check of the most barbarous nature_.]

_If the visionary danger of independence in our colonies is to be
feared; nothing is more likely to render it substantial, than the
neighbourhood of foreigners at enmity with the sovereign governments,
capable of giving either_ aid[47], _or an_ asylum, _as the event
shall require_. Yet against even these disadvantages, did Spain
preserve almost ten provinces, merely through their want of union;
which indeed could never have taken place among the others, but for
causes, some of which are in our case impossible, and others it is
impious to suppose possible.

The Romans well understood that policy, which teaches the security
arising to the chief government from separate states among the
governed; when they restored the liberties of the states of Greece
(oppressed but united under Macedon) by an edict, that every state
should live under its own laws. They did not even name a governor.
Independence of each other, and separate interests (though among a
people united by common manners, language, and I may say religion;
inferior neither in wisdom, bravery, nor their love of liberty, to
the Romans themselves;) was all the security the sovereigns wished
for their sovereignty. It is true, they did not call themselves
sovereigns; they set no value on the title; they were contented
with possessing the thing. And possess it they did, even without
a standing army: (what can be a stronger proof of the security of
their possession?) And yet by a policy, similar to this throughout,
was the Roman world subdued and held: a world composed of above an
hundred languages, and sets of manners, different from those of their
masters. Yet this dominion was unshakeable, till the loss of liberty
and corruption of manners in the sovereign state overturned it.

_But what is the prudent policy, inculcated by the remarker to obtain
this end, security of dominion over our colonies? It is_, to leave
the French _in_ Canada, to "check" their growth; _for otherwise,
our people may "increase infinitely from all causes[48]."_ We have
already seen in what manner the French and their Indians check the
growth of our colonies. It is a modest word, this _check_, for
massacring men, women, and children. The writer would, if he could,
hide from himself as well as from the public, the horror arising from
such a proposal, by couching it in general terms: it is no wonder
he thought it a "subject not fit for discussion" in his letter;
though he recommends it as "a point that should be the constant
object of the minister's attention!" But if Canada is restored on
this principle, will not Britain be guilty of all the blood to be
shed, all the murders to be committed, in order to check this dreaded
growth of our own people? Will not this be telling the French in
plain terms, that the horrid barbarities they perpetrate with their
Indians on our colonists are agreeable to us; and that they need not
apprehend the resentment of a government, with whose views they so
happily concur? Will not the colonies view it in this light? Will
they have reason to consider themselves any longer as subjects and
children, when they find their cruel enemies hallooed upon them
by the country from whence they sprung; the government that owes
them protection, as it requires their obedience? Is not this the
most likely means of driving them into the arms of the French, who
can invite them by an offer of that security, their own government
chuses not to afford them? I would not be thought to insinuate, that
the remarker wants humanity. I know how little many good-natured
persons are affected by the distresses of people at a distance, and
whom they do not know. There are even those, who, being present, can
sympathize sincerely with the grief of a lady on the sudden death of
a favourite bird; and yet can read of the sinking of a city in Syria
with very little concern. If it be, after all, thought necessary to
check the growth of our colonies, give me leave to propose a method
less cruel. It is a method of which we have an example in scripture.
The murder of husbands, of wives, of brothers, sisters and children,
whose pleasing society has been for some time enjoyed, affects deeply
the respective surviving relations; but grief for the death of a
child just born is short, and easily supported. The method I mean is
that which was dictated by the Egyptian policy, when the "infinite
increase" of the children of Israel was apprehended as dangerous to
the state[49]. Let an act of parliament then be made, enjoining the
colony midwives to stifle in the birth every third or fourth child.
By this means you may keep the colonies to their present size. And
if they were under the hard alternative of submitting to one or the
other of these schemes for checking their growth, I dare answer for
them, they would prefer the latter.

_But all this debate about the propriety or impropriety of keeping or
restoring Canada_ is possibly too early. We have taken the capital
indeed, but the country is yet far from being in our possession;
and perhaps never will be: for if our m----rs are persuaded by such
counsellors as the remarker, that the French there are "not the
worst of neighbours," and that if we had conquered Canada, we ought,
for our own sakes, to restore it, as a check to the growth of our
colonies; I am then afraid we shall never take it. For there are many
ways of avoiding the completion of the conquest, that will be less
exceptionable and less odious than the giving it up.

  [7. _Canada easily peopled_, without draining Great Britain _of any
  of its inhabitants_.]

_The objection I have often heard, that if we had Canada we could not
people it, without draining Britain of its inhabitants, is founded
on ignorance of the nature of population in new countries._ When we
first began to colonize in America, it was necessary to send people,
and to send seed-corn; but it is not now necessary that we should
furnish, for a new colony, either one or the other. The annual
increment alone of our present colonies, without diminishing their
numbers, or requiring a man from hence, is sufficient in ten years
to fill Canada with double the number of English that it now has of
French inhabitants[50]. Those who are protestants among the French
will probably choose to remain under the English government; many
will choose to remove, if they can be allowed to sell their lands,
improvements, and effects: the rest in that thin-settled country will
in less than half a century, from the crowds of English settling
round and among them, be blended and incorporated with our people
both in language and manners.

  [8. _The merits of Guadaloupe to Great Britain_ over-valued; _yet
  likely to be paid_ much dearer for, _than Canada_.]

_In Guadaloupe the case is somewhat different_; and though I am far
from thinking[51] we have sugar-land enough[52], I cannot think
Guadaloupe is so desirable an increase of it, as other objects
the enemy would probably be infinitely more ready to part with. A
country, _fully inhabited_ by any nation, is no proper possession
for another of different languages, manners, and religion. It is
hardly ever tenable at less expence than it is worth. But the isle
of _Cayenne, and its appendix, Equinoctial-France_, having but very
few inhabitants, and these therefore easily removed, would indeed
be an acquisition every way suitable to our situation and desires.
This would hold all that migrate from Barbadoes, the Leeward Islands,
or Jamaica. It would certainly recal into an English government (in
which there would be room for millions) all who have before settled
or purchased in Martinico, Guadaloupe, Santa-Cruz, or St. John's;
except such as know not the value of an English government, and such
I am sure are not worth recalling.

But should we keep Guadaloupe, we are told it would _enable us to
export 300,000_l._ in sugars_. Admit it to be true, though perhaps
the amazing increase of English consumption might stop most of
it here,--to whose profit is this to redound? To the profit of
the French inhabitants of the island: except a small part, that
should fall to the share of the English purchasers, but whose whole
purchase-money must first be added to the wealth and circulation of
France. I grant, however, much of this 300,000_l._ would be expended
in British manufactures. Perhaps too, a few of the land-owners of
Guadaloupe might dwell and spend their fortunes in Britain (though
probably much fewer than of the inhabitants of North America.) I
admit the advantage arising to us from these circumstances (as far
as they go) in the case of Guadaloupe, as well as in that of our
other West-India settlements. Yet even this consumption is little
better than that of an allied nation would be, who should take our
manufactures and supply us with sugar, and put us to no great expence
in defending the place of growth. But though our own colonies expend
among us almost the whole produce of our sugar[53], _can we, or ought
we_ to promise ourselves this will be the case of Guadaloupe? One
100,000_l._ will supply them with British manufactures; and supposing
we can effectually prevent the introduction of those of France
(which is morally impossible in a country used to them) the other
200,000_l._ will still be spent in France, in the education of their
children and support of themselves; or else be laid up there, where
they will always think their home to be.

Besides this consumption of British manufactures, _much is said of
the benefit we shall have from the_ situation of Guadaloupe; and we
are told of a trade to the Caraccas and Spanish Main. In what respect
Guadaloupe is better situated for this trade than Jamaica, or even
any of our other islands, I am at a loss to guess. I believe it to be
not so well situated for that of the windward coast, as Tobago and
St. Lucia; which in this, as well as other respects, would be more
valuable possessions, and which, I doubt not, the peace will secure
to us. Nor is it nearly so well situated for that of the rest of
the Spanish Main as Jamaica. As to the greater safety of our trade
by the possession of Guadaloupe, experience has convinced us, that
in reducing a single island, or even more, we stop the privateering
business but little. Privateers still subsist, in equal if not
greater numbers, and carry the vessels into Martinico, which before
it was more convenient to carry into Guadaloupe. Had we all the
Caribbees, it is true, they would in those parts be without shelter.

Yet, upon the whole, I suppose it to be a doubtful point, and
well worth consideration, whether our obtaining possession of all
the Caribbees would be more than a temporary benefit; as it would
necessarily soon fill the French part of Hispaniola with French
inhabitants, and thereby render it five times more valuable in time
of peace, and little less than impregnable in time of war, and
would probably end in a few years in the uniting the whole of that
great and fertile island under a French government. It is agreed
on all hands, that our conquest of St. Christopher's, and driving
the French from thence, first furnished Hispaniola with skilful and
substantial planters, and was consequently the first occasion of
its present opulence. On the other hand, I will hazard an opinion,
that valuable as the French possessions in the West Indies are, and
undeniable the advantages they derive from them, there is somewhat
to be weighed in the opposite scale. They cannot at present make war
with England, without exposing those advantages, while divided among
the numerous islands they now have, much more than they would, were
they possessed of St. Domingo only; their own share of which would,
if well cultivated, grow more sugar, than is now grown in all their
West-India islands.

_I have before said, I do not deny the utility of the conquest, or
even of our future possession of Guadaloupe, if not bought too dear._
The trade of the West Indies is one of our most valuable trades. Our
possessions there deserve our greatest care and attention. So do
those of North America. I shall not enter into the invidious task of
comparing their due estimation. It would be a very long, and a very
disagreeable one, to run through every thing material on this head.
It is enough to our present point, if I have shown, that the value of
North America is capable of an immense increase, by an acquisition
and measures, that must necessarily have an effect the direct
contrary of what we have been industriously taught to fear; and that
Guadaloupe is, in point of advantage, but a very small addition to
our West-India possessions; rendered many ways less valuable to us,
than it is to the French, who will probably set more value upon it,
than upon a country [Canada] that is much more valuable to us than to
them.

There is a great deal more to be said on all the parts of these
subjects; but as it would carry me into a detail, that I fear
would tire the patience of my readers, and which I am not without
apprehensions I have done already, I shall reserve what remains till
I dare venture again on the indulgence of the public[54].

FOOTNOTES:

[17] In the year 1760, upon the prospect of a peace with France,
the late Earl of Bath addressed a Letter to Two Great Men (Mr. Pitt
and the Duke of Newcastle) on the terms necessary to be insisted
upon in the negociation. He preferred the acquisition of Canada, to
acquisitions in the West Indies. In the same year there appeared
Remarks on the letter addressed to two great men, containing opposite
opinions on this and other subjects. At this moment a philosopher
stepped into the controversy, and wrote a pamphlet entitled, The
Interest of Great Britain considered, with Regard to her Colonies,
&c. The arguments he used, appear to have carried weight with them at
the courts of London and Paris, for Canada was kept by the peace.

The editor thinks it necessary to add the following further
explanations.--The above piece (which first came to his hands in the
shape of a pamphlet, printed for Becket, 1761, 2d edit.) has none
of the eight subdivisions it is now thrown into, marked out by the
author. He conceived however that they might be useful, and has taken
the liberty of making them, but guards it with this apology. The
better to suit his purpose, the division of the paragraphs, &c. and
the italics of the original, are not accurately adhered to. It was
impossible for him however to alter one word in the sense, style, or
disposition, of his author: this was a liberty for which he could
make no apology.

In the original, the author has added his observations concerning
the Increase of Mankind, Peopling of Countries, &c. [printed in the
2d Vol. of this work] and introduced it with the following note.
"In confirmation of the writer's opinion concerning population,
manufactures, &c. he has thought it not amiss to add an extract from
a piece written some years since in America, where the facts must
be well known, on which the reasonings are founded. It is entitled,
Observations, &c."

With respect to the arguments used by the authors of the Letter, and
of the Remarks, it is useless to repeat them here. As far as they
are necessary for the understanding of Dr. Franklin, they are to be
collected from his own work. B. V.

[18] Remarks, p. 6.

[19] Ibid. p. 7.

[20] Remarks, p. 7.

[21] Ibid.

[22] Remarks, p. 19.

[23] Ibid.

[24] Page 30, of the Letter, and p. 21, of the Remarks.

[25] Remarks, p. 28.

[26] A very intelligent writer of that country, Dr. Clark, in his
Observations on the late and present Conduct of the French, &c.
printed at Boston, 1755, says,

"The Indians in the French interest are, upon all proper
opportunities, _instigated by their priests_ (who have generally
the chief management of their public councils) to acts of hostility
against the English, even in time of profound peace between the two
crowns. Of this there are many undeniable instances: the war between
the Indians and the colonies of the Massachusett's Bay and New
Hampshire, in 1723, by which those colonies suffered so much damage,
was begun by the instigation of the French: their supplies were from
them; and there are now original letters of several Jesuits to be
produced, whereby it evidently appears, that they were continually
animating the Indians, when almost tired with the war, to a farther
prosecution of it. The French not only excited the Indians, and
supported them, but joined their own forces with them in all the late
hostilities that have been committed within his majesty's province
of Nova Scotia. And from an intercepted letter this year from the
Jesuits at Penobscot, and from other information, it is certain,
that they have been using their utmost endeavours to excite the
Indians to new acts of hostility against his majesty's colony of
the Massachusett's Bay; and some have been committed. The French
not only excite the Indians to acts of hostility, but reward them
for it, by _buying the English prisoners of them_: for the ransom
of each of which they afterwards demand of us the price that is
usually given for a slave in these colonies. They do this under the
specious pretence of rescuing the poor prisoners from the cruelties
and barbarities of the savages; but in reality to encourage them to
continue their depredations, as they can by this means get more by
hunting the English, than by hunting wild-beasts; and the French at
the same time are thereby enabled to keep up a large body of Indians,
entirely at _the expence of the English_."

[27] Remarks, p. 25.

[28] Remarks, p. 25.

[29] "Although the Indians live scattered, as a hunter's life
requires, they may be collected together from almost any distance; as
they can find their subsistence from their gun in their travelling.
But let the number of the Indians be what it will, they are not
formidable merely on account of their numbers; there are many other
circumstances that give them a great advantage over the English.
The English inhabitants, though numerous, are extended over a large
tract of land, five hundred leagues in length on the sea shore;
and although some of their trading towns are thick settled, their
settlements in the country towns must be at a distance from each
other: besides, that in a new country where lands are cheap, people
are fond of acquiring large tracts to themselves; and therefore in
the out-settlements, they must be more remote: and as the people that
move out are generally poor, they sit down either where they can
easiest procure land, or soonest raise a subsistence. Add to this,
that the English have fixed settled habitations, the easiest and
shortest passages to which the Indians, by constantly hunting in the
woods, are perfectly well acquainted with; whereas the English know
little or nothing of the Indian country, nor of the passages through
the woods that lead to it. The Indian way of making war is by sudden
attack upon exposed places; and as soon as they have done mischief,
they retire, and either go home by the same or some different route,
as they think safest; or go to some other place at a distance, to
renew their stroke. If a sufficient party should happily be ready to
pursue them, it is a great chance, whether in a country consisting
of woods and swamps, which the English are not acquainted with, the
enemy do not lie in ambush for them in some convenient place, and
from thence destroy them. If this should not be the case, but the
English should pursue them, as soon as they have gained the rivers,
by means of their canoes (to the use of which they are brought up
from their infancy) they presently get out of their reach: further,
if a body of men were to march into their country, to the place where
they are settled, they can, upon the least notice, without great
disadvantage, quit their present habitation, and betake themselves to
new ones." _Clark's Observations_, p. 13.

"It has been already remarked, that the tribes of the Indians, living
upon the lakes and rivers that run upon the back of the English
settlements in North America, are very numerous, and can furnish a
great number of fighting men, all perfectly well acquainted with the
use of arms as soon as capable of carrying them, as they get the
whole of their subsistence from hunting; and that this army, large
as it may be, can be maintained by the French without any expence.
From their numbers, their situation, and the rivers that run into the
English settlements, it is easy to conceive, that they can at any
time make an attack upon, and constantly annoy as many of the exposed
English settlements as they please, and those at any distance from
each other. The effects of such incursions have been too severely
felt by many of the British colonies, not to be very well known. The
entire breaking up places, that had been for a considerable time
settled at a great expence both of labour and money; burning the
houses, destroying the flock, killing and making prisoners great
numbers of the inhabitants, with all the cruel usage they meet with
in their captivity, is only a part of the scene. All other places
that are exposed are kept in continual terror; the lands lie waste
and uncultivated, from the danger that attends those that shall
presume to work upon them: besides the immense charge the governments
must be at in a very ineffectual manner to defend their extended
frontiers; and all this from the influence the French have had over,
but comparatively, a few of the Indians. To the same or greater evils
still will every one of the colonies be exposed, whenever the same
influence shall be extended to the whole body of them." Ibid. p. 20.

[30] Remarks, p. 26.

[31] Douglass.

[32] Remarks, p. 25.

[33] Remarks, p. 26.

[34] This I believe is meant for Dr. Adam Smith, who seems not at
this time to have printed any of his political pieces. B. V.

[35] Remarks, p. 27.

[36] Remarks, p. 50, 51.

[37] Remarks, p. 50, 51.

[38] The reason of this greater increase in America than in Europe
is, that in old settled countries, all trades, farms, offices, and
employments are full; and many people refrain marrying till they see
an opening, in which they can settle themselves, with a reasonable
prospect of maintaining a family: but in America, it being easy to
obtain land, which, with moderate labour will afford subsistence and
something to spare, people marry more readily and earlier in life,
whence arises a numerous offspring and the swift population of those
countries. It is a common error, that we cannot fill our provinces
or increase the number of them, without draining this nation of its
people. The increment alone of our present colonies is sufficient for
both those purposes. [Written in 1760.]

[39] Viz. forty sail, none of more than forty guns.

[40] Sir C. Whitworth has the following assertion: "Each state
in Germany is jealous of its neighbours; and hence, rather than
facilitate the export or transit of its neighbours' products or
manufactures, they have all recourse to strangers." State of Trade,
p. xxiv. B. V.

[41] From New York into lake Ontario, the land-carriage of the
several portages altogether, amounts to but about twenty-seven miles.
From lake Ontario into lake Erie, the land-carriage at Niagara is
but about twelve miles. All the lakes above Niagara communicate by
navigable straits, so that no land-carriage is necessary, to go out
of one into another. From Presqu'isle on lake Erie, there are but
fifteen miles land-carriage, and that a good waggon-road, to Beef
River, a branch of the Ohio; which brings you into a navigation
of many thousand miles inland, if you take together the Ohio, the
Mississippi, and all the great rivers and branches that run into them.

[42] I beg pardon for attempting to remind the reader that he must
not confound the river Duna, with the river Dwina.--The fork of the
Ohio is about four hundred miles distant from the sea, and the fork
of the Mississippi about nine hundred: it is four hundred miles from
Petersburgh to Moscow, and very considerably more than four thousand
from Petersburgh to Pekin. This is enough to justify Dr. Franklin's
positions in the page above, without going into farther particulars.
B. V.

[43] Remarks, p. 47, 48, &c.

[44] The writer has [since] obtained accounts of the exports to
North America, and the West India Islands; by which it appears, that
there has been some increase of trade to those islands as well as to
North America, though in a much less degree. The following extract
from these accounts will show the reader at one view the amount of
the exports to each, in two different terms of five years; the terms
taken at ten years distance from each other, to show the increase,
viz.


_First term, from 1744 to 1748, inclusive._

     _Northern Colonies._         _West India Islands._

    1744     £.640,114 12  4          £.796,112 17  9

    1745       534,316  2  5            503,669 19  9

    1746       754,945  4  3            472,994 19  7

    1747       726,648  5  5            856,463 18  6

    1748       830,243 16  9            734,095 15  3
             ---------------          ---------------
  Total,   £.3,486,261  1  2   Tot. £.3,363,337 10 10

                            Difference, 122,930 10  4
                                        -------------
                                    £.3,486,268  1  2


_Second term, from 1754 to 1758, inclusive._

     _Northern Colonies._           _West India Islands._

    1754     1,246,615  1 11            685,675  3  0

    1755     1,177,848  6 10            694,667 13  3

    1756     1,428,720 18 10            733,458 16  3

    1757     1,727,924  2 10            776,488  0  6

    1758     1,832,948 13 10            877,571 19 11
             ---------------           ---------------
  Total,   £.7,414,057  4  3   Tot. £.3,767,841 12 11

                          Difference, 3,646,215 11  4
                                      ---------------
                                    £.7,414,057  4  3

  In the first term, total of West India islands, 3,363,337 10 10

  In the second term, ditto                       3,767,841 12 11
                                                  ---------------
                                 Increase, only £.0,404,504  2  1

  In the first term, total for Northern Colonies, 3,486,268  1  2

  In the second term, ditto                       7,414,057  4  3
                                                  ---------------
                                      Increase, £.3,927,789  3  1

By these accounts it appears, that the exports to the West India
islands, and to the northern colonies, were in the first term
nearly equal (the difference being only 122,936_l._ 10s. 4d.) and in
the second term, the exports to those islands had only increased
404,504_l._ 2s. 1d.--Whereas the increase to the northern colonies is
3,927,789_l._ 3s. 1d. almost _four millions_.

Some part of this increased demand for English goods may be ascribed
to the armies and fleets we have had both in North America and the
West Indies; not so much for what is consumed by the soldiery; their
clothing, stores, ammunition, &c. sent from hence on account of the
government, being (as is supposed) not included in these accounts of
merchandize exported; but, as the war has occasioned a great plenty
of money in America, many of the inhabitants have increased their
expence.

N. B. These accounts do not include any exports from Scotland to
America, which are doubtless proportionally considerable; nor the
exports from Ireland.

[I shall carry on this calculation where Dr. Franklin left it. For
four years, from 1770 to 1773 inclusively, the same average _annual_
exports to the same ports of the West Indies is 994,463_l._, and to
the same ports of the North American plantations 2,919,669_l._ But the
annual averages of the first and second terms of the former were
672,668_l._ and 753,568_l._: of the latter, 697,254_l._ and 1,482,811_l._

In ten years therefore (taking the middle years of the terms) the
North American trade is found to have _doubled_ the West Indian: in
the next sixteen years it becomes greater by _three-fold_.--With
respect to itself, the North American trade in 32 years (taking the
extremes of the terms) has quadrupled; while the West Indian trade
increased only one half; of which increase I apprehend Jamaica has
given more than one-third, chiefly in consequence of the quiet
produced by the peace with the maroon negroes.--Had the West Indian
trade continued stationary, the North American trade would have
quadrupled with respect to it, in 26 years; and this, notwithstanding
the checks given to the latter, by their non-importation agreements
and the encouragement of their own manufactures.

There has been an accession to both these trades, produced by the
cessions at the treaty of Paris, not touched upon by Dr. Franklin.
The average _annual_ export-trade, from 1770 to 1773 inclusively, to
the ceded West India islands, amounted to 258,299_l._: to the ceded
North American territory it has been 280,423_l._ See Sir Charles
Whitworth's State of Trade. B. V.]

[45] _Copy of the Report of Governor Hopkins to the Board of Trade,
on the Numbers of People in Rhode-Island._

In obedience to your lordships' commands, I have caused the within
account to be taken by officers under oath. By it there appears to be
in this colony at this time 35,939 white persons, and 4697 blacks,
chiefly negroes.

In the year 1730, by order of the then lords commissioners of trade
and plantations, an account was taken of the number of people in this
colony, and then there appeared to be 15,302 white persons, and 2633
blacks.

Again in the year 1748, by like order, an account was taken of the
number of people in this colony, by which it appears there were at
that time 29,755 white persons, and 4373 blacks.

  _Colony of Rhode Island, Dec. 24, 1755._
  STEPHEN HOPKINS.

[46] _An Account of the Value of the Exports from England to
Pensylvania, in one Year, taken at different Periods, viz._

  In 1723 they amounted only to  £. 15,992 19  4
     1730 they were                 48,592  7  5
     1737                           56,690  6  7
     1742                           75,295  3  4
     1747                           82,404 17  7
     1752                          201,666 19 11
     1757                          268,426  6  6

N. B. The accounts for 1758 and 1759, are not yet completed; but
those acquainted with the North American trade know, that the
increase in those two years has been in a still greater proportion;
the last year being supposed to exceed any former year by a third;
and this owing to the increased ability of the people to spend, from
the greater quantities of money circulating among them by the war.

[47] The _aid_ Dr. Franklin alludes to must probably have consisted
in early and full supplies of arms, officers, intelligence, and trade
of export and of import, through the river St. Lawrence, on risques
both public and private; in the encouragement of splendid promises
and a great ally; in the passage from Canada to the back settlements,
being _shut_ to the British _forces_; in the quiet of the _great
body_ of Indians; in the support of emissaries and discontented
citizens; in loans and subsidies to congress, in ways _profitable to
France_; in a refuge to be granted them in case of defeat, in vacant
lands, as settlers; in the probability of war commencing earlier
between England and France, at the gulph of St. Lawrence (when the
shipping taken, were _rightfully_ addressed to Frenchmen) than in
the present case. All this might have happened, as soon as America's
distaste of the sovereign had exceeded the fear of the foreigner;
a circumstance frequently seen possible in history, and which our
ministers took care should not be wanting.

This explanation would have required apology for its insertion, were
not the opinion pretty common in England, that _had not the French
been removed from Canada, the revolt of America never would have
taken place_. Why then were the French _not left_ in Canada, at the
peace of 1763? Or, since they _were not_ left there, why was the
American dispute begun? Yet in one sense, perhaps this opinion is
true; for _had_ the French been left in Canada, ministers would not
only have _sooner_ felt, but _sooner_ have seen, the strange fatality
of their plans. B. V.

[48] Remarks, p. 50, 51.

[49] And Pharoah said unto his people, behold the people of the
children of Israel are more and mightier than we; come on, let us
deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that
when there falleth out any war, they join also unto our enemies and
fight against us, and so get them up out of the land. And the king
spake to the Hebrew midwives, &c. Exodus, chap. 1.

[50] In fact, there have not gone from Britain [itself] to our
colonies these twenty years past to settle there, so many as ten
families a year; the new settlers are either the offspring of the
old, or emigrants from Germany, or the north of Ireland.

[51] Remarks, p. 30, 34.

[52] It is often said we have plenty of sugar-land still unemployed
in Jamaica: but those who are well acquainted with that island know,
that the remaining vacant land in it is generally situated among
mountains, rocks, and gullies, that make carriage impracticable, so
that no profitable use can be made of it; unless the price of sugars
should so greatly increase, as to enable the planter to make very
expensive roads, by blowing up rocks, erecting bridges, &c. every two
or three hundred yards. [Our author was somewhat misinformed here. B.
V.]

[53] Remarks, p. 47.

[54] Dr. Franklin has often been heard to say, that in writing this
pamphlet he received considerable assistance from a learned friend,
who was not willing to be named. B. V.




  _Remarks and Facts relative to the American Paper-money._[55]


In the Report of the Board of Trade, dated Feb. 9, 1764, the
following reasons are given for _restraining the emission_ of
paper-bills of credit in America, as _a legal tender_.

1. "That it _carries the gold and silver out_ of the province, and so
ruins the country; as _experience has shewn_, in every colony where
it has been practised in any great degree.

2. "That the _merchants_ trading to America _have suffered_ and lost
by it.

3. "That the restriction [of it] _has had a beneficial effect_ in New
England.

4. "That every _medium of trade should have an intrinsic value_,
which paper-money has not. Gold and silver are therefore the fittest
for this medium, as they are an equivalent; which paper never can be.

5. "That _debtors_ in the assemblies make paper-money with
_fraudulent views_.

6. "That in the middle colonies, where the credit of the paper-money
has been best supported, the bills have _never kept to their nominal
value_ in circulation; but have constantly depreciated to a certain
degree, whenever the quantity has been increased."

To consider these reasons in their order; the first is,

1. "_That paper-money_ carries the gold and silver out _of the
province, and so ruins the country; as_ experience has shewn, _in
every colony where it has been practised in any great degree_."--This
opinion, of its ruining the country, seems to be merely speculative,
or not otherwise founded than upon misinformation in the matter of
fact. The truth is, that the balance of their trade with Britain
being greatly against them, the gold and silver are drawn out to
pay that balance; and then the necessity of some medium of trade
has induced the making of paper-money, which could _not_ be carried
away. Thus, if carrying out all the gold and silver ruins a country,
every colony was ruined before it made paper-money.--But, far from
being ruined by it, the colonies that have made use of paper-money
have been, and are all, in a thriving condition. The debt indeed to
Britain has increased, because their numbers, and of course their
trade, have increased; for all trade having always a proportion
of debt outstanding, which is paid in its turn, while fresh debt
is contracted, the proportion of debt naturally increases as the
trade increases; but the improvement and increase of estates in
the colonies have been in a greater proportion than their debt.
New England, particularly in 1696 (about the time they began the
use of paper-money) had in all its four provinces but 180 churches
or congregations; in 1760 they were 530. The number of farms and
buildings there is increased in proportion to the numbers of people;
and the goods exported to them from England in 1750, before the
restraint took place, were near five times as much as before they
had paper-money. Pensylvania, before it made any paper-money, was
totally stript of its gold and silver; though they had from time to
time, like the neighbouring colonies, agreed to take gold and silver
coins at higher nominal values, in hopes of drawing money into, and
retaining it, for the internal uses of the province. During that
weak practice, silver got up by degrees to 8s. 9d. per ounce, and
English crowns were called six, seven, and eight-shilling pieces,
long before paper-money was made. But this practice of increasing
the denomination was found not to answer the end. The balance of
trade carried out the gold and silver as fast as they were brought
in; the merchants raising the price of their goods in proportion
to the increased denomination of the money. The difficulties for
want of cash were accordingly very great, the chief part of the
trade being carried on by the extremely inconvenient method of
barter; when in 1723 paper-money was first made there; which gave
new life to business, promoted greatly the settlement of new lands
(by lending small sums to beginners on easy interest, to be repaid
by instalments) whereby the province has so greatly increased in
inhabitants, that the export from hence thither is now more than
tenfold what it then was; and by their trade with foreign colonies,
they have been able to obtain great quantities of gold and silver to
remit hither in return for the manufactures of this country. New York
and New Jersey have also increased greatly during the same period,
with the use of paper-money; so that it does not appear to be of
the ruinous nature ascribed to it. And if the inhabitants of those
countries are glad to have the use of paper among themselves, that
they may thereby be enabled to spare, for remittances hither, the
gold and silver they obtain by their commerce with foreigners; one
would expect, that no objection against their parting with it could
arise here, in the country that receives it.

The 2d reason is, "_That the_ merchants _trading to America have_
suffered _and lost by the paper-money_."--This may have been the case
in particular instances, at particular times and places: as in South
Carolina, about 58 years since; when the colony was thought in danger
of being destroyed by the Indians and Spaniards; and the British
merchants, in fear of losing their whole effects there, called
precipitately for remittances; and the inhabitants, to get something
lodged in safe countries, gave any price in paper-money for bills of
exchange; whereby the paper, as compared with bills, or with produce,
or other effects fit for exportation, was suddenly and greatly
depreciated. The unsettled state of government for a long time in
that province had also its share in depreciating its bills. But
since that danger blew over, and the colony has been in the hands of
the crown; their currency became fixed, and has so remained to this
day. Also in New England, when much greater quantities were issued
than were necessary for a medium of trade, to defray the expedition
against Louisbourg; and, during the last war in Virginia and North
Carolina, when great sums were issued to pay the colony troops, and
the war made tobacco a poorer remittance, from the higher price of
freight and insurance: in these cases, the merchants trading to those
colonies may sometimes have suffered by the sudden and unforeseen
rise of exchange. By slow and gradual rises, they seldom suffer;
the goods being sold at proportionable prices. But war is a common
calamity in all countries, and the merchants that deal with them
cannot expect to avoid a share of the losses it sometimes occasions,
by affecting public credit. It is hoped, however, that the profits of
their subsequent commerce with those colonies may have made them some
reparation. And the merchants trading to the middle colonies (New
York, New Jersey, and Pensylvania) have never suffered by any rise
of exchange; it having ever been a constant rule there, to consider
British debts as payable in Britain, and not to be discharged but
by as much paper (whatever might be the rate of exchange) as would
purchase a bill for the full sterling sum. On the contrary, the
merchants have been great gainers by the use of paper-money in
those colonies; as it enabled them to send much greater quantities
of goods, and the purchasers to pay more punctually for them. And
the people there make no complaint of any injury done them by
paper-money, with a legal tender; they are sensible of its benefits;
and petition to have it so allowed.

The 3d reason is, "_That the_ restriction _has had a_ beneficial
effect _in New England_." Particular circumstances in the New England
colonies made paper-money less necessary and less convenient to them.
They have great and valuable fisheries of whale and cod, by which
large remittances can be made. They are four distinct governments;
but having much mutual intercourse of dealings, the money of each
used to pass current in all: but the whole of this common currency
not being under one common direction, was not so easily kept within
due bounds; the prudent reserve of one colony in its emissions being
rendered useless by excess in another. The Massachusets, therefore,
were not dissatisfied with the restraint, as it restrained their
neighbours as well as themselves; and perhaps _they_ do not desire to
have the act repealed. They have not yet felt much inconvenience from
it; as they were enabled to abolish their paper-currency, by a large
sum in silver from Britain to reimburse their expences in taking
Louisbourg, which, with the gold brought from Portugal, by means of
their fish, kept them supplied with a currency; till the late war
furnished them and all America with bills of exchange; so that little
cash was needed for remittance. Their fisheries too furnish them
with remittance through Spain and Portugal to England; which enables
them the more easily to retain gold and silver in their country. The
middle colonies have not this advantage; nor have they tobacco; which
in Virginia and Maryland answers the same purpose. When colonies
are so different in their circumstances, a regulation, that is not
inconvenient to one or a few, may be very much so to the rest. But
the pay is now become so indifferent in New England, at least in
some of its provinces, through the want of currency, that the trade
thither is at present under great discouragement.

The 4th reason is, "_That every_ medium of trade _should have an_
intrinsic value; _which paper-money has not_. _Gold and silver are
therefore the fittest for this medium, as they are an equivalent;
which paper never can be."_ However fit a particular thing may be
for a particular purpose; wherever that thing is not to be had,
or not to be had in sufficient quantity; it becomes necessary to
use something else, the fittest that can be got, in lieu of it.
Gold and silver are not the produce of North America, which has no
mines; and that which is brought thither cannot be kept there in
sufficient quantity for a currency. Britain, an independent great
state, when its inhabitants grow too fond of the expensive luxuries
of foreign countries, that draw away its money, can, and frequently
does, make laws to discourage or prohibit such importations; and
by that means can retain its cash. The _colonies_ are dependent
governments; and their people having naturally great respect for
the sovereign country, and being thence immoderately fond of its
modes, manufactures, and superfluities, cannot be restrained from
purchasing them by any province law; because such law, if made,
would immediately be repealed here, as prejudicial to the trade and
interest of Britain. It seems hard therefore, to draw all, their
real money from them, and then refuse them the poor privilege of
using paper instead of it. Bank bills and bankers notes are daily
used _here_ as a medium of trade, and in large dealings perhaps the
greater part is transacted by their means; and yet _they_ have no
intrinsic value, but rest on the credit of those that issue them;
as paper-bills in the colonies do on the credit of the respective
governments there. Their being payable in cash upon sight by the
drawer is indeed a circumstance that cannot attend the colony bills;
for the reasons just above-mentioned; their cash being drawn from
them by the British trade; but the legal tender being substituted in
its place is rather a greater advantage to the possessor; since he
need not be at the trouble of going to a _particular bank_ or banker
to demand the money, finding (wherever he has occasion to lay out
money in the province) a person that is obliged to take the bills.
So that even out of the province, the knowledge, that every man
within that province is obliged to take its money, gives the bills a
credit among its neighbours, nearly equal to what they have at home.

And were it not for the laws _here_, that restrain or prohibit as
much as possible all losing trades, the cash of _this_ country would
soon be exported: every merchant, who had occasion to remit it,
would run to the bank with all its bills, that came into his hands,
and take out his part of its treasure for that purpose; so that in
a short time, it would be no more able to pay bills in money upon
sight, than it is now in the power of a colony treasury so to do. And
if government afterwards should have occasion for the credit of the
bank, it must of necessity make its bills a legal tender; funding
them however on taxes by which they may in time be paid off; as
has been the general practice in the colonies.--At this very time,
even the silver-money in England is obliged to the legal tender for
part of its value; that part which is the difference between its
real weight and its denomination. Great part of the shillings and
sixpences now current are, by wearing, become five, ten, twenty,
and some of the sixpences even fifty per cent. too light. For
this difference between the _real_ and the _nominal_, you have no
_intrinsic_ value; you have not so much as paper, you have nothing.
It is the legal tender, with the knowledge that it can easily be
repassed for the same value, that makes three-pennyworth of silver
pass for sixpence. Gold and silver have undoubtedly _some_ properties
that give them a fitness above paper, as a medium of exchange;
particularly their _universal estimation_; especially in cases where
a country has occasion to carry its money abroad, either as a stock
to trade with, or to purchase _allies_ and _foreign succours_.
Otherwise, that very universal estimation is an inconvenience, which
paper-money is free from; since it tends to deprive a country of
even the quantity of currency that should be retained as a necessary
instrument of its internal commerce, and obliges it to be continually
on its guard in making and executing, at a great expence, the
laws that are to prevent the trade which exports it. Paper-money
well funded has another great advantage over gold and silver; its
lightness of carriage, and the little room that is occupied by a
great sum; whereby it is capable of being more easily, and more
safely, because more privately, conveyed from place to place. Gold
and silver are not _intrinsically_ of equal value with iron, a metal
in itself capable of many more beneficial uses to mankind. Their
value rests chiefly in the estimation they happen to be in among the
generality of nations, and the credit given to the opinion, that that
estimation will continue. Otherwise a pound of gold would not be a
real equivalent for even a bushel of wheat. Any other well-founded
credit, is as much an equivalent as gold and silver; and in some
cases more so, or it would not be preferred by commercial people
in different countries. Not to mention again our own bank bills;
Holland, which understands the value of cash as well as any people in
the world, would never part with gold and silver for credit (as they
do when they put it into their bank, from whence little of it is ever
afterwards drawn out) if they did not think and find the credit a
full equivalent.

The 5th reason is, "_That_ debtors _in the assemblies make
paper-money_ with fraudulent views." This is often said by the
adversaries of paper-money, and if it has been the case in any
particular colony, that colony should, on proof of the fact, be duly
punished. This, however, would be no reason for punishing other
colonies, who have _not_ so abused their legislative powers. To
deprive all the colonies of the convenience of paper-money, because
it has been charged on some of them, that they have made it an
instrument of fraud, is as if all the India, Bank, and other stocks
and trading companies were to be abolished, because there have been,
once in an age, Mississippi and South-Sea schemes and bubbles.

The 6th and last reason is, "_That in the middle colonies, where the
paper-money has been best supported, the bills have_ never kept to
their nominal value _in circulation; but have constantly depreciated
to a certain degree, whenever the quantity has been increased_."
If the rising of the value of any particular commodity wanted for
exportation, is to be considered as a depreciation of the values of
_whatever remains_ in the country; then the rising of silver above
paper to that height of additional value, which its capability of
exportation only gave it, may be called a depreciation of the paper.
Even here, as bullion has been wanted or not wanted for exportation,
its price has varied from 5_s._ 2_d._ to 5_s._ 8_d._ per ounce. This
is near 10 per cent. But was it ever said or thought on such an
occasion, that all the bank bills, and all the coined silver, and
all the gold in the kingdom, were depreciated 10 per cent? Coined
silver is now wanted here for change, and 1 per cent is given for
it by some bankers: are gold and bank notes therefore depreciated 1
per cent.? The fact in the middle colonies is really this: on the
emission of the first paper-money, a difference soon arose between
that and silver; the latter having a property the former had not,
a property always in demand in the colonies; to wit, its being fit
for a remittance. This property having soon found its value, by
the merchants bidding on one another for it, and a dollar thereby
coming to be rated at 8_s._ in paper-money of New York, and 7_s._
6_d._ in paper of Pensylvania, it has continued uniformly at those
rates in both provinces now near forty years, without any variation
upon new emissions; though, in Pensylvania, the paper-currency has
at times increased from 15,000_l._ the first sum, to 600,000_l._ or
near it. Nor has any alteration been occasioned by the paper-money,
in the price of the necessaries of life, when compared with silver:
they have been for the greatest part of the time no higher than
before it was emitted; varying only by plenty and scarcity, or by a
less or greater foreign demand. It has indeed been usual with the
adversaries of a paper-currency, to call every rise of exchange with
London, a depreciation of the paper: but this notion appears to be by
no means just: for if the paper purchases every thing but bills of
exchange, at the former rate, and these bills are not above one-tenth
of what is employed in purchases; then it may be more properly and
truly said, that the exchange has risen, than that the paper has
depreciated. And as a proof of this, it is a certain fact, that
whenever in those colonies bills of exchange have been dearer, the
purchaser has been constantly obliged to give more in silver, as well
as in paper, for them; the silver having gone hand in hand with the
paper at the rate above-mentioned; and therefore it might as well
have been said, that the silver was depreciated.

There have been several different schemes for furnishing the
colonies with paper-money, that should _not_ be a legal tender, viz.

1. _To form a bank, in imitation of the bank of England, with a
sufficient stock of cash_ to pay the bills on sight.

This has been often proposed, but appears impracticable, under the
present circumstances of the colony-trade; which, as is said above,
draws all the cash to Britain, and would soon strip the bank.

2. _To raise a fund by some yearly tax, securely lodged in the bank
of England as it arises, which should_ (during the term of years
_for which the paper-bills are to be current_) _accumulate to a sum
sufficient to discharge them all at their_ original value.

This has been tried in Maryland: and the bills so funded were
issued without being made a general legal tender. The event was,
that as notes payable in time are naturally subject to a discount
proportioned to the time: so these bills fell at the beginning of
the term so low, as that twenty pounds of them became worth no more
than twelve pounds in Pensylvania, the next neighbouring province;
though both had been struck near the same time at the same nominal
value, but the latter was supported by the general legal tender.
The Maryland bills however began to rise as the term shortened, and
towards the end recovered their full value. But, as a depreciating
currency injures creditors, _this_ injured debtors; and by its
continually changing value, appears unfit for the purpose of money,
which should be as fixed as possible in its own value; because it is
to be the measure of the value of other things.

3. _To make the bills_ carry an interest _sufficient to support their
value_.

This too has been tried in some of the New England colonies; but
great inconveniencies were found to attend it. The bills, to fit them
for a currency, are made of various denominations, and some very
low, for the sake of change; there are of them from 10_l._ down to
3_d._ When they first come abroad, they pass easily, and answer the
purpose well enough for a few months; but as soon as the interest
becomes worth computing, the calculation of it on every little bill
in a sum between the dealer and his customers, in shops, warehouses
and markets, takes up much time, to the great hindrance of business.
This evil, however, soon gave place to a worse; for the bills were
in a short time gathered up and hoarded; it being a very tempting
advantage to have money bearing interest, and the principal all the
while in a man's power, ready for bargains that may offer; which
money out on mortgage is not. By this means numbers of people became
usurers with small sums, who could not have found persons to take
such sums of them upon interest, giving good security; and would
therefore not have thought of it; but would rather have employed the
money in some business, if it had been money of the common kind.
Thus trade, instead of being increased by such bills, is diminished;
and by their being shut up in chests, the very end of making them
(viz. to furnish a medium of commerce) is in a great measure, if not
totally defeated.

On the whole, no method has hitherto been formed to establish a
medium of trade, in lieu of money, equal in all its advantages, to
bills of credit--funded on sufficient taxes for discharging it, or
on land-security of double the value for repaying it at the end of
the term; and in the mean time, made a GENERAL LEGAL TENDER. The
experience of now near half a century in the middle colonies has
convinced them of it among themselves; by the great increase of their
settlements, numbers, buildings, improvements, agriculture, shipping,
and commerce. And the same experience has satisfied the British
merchants, who trade thither, that it has been greatly useful to
them, and not in a single instance prejudicial.

It is therefore hoped, that securing the full discharge of British
debts, which are payable here, and in all justice and reason ought
to be fully discharged here in sterling money; the restraint on the
legal tender within the colonies will be taken off; at least for
those colonies that desire it, and where the merchants trading to
them make no objection to it[56].

FOOTNOTES:

[55] The best account I can give of the occasion of the Report, to
which this paper is a reply, is as follows. During the war there had
been a considerable and unusual trade to America, in consequence
of the great fleets and armies on foot there, and the clandestine
dealings with the enemy, who were cut off from their own supplies.
This made great debts. The briskness of the trade ceasing with the
war, the merchants were anxious for payment, which occasioned some
confusion in the colonies, and stirred up a clamour here against
paper-money. The board of trade, of which lord Hilsborough was the
chief, joined in this opposition to paper-money, as appears by the
report. Dr. Franklin being asked to draw up an answer to their
report, wrote the paper given above. B. V.

[56] I understand that Dr. Franklin is the friend who assisted
governor Pownall in drawing up a plan for a general paper-currency
for America, to be established by the British government. See
Governor Pownall's Administration of the Colonies, 5th Edition, p.
199, and 208. B. V.




  _To the Freemen of Pensylvania, on the Subject of a particular
  Militia-Bill, rejected by the Proprietor's Deputy or Governor._


  _Philadelphia, Sept. 28, 1764._

  GENTLEMEN,

Your desire of knowing how the militia-bill came to fail in the last
assembly shall immediately be complied with.

As the governor pressed hard for a militia-law to secure the internal
peace of the province, and the people of this country had not been
accustomed to militia service; the house, to make it more generally
agreeable to the freeholders, formed the bill so as that they might
have some share in the election of the officers; to secure them
from having absolute strangers set over them, or persons generally
disagreeable.

This was no more, than that every company should choose, and
recommend to the governor, three persons for each office of captain,
lieutenant, and ensign; _out of which three_, the governor was to
commission _one_, that he thought most proper, or which he pleased,
to be the officer. And that the captains, lieutenants, and ensigns,
so commissioned by the governor, should, in their respective
regiments, choose and recommend three persons for each office of
colonel, lieutenant-colonel, and major; out of which three the
governor was to commission _one_, whichever he pleased, to each of
the said offices.

The governor's amendment to the bill in this particular was, to
strike out wholly this privilege of the people, and take to himself
the _sole_ appointment of all the officers.

The next amendment was to aggravate and _enhance all the fines_. A
fine, that the assembly had made one hundred pounds, and thought
heavy enough, the governor required to be three hundred pounds. What
they had made fifty pounds, he required to be one hundred and fifty.
These were fines on the commissioned officers for disobedience to
his commands; but the non-commissioned officers, or common soldiers,
whom, for the same offence, the assembly proposed to fine at ten
pounds, the governor insisted should be fined fifty pounds.

These fines, and some others to be mentioned hereafter, the assembly
thought ruinously high: but when, in a subsequent amendment, the
governor would, for offences among the militia, take away the _trial
by jury_ in the common courts; and required, that the trial should be
by a court-martial, composed of officers of his own sole appointing,
who should have power of sentencing even to death; the house could by
no means consent thus to give up their constituents' liberty, estate,
and life itself, into the absolute power of a proprietary governor;
and so the bill failed.

That you may be assured I do not misrepresent this matter, I shall
give you the last-mentioned amendment (so called) at full length; and
for the truth and exactness of my copy I dare appeal to Mr. Secretary
Shippen.

The words of the bill, p. 43, were, "Every such person, so offending,
being legally convicted thereof, &c." By the words _legally
convicted_, was intended a conviction after legal trial, in the
common course of the laws of the land. But the governor required this
addition immediately to follow the words ["convicted thereof"] viz.
'by a court-martial, shall suffer DEATH, or such other punishment
as such court, by their sentence or decree, shall think proper to
inflict and pronounce. And be it farther enacted by the authority
aforesaid, That when and so often as it may be necessary, the
governor and commander in chief for the time being shall appoint
and commissionate, under the great seal of this province, sixteen
commissioned officers in each regiment; with authority and power to
them, or any thirteen of them, to hold courts-martial, of whom a
field-officer shall always be one, and president of the said court;
and such courts-martial shall, and are hereby impowered to administer
an oath to any witness, in order to the examination or trial of any
of the offences which by this act are made cognizable in such courts,
and shall come before them. Provided always, that in all trials by
a court-martial by virtue of this act, every officer present at
such trial, before any proceedings be had therein, shall take an
_oath_ upon the holy evangelists, before one justice of the peace
in the county where such court is held, who are hereby authorized
to administer the same, in the following words, that is to say, "I
A. B. do swear, that I will duly administer justice according to
evidence, and to the directions of an act, entitled, An act for
forming and regulating the militia of the province of Pensylvania,
without partiality, favour, or affection; and that I will not divulge
the sentence of the court, until it shall be approved of by the
governor or commander in chief of this province for the time being;
neither will I, upon any account, at any time whatsoever, disclose
or _discover the vote or opinion_ of any particular member of the
court-martial. So help me God."--And no sentence of death, or other
sentence shall be given against any offender but by the concurrence
of nine of the officers so sworn. And no sentence, passed against
any offender by such court-martial, shall be put in execution, until
report be made of the whole proceedings to the governor or commander
in chief of this province for the time being, and his directions
signified thereupon.'

It is observable here, that by the common course of justice, a man is
to be tried by a jury of his neighbours and fellows; impannelled by a
sheriff, in whose appointment the people have a choice: the prisoner
too has a right to challenge twenty of the pannel, without giving a
reason, and as many more as he can give reasons for challenging; and
before he can be convicted, the jury are to be unanimous; they are
all to agree that he is guilty, and are therefore all accountable
for their verdict. But by this amendment, the jury (if they may be
so called) are all officers of the governor's sole appointing, and
not one of them can be challenged; and though a common militia-man
is to be tried, no common militia-man shall be of that Jury; and so
far from requiring all to agree, a bare majority shall be sufficient
to condemn you. And lest that majority should be under any check or
restraint, from an apprehension of what the world might think or say
of the severity or injustice of their sentence, an oath is to be
taken, never to discover the vote or opinion of any particular member!

These are some of the chains attempted to be forged for you by the
proprietary faction! Who advised the g----r is not difficult to
know. They are the very men, who now clamour at the assembly for a
proposal of bringing the trial of a particular murder to this county,
from another, where it was not thought safe for any man to be either
juryman or witness; and call it disfranchising the people! who are
now bawling about the constitution, and pretending vast concern for
your liberties! In refusing you the least means of recommending or
expressing your regard for persons to be placed over you as officers,
and who were thus to be made your judges in life and estate; they
have not regarded the example of the king, our wise, as well as
kind master, who, in all his requisitions made to the colonies,
of raising troops for their defence, directed, that "the better to
facilitate the important service, the commissions should be given
to such as from their weight and credit with the people may be best
enabled to effectuate the levies[57]." In establishing a militia
for the defence of the province, how could the "weight and credit"
of men with the people be better discovered, than by the mode that
bill directed; viz. by a majority of those that were to be commanded
nominating three for each office to the governor, of which three he
might take the one he liked best?

However, the courts-martial being established, and all of us thus put
into his honour's absolute power, the governor goes on to enhance
the fines and penalties; thus, in page 49 of the bill, where the
assembly had proposed the fine to be ten shillings, the governor
required it to be ten pounds: in page 50, where a fine of five pounds
was mentioned, the governor's amendment required it to be made fifty
pounds. And in page 44, where the assembly had said, "shall forfeit
and pay any sum not exceeding five pounds," the governor's amendment
says, "shall suffer DEATH, or such other punishment, as shall,
according to the nature of the offence, be inflicted by the sentence
of a court-martial!"

The assembly's refusing to admit of these amendments in that bill
is one of their offences against the Lord Proprietary; for which
that faction are now abusing them in both the languages[58] of the
province, with all the virulence that reverend malice can dictate;
enforced by numberless barefaced falshoods, that only the most
dishonest and base would dare to invent, and none but the most weak
and credulous can possibly believe.

  VERITAS.

FOOTNOTES:

[57] See Secretary of State's Letters in the printed Votes.

[58] It is hardly necessary to mention here, that Pensylvania was
settled by a mixture of German and English. B. V.




  _Preface by a Member of the Pensylvanian Assembly (Dr. Franklin)
  to the Speech of Joseph Galloway, Esq. one of the Members for
  Philadelphia County; in Answer to the Speech of John Dickinson,
  Esq.; delivered in the House of the Assembly of the Province of
  Pensylvania, May 24, 1764, on Occasion of a Petition drawn up by
  Order, and then under the Consideration of the House, praying his
  Majesty for a Royal, in lieu of a Proprietary, Government_[59].


It is not merely because Mr. Dickinson's speech was ushered into
the world by a preface, that one is made to this of Mr. Galloway.
But as, in that preface, a number of aspersions were thrown on
our assemblies, and their proceedings grossly misrepresented, it
was thought necessary to wipe those aspersions off by some proper
animadversions, and by a true state of facts, to rectify those
misrepresentations.

The preface begins with saying, "That governor Denny (whose
administration will never be mentioned but with disgrace in the
annals of this province) was induced, by considerations to which the
world is now no stranger, to pass sundry acts," &c. thus insinuating,
that by some unusual base bargain, secretly made, but afterwards
discovered, he was induced to pass them.

It is fit therefore, without undertaking to justify all that
governor's administration, to show _what_ those considerations
were. Ever since the revenue of the quit-rents first, and after
that, the revenue of tavern-licences, were settled irrevocably on
our proprietors and governors, they have looked on those incomes as
their proper estate, for which they were under no obligations to the
people: and when they afterwards concurred in passing any useful
laws, they considered them as so many jobs, for which they ought to
be particularly paid. Hence arose the custom of _presents_ twice a
year to the governors, at the close of each session in which laws
were passed, given at the time of passing: they usually amounted to
a thousand pounds per annum. But when the governors and assemblies
disagreed, so that laws were not passed, the presents were withheld.
When a disposition to agree ensued, there sometimes still remained
some _diffidence_. The governors would not pass the laws that were
wanted, without being sure of the money, even all that they called
their arrears; nor the assemblies give the money, without being
sure of the laws. Thence the necessity of some private conference,
in which mutual assurances of good faith might be received and
given, that the transactions should go hand in hand. What name
the impartial reader will give to this kind of commerce, I cannot
say: to me it appears an extortion of more money from the people,
for that to which they had before an undoubted right, both by the
constitution and by purchase; but there was no other shop they could
go to for the commodity they wanted, and they were obliged to comply.
Time established the custom, and made it seem honest; so that our
governors, even those of the most undoubted honour, have practised
it. Governor Thomas, after a long misunderstanding with the assembly,
went more openly to work with them in managing this commerce, and
they with him. The fact is curious, as it stands recorded in the
votes of 1742-3. Sundry bills, sent up to the governor for his
assent, had lain long in his hands, without any answer. Jan. 4, the
house "ordered, that Thomas Leech and Edward Warner wait upon the
governor, and acquaint him, that the house had long waited for his
result on the bills that lie before him, and desire to know, when
they may expect it:" the gentlemen return, and report, "that they
waited upon the governor, and delivered the message of the house
according to order; and that the governor was pleased to say, he had
had the bills long under consideration, and _waited the result_ of
the _house_." The house well understood this hint; and immediately
resolved into a committee of the whole house, to take what was
called _the governor's support_ into consideration; in which they
made (the minutes say) _some progress_; and the next morning it
appears, that that _progress_, whatever it was, had been communicated
to him; for he sent them down this message by his secretary: "Mr.
Speaker, the governor commands me to acquaint you, that as he has
received assurances of a _good disposition_ in the house, he thinks
it incumbent on him to show _the like_ on his part; and therefore
sends down the bills which lay before him, without any amendment." As
this message only showed a good disposition, but contained no promise
to pass the bills, the house seem to have had their doubts; and
therefore, February 2, when they came to resolve, on the report of
the grand committee, to give the money, they guarded their resolves
very cautiously, viz. "Resolved, that _on the passage_ of such bills
as now lie before the governor, (the naturalization bill, and such
other bills as may be presented to him during this sitting) there
be PAID him the sum of _five hundred pounds_. Resolved also, that
on the passage of such bills as now lie before the governor (the
naturalization bill, and such other bills as may be presented to him
this sitting) there be PAID to the governor the _further_ sum of _one
thousand pounds_, for the current year's support; and that orders be
drawn on the treasurer and trustees of the loan-office, pursuant to
these resolves." The orders were accordingly drawn; with which being
acquainted, he appointed a time to pass the bills; which was done
with one hand, while he received the orders in the other: and then
with the utmost politeness [he] thanked the house for the fifteen
hundred pounds, as if it had been a pure free gift, and a mere mark
of their respect and affection. "I _thank you_, gentlemen (says he)
for this instance of _your regard_; which I am the more pleased with,
as it gives an agreeable prospect of _future harmony_ between me
and the representatives of the people." This, reader, is an exact
_counterpart_ of the transaction with governor Denny; except that
Denny sent word to the house, that he would pass the bills _before_
they voted the support. And yet _here_ was no proprietary clamour
about bribery, &c. And why so? Why at that time the proprietary
family, by virtue of a _secret bond_ they had obtained of the
governor at his appointment, were to _share with_ him the sums so
obtained of the people!

This reservation of the proprietaries they were at that time a little
ashamed of; and therefore such bonds were then to be secrets. But
as, in every kind of sinning, frequent repetition lessens shame, and
increases boldness, we find the proprietaries ten years afterwards
openly insisting on these advantages to themselves, _over and above_
what was paid to their deputy: "Wherefore (say they) on this occasion
it is necessary that we should inform the people, through yourselves
their representatives, that as by the constitution _our consent
is necessary_ to their _laws_, at the same time that they have an
_undoubted right_ to such as are necessary for the defence and real
service of the country; so it will tend the better to facilitate
the several matters which must be transacted with us, for their
representatives to show a regard _to us_ and our _interest_." This
was in their answer to the representation of the assembly [Votes,
December, 1754, p. 48.] on the justice of their contributing to
Indian expences, which they had refused. And on this clause the
committee make the following remark: "They tell us their consent
is necessary to our laws, and that it will tend the better to
facilitate the matters which must be transacted with them, for the
representatives to show a regard to their _interest_: that is (as we
understand it) though the proprietaries have a deputy here, supported
by the province, who is, or ought to be, fully impowered to pass all
laws necessary for the service of the country; yet, before we can
obtain such laws, we must facilitate their passage by paying money
for the proprietaries, which they ought to pay; or in some shape make
it their particular _interest_ to pass them. We hope, however, that
if this practice has ever been begun, it will never be continued in
this province; and that since, as this very paragraph allows, we have
an undoubted right to such laws, we shall always be able to obtain
them from the goodness of our sovereign, without going to market
for them to a subject." Time has shown, that those hopes were vain;
they have been obliged to go to that market ever since, directly or
indirectly, or go without their laws. The practice has continued,
and will continue, as long as the proprietary government subsists,
intervening between the crown and the people.

Do not, my courteous reader, take pet at our proprietary
constitution, for these our bargain and sale proceedings in
legislation. It is a happy country where justice, and what was your
own before, can be had for ready money. It is another addition to the
value of money, and of course another spur to industry. Every land
is not so blessed. There are countries where the princely proprietor
claims to be lord of all property; where what is your own shall not
only be wrested from you, but the money you give to have it restored
shall be kept with it; and your offering so much, being a sign of
your being too rich, you shall be plundered of every thing that
remained. These times are not come here yet: your present proprietors
have never been more unreasonable hitherto, than barely to insist on
your fighting in defence of _their_ property, and paying the expence
yourselves; or if their estates must [ah! _must_] be taxed towards
it, that the _best_ of their lands shall be taxed no higher than the
_worst_ of yours.

Pardon this digression, and I return to governor Denny; but first let
me do governor Hamilton the justice to observe, that whether from
the uprightness of his own disposition, or from the odious light the
practice had been set in on Denny's account, or from both; he did not
attempt these bargains, but passed such laws as he thought fit to
pass, without any _previous_ stipulation of pay for them. But then,
when he saw the assembly tardy in the payment he expected, and yet
calling upon him still to pass more laws; he openly put them in mind
of the money, as a _debt_ due to him from custom. "In the course of
the present year (says he, in his message of July 8, 1763) a great
deal of public business hath been transacted by me, and I believe as
many useful laws enacted, as by any of my predecessors in the same
space of time: yet I have not understood that any allowance hath
hitherto been made to me for my support, as hath been customary in
this province." The house having then some bills in hand, took the
matter into immediate consideration, and voted him five hundred
pounds, for which an order or certificate was accordingly drawn:
and on the same day the speaker, after the house had been with the
governor, reported, "That his honour had been pleased to give his
assent to the bills, by enacting the same into laws. And Mr. Speaker
farther reported, That he had then, in behalf of the house, presented
their certificate of five hundred pounds to the governor, who was
pleased to say, he was obliged to the house for the same." Thus we
see the practice of purchasing and paying for laws is interwoven
with our proprietary constitution, used in the best times, and under
the best governors. And yet, alas! poor assembly! how will you steer
your brittle bark between these rocks? If you pay _ready money_ for
your laws, and those laws are not liked by the proprietaries, you are
charged with bribery and corruption: if you wait a while before you
pay, you are accused of detaining the governor's customary right, and
dunned as a negligent or dishonest debtor, that refuses to discharge
a just debt!

But governor Denny's case, I shall be told, differs from all these;
for the acts he was induced to pass were, as the prefacer tell us,
"_contrary to his duty, and to every tie of honour and justice_."
Such is the imperfection of our language, and perhaps of all other
languages, that, notwithstanding we are furnished with dictionaries
innumerable, we cannot precisely know the import of words, unless
we know of what party the man is that uses them. In the mouth of an
assembly-man, or true Pensylvanian, "contrary to his duty and to
every tie of honour and justice" would mean, the governor's long
refusal to pass laws, however just and necessary, for taxing the
proprietary estate: a refusal, contrary to the trust reposed in
the lieutenant-governor by the royal charter, to the rights of the
people, whose welfare it was his duty to promote, and to the nature
of the contract made between the governor and the governed, when the
quit-rents and licence-fees were established, which confirmed what
the proprietaries call our "undoubted right" to necessary laws. But
in the mouth of the proprietaries, or their creatures, "contrary to
his duty, and to every tie of justice and honour" means, his passing
laws contrary to proprietary instructions, and contrary to the bonds
he had previously given to observe those instructions: instructions
however, that were unjust and unconstitutional; and bonds, that were
illegal and void from the beginning.

Much has been said of the wickedness of governor Denny in passing,
and of the assembly in prevailing with him to pass, those acts.
By the prefacer's account of them, you would think the laws, so
obtained, were _all_ bad; for he speaks of but _seven_, of which,
six, he says, were repealed, and the seventh reported to be
"fundamentally _wrong_ and _unjust_," "and ought to be repealed,
_unless_ six certain amendments were made therein[60]." Whereas
in fact there were _nineteen_ of them, and several of those must
have been good laws, for even the proprietaries did not object to
them. Of the eleven that they opposed, only six were repealed; so
that it seems, these good gentlemen may themselves be sometimes as
wrong in opposing, as the assembly in enacting laws. But the words,
"fundamentally _wrong_ and _unjust_," are the great fund of triumph
to the proprietaries and their partizans. These, their subsequent
governors have unmercifully dinned in the ears of the assembly on all
occasions ever since; for they make a part of near a dozen of their
messages. They have rung the changes on those words, till they worked
them up to say, that the law was fundamentally wrong and unjust in
_six several articles_ (Governor's Message, May 17, 1764) instead
of "ought to be repealed, _unless_ six alterations or amendments
could be made therein." A law, unjust in six several articles, must
be an unjust law indeed. Let us therefore, once for all, _examine_
this unjust law, article by article, in order to see, whether our
assemblies have been such villains as they have been represented.

The _first_ particular in which their lordships proposed the act
should be amended was, "That the real estates to be taxed, be
_defined with precision_; so as not to include the unsurveyed waste
land belonging to the proprietaries." This was at most but an
_obscurity_ to be cleared up. And though the law might well appear
to their lordships uncertain in that particular, with us, who better
know our own customs, and that the proprietaries waste unsurveyed
land was never here considered among estates real, subject to
taxation; there was not the least doubt or supposition, that such
lands were included in the words "all estates, real and personal."
The agents therefore, knowing that the assembly had no intention
to tax those lands, might well suppose they would readily agree to
remove the obscurity. Before we go farther, let it be observed, that
the main design of the proprietaries in opposing this act was, to
_prevent their estates being taxed at all_. But as they knew, that
the doctrine of proprietary exemption, which they had endeavoured to
enforce here, could not be supported there[61], they bent their whole
strength against the act on _other_ principles to procure its repeal,
pretending great willingness to submit to an equitable tax; but that
the assembly (out of mere malice, because they had conscientiously
quitted quakerism for the church!) were wickedly determined to ruin
them, to tax all their unsurveyed wilderness-lands, and at the
highest rates: and by that means exempt themselves and the people,
and throw the whole burden of the war on the proprietary family. How
foreign these charges were from the truth, need not be told to any
man in Pensylvania. And as the proprietors knew, that the hundred
thousand pounds of paper-money, struck for the defence of _their_
enormous estates, with others, was actually issued, spread through
the country, and in the hands of thousands of poor people, who had
given their labour for it; how base, cruel, and inhuman it was to
endeavour, by a repeal of the act, to strike the money dead in those
hands at one blow, and reduce it all to waste paper, to the utter
confusion of all trade and dealings, and the ruin of multitudes,
merely to avoid paying their own just tax--Words may be wanting
to express,--but minds will easily conceive,--and never without
abhorrence!

The _second_ amendment proposed by their lordships was, "That the
located uncultivated lands, belonging to the proprietaries, shall
not be assessed higher than the _lowest_ rate, at which any located
uncultivated lands belonging to the inhabitants shall be assessed."
Had there been any provision in the act, that the proprietaries'
lands, and those of the people, of the same value, should be taxed
differently, the one high, and the other low; the act might well have
been called in this particular fundamentally wrong and unjust. But
as there is no such clause, this cannot be one of the particulars
on which the charge is founded; but, like the first, is merely a
requisition to make the act _clear_, by express directions therein,
that the proprietaries' estate should not be, as they pretended to
believe it would be, taxed higher in proportion to its value than
the estates of others. As to their present claim, founded on that
article, "that the best and most valuable of their lands, should be
taxed no higher than the worst and least valuable of the people's,"
it was not _then_ thought of; they made no such demand; nor did any
one dream that so iniquitous a claim would ever be made by men, who
had the least pretence to the characters of honourable and honest.

The _third_ particular was, "That all lands, _not granted_ by
the proprietaries _within boroughs and towns_, be deemed located
uncultivated lands, and rated accordingly; and not as lots." The
clause in the act that this relates to is, "And whereas many valuable
lots of ground within the city of Philadelphia, and the several
boroughs and towns within this province, remain unimproved; Be it
enacted, &c. That _all_ such unimproved lots of ground within the
city and boroughs aforesaid, shall be rated and assessed according to
their situation and value for, and towards raising the money hereby
granted." The reader will observe, that the word is, _all_ unimproved
lots; and that _all_ comprehends the lots belonging to the people,
as well as those of the proprietary. There were many of the former;
and a number belonging even to members of the then assembly; and
considering the value, the tax must be proportionably as grievous to
them, as the proprietary's to him. Is there among us a single man,
even a proprietary relation, officer, or dependant, so insensible of
the differences of right and wrong, and so confused in his notions of
just and unjust, as to think and say, that the act in this particular
was fundamentally wrong and unjust? I believe not one. What then
could their lordships mean by the proposed amendment? Their meaning
is easily explained. The proprietaries have considerable tracts of
land within the bounds of boroughs and towns, that have not yet been
divided into lots: they pretended to believe, that by virtue of this
clause an imaginary division would be made of _those_ lands into
lots, and an extravagant value set on such imaginary lots, greatly
to their prejudice. It was answered, that no such thing was intended
by the act: and that by lots was meant only such ground as _had_
been surveyed and divided into lots, and not the open undivided
lands. If this only is intended, say their lordships, then let the
act be amended, so as _clearly_ to express what is intended. This is
the full amount of the third particular. How the act was understood
here, is well known by the execution of it before the dispute came
on in England, and therefore before their lordships' opinion on the
point could be given, of which full proof shall presently be made.
In the mean time it appears, that the act was not on _this_ account
fundamentally wrong and unjust.

The _fourth_ particular is, "That the _governor's consent_ and
approbation be made necessary to every issue and application of the
money, to be raised by virtue of such act." The assembly intended
this, and thought they had done it in the act. The words of the
clause being, "That [the commissioners named] or the major part of
them, or of the survivors of them, _with the consent_ or approbation
of the governor or commander in chief of this province for the time
being, shall order and appoint _the disposition of the monies_
arising by virtue of this act, for and towards paying and clothing
two thousand seven hundred effective men," &c. It was understood
here, that as the power of disposing was expressly to be with the
consent and approbation of the governor, the commissioners had no
power to dispose of the money without that approbation: but their
lordships, jealous (as their station requires) of this prerogative of
the crown, and being better acquainted with the force and weakness
of law expression, did not think the clause explicit enough, unless
the words, "_and not otherwise_," were added, or some other words
equivalent. This particular, therefore, was no more than another
requisition of greater _clearness_ and precision; and by no means a
foundation for the charge of fundamentally wrong and unjust.

The _fifth_ particular was, "That _provincial_ commissioners be
named, to hear and _determine appeals_, brought on the part of
the inhabitants, as well as the proprietaries." There was already
subsisting a provision for the appointment of _county_ commissioners
of appeal; by whom the act might be, and actually has been (as we
shall presently show) justly and impartially executed with regard to
the proprietaries; but _provincial_ commissioners appointed in the
act it was thought might be of use, in regulating and equalizing the
modes of assessment of different counties, where they were unequal;
and by affording a second appeal, tend more to the satisfaction both
of the proprietaries and the people.--This particular was therefore
a mere proposed improvement of the act, which could not be, and was
not, in this respect, denominated fundamentally wrong and unjust.

We have now gone through five of the six proposed amendments, without
discovering any thing on which that censure could be founded; but the
_sixth_ remains; which points at a part of the act wherein we must
candidly acknowledge there is something, that, in their lordships'
view of it, must justify their judgment. The words of the _sixth_
article are, "That the payments by the tenants to the proprietaries
of their rents, shall be according to the terms of their respective
grants, as if such act had never been passed." This relates to that
clause of the act by which the _paper-money_ was made a _legal
tender_ in "discharge of all manner of debts, rents, sum and sums
of money whatsoever, &c. at the rates ascertained in the act of
parliament made in the sixth of Queen Anne." From the great injustice
frequently done to creditors, and complained of from the colonies, by
the vast depreciation of paper bills, it was become a general fixed
principle with the ministry, that such bills (whose value, though
fixed in the act, could not be kept fixed by the act) ought _not_ to
be made a legal tender in any colony at those rates. The parliament
had before passed an act, to take that tender away in the four New
England colonies, and have since made the act general. This was what
their lordships would therefore have proposed for the amendment. But
it being represented, That the chief support of the credit of the
bills was the legal tender; and that without it they would become
of no value, it was allowed generally to remain; with an exception
to the proprietaries' rents, where[62] there was a special contract
for payment in another coin. It cannot be denied but that _this_ was
doing justice to the proprietaries; and that, had the requisition
been in favour of _all other_ creditors also, the justice had been
equal, as being general. We do not therefore presume to impeach their
lordships' judgment, that the act, as it enforced the acceptance of
bills for money at a value which they had only nominally, and not
really, was in that respect fundamentally wrong and unjust. And yet
we believe the reader will not think the assembly so much to blame,
when he considers, that the making paper-bills a legal tender had
been the universal mode in America for more than threescore years;
that there was scarce a colony that had not practised that mode
more or less; that it had always been thought absolutely necessary,
in order to give the bills a credit, and thereby obtain from them
the uses of money; that the inconveniences were therefore submitted
to, for the sake of the greater conveniences; that acts innumerable
of the like kind had been approved by the crown; and that if the
assembly made the bills a legal tender at those rates to the
proprietaries, they made them also a legal tender to themselves and
all their constituents, many of whom might suffer in their rents,
&c. as much in proportion to their estates as the proprietaries. But
if he cannot, on these considerations, quite excuse the assembly,
what will he think of those honourable proprietaries, who, when
paper-money was issued in their colony, for the common defence of
their vast estates, with those of the people, and who must therefore
reap at least equal advantages from those bills with the people,
could nevertheless wish to be exempted from their share of the
unavoidable disadvantages. Is there upon earth a man besides, with
any conception of what is honest, with any notion of honour, with
the least tincture in his veins of the gentleman, but would have
blushed at the thought; but would have rejected with disdain such
undue preference, if it had been offered him? Much less would he have
struggled for it, moved heaven and earth to obtain it, resolved to
ruin thousands of his tenants by a repeal of the act, rather than
miss of it[63]; and enforce it afterwards by an audaciously wicked
instruction; forbidding aids to his king, and exposing the province
to destruction, unless it was complied with. And yet,--These are
_honourable_ men[64].

Here then we have a full view of the assembly's injustice; about
which there has been so much insolent triumph! But let the
proprietaries and their discreet deputies hereafter recollect
and remember, that the same august tribunal, which censured some
of the modes and circumstances of that act, did at the same time
establish and confirm the grand principle of the act, viz. "That
the proprietary estate ought, with other estates, to be taxed:" and
thereby did in effect determine and pronounce, that the opposition
so long made in various shapes to that just principle, by the
proprietaries, was fundamentally _wrong_ and _unjust_. An injustice
they were not, like the assembly, under any necessity of committing
for the public good, or any other necessity but what was imposed on
them by those base passions, that act the tyrant in bad minds; their
selfishness, their pride, and their avarice.

I have frequently mentioned the _equitable intentions_ of the house
in those parts of the act, that were supposed obscure, and how they
were understood here. A clear proof thereof is found, as I have
already said, in the actual execution of the act; in the execution
of it before the contest about it in England; and therefore before
their lordships' objections to it had a being. When the report came
over, and was laid before the house, one year's tax had been levied:
and the assembly, conscious that no injustice had been intended to
the proprietaries, and willing to rectify it if any should appear,
appointed a _committee_ of members from the several counties to
examine into the state of the proprietaries' taxes through the
province, and nominated on that committee a gentleman of known
attachment to the proprietaries, and their chief justice, Mr. Allen;
to the end that the strictest inquiry might be made. _Their report_
was as follows: "We, the committee appointed to inquire into, and
consider the state of the proprietary taxation through the several
counties, and report the same to the house, have, in pursuance of
the said appointment, carefully examined the returns of property,
and compared them with the respective assessments thereon made
through the whole province; and find, _first_, That no part of the
_unsurveyed_ waste lands belonging to the proprietaries have, in any
instance, been included in the estates taxed. _Secondly_, That some
of the _located uncultivated_ lands belonging to the proprietaries
in several counties _remain unassessed_; and are not in any county
assessed higher, than the lands under like circumstances belonging
to the inhabitants. _Thirdly_, That all _lands_; _not_ granted by
the proprietaries, _within boroughs_ and towns, remain _untaxed_;
excepting in a few instances, and in those they are rated as _low_,
as the lands which are granted in the said boroughs and towns. The
whole of the proprietary tax of eighteen pence in the pound amounts
to 566_l._ 4_s._ 10_d._ And the sum of the tax on the inhabitants for
the same year amounts, through the several counties, to 27,103_l._
12_s._ 8_d._ And it is the opinion of your committee, that there has
not been any injustice done to the proprietaries, or attempts made to
rate or assess any part of their estates higher than the estates of
the like kind belonging to the inhabitants are rated and assessed;
but, on the contrary, we find that their estates are rated, in many
instances, below others.

  Thomas Leech,      George Ashbridge,
  Joseph Fox,        Emanuel Carpenter,
  Samuel Rhoads,     John Blackburn,
  Abraham Chapman,   William Allen."

The house communicated this report to governor Hamilton, when he
afterwards pressed them to make the stipulated act of amendment;
acquainting him at the same time, that as in the execution of the act
no injustice _had_ hitherto been done to the proprietary, so, by a
yearly inspection of the assessments, they would take care that none
_should_ be done him; for that if any should appear, or the governor
could at any time point out to them any that had been done, they
would immediately rectify it; and therefore, as the act was shortly
to expire, they did not think the amendments necessary. Thus that
matter ended during that administration.

And had his successor, governor Penn, permitted it still to sleep,
we are of opinion it had been more to the honour of the family, and
of his own discretion. But he was pleased to found upon it a _claim_
manifestly unjust, and which he was totally destitute of reason to
support. A claim, that the proprietaries best and most valuable
located uncultivated lands, should be taxed no _higher_ than the
worst and least valuable of those belonging to the inhabitants: to
enforce which, as he thought the words of one of the stipulations
seemed to give some countenance to it, he insisted on using those
very words as sacred; from which he could "neither in decency or in
duty," deviate; though he had agreed to deviate from words [in] the
same report, and therefore equally sacred in every other instance. A
conduct which will (as the prefacer says in governor Denny's case)
for ever disgrace the annals of _his_ administration[65]. Never did
any administration open with a more _promising_ prospect [than this
of governor Penn]. He assured the people, in his first speeches,
of the proprietaries' paternal regard for them, and their sincere
disposition to do every thing that might promote their happiness. As
the proprietaries had been pleased to appoint a son of the family
to the government, it was thought not unlikely, that there might be
something in these professions; for that they would probably choose
to have his administration made easy and agreeable; and to that
end might think it prudent to withdraw those harsh, disagreeable,
and unjust instructions with which most of his predecessors had
been hampered: the assembly therefore believed fully, and rejoiced
sincerely. They showed the new governor every mark of respect and
regard that was in their power. They readily and cheerfully went into
every thing he recommended to them. And when he and his authority
were insulted and endangered by a lawless murdering mob, they and
their friends took arms at his call, and formed themselves round him
for his defence, and the support of his government. But when it was
found, that those mischievous instructions still subsisted, and were
even farther extended; when the governor began, unprovoked, to send
the house affronting messages, seizing every imaginary occasion of
reflecting on their conduct; when every other symptom appeared of
fixed deep-rooted family malice, which could but a little while bear
the unnatural covering that had been thrown over it, what wonder
is it, if all the old wounds broke out and bled afresh? if all the
old grievances, still unredressed, were recollected; if despair
succeeded of [seeing] any peace with a family, that could make such
returns to all their overtures of kindness! And when in the very
proprietary council, composed of staunch friends of the family, and
chosen for their attachment to it, it was observed, that the _old
men_ (1 Kings, chap. xii.) withdrew themselves, finding their opinion
slighted, and that all measures were taken by the advice of two or
three _young men_ (one of whom too denies his share in them) is it
any wonder, since like causes produce like effects, if the assembly,
notwithstanding all their veneration for the first proprietor, should
say, with the children of Israel, under the same circumstances, "What
portion have we in David, or inheritance in the son of Jesse? To your
tents, O Israel!"

Under these circumstances, and a conviction that while so many
natural sources of difference subsisted between proprietaries and
people, no harmony in government long subsist (without which neither
the commands of the crown could be executed, nor the public good
promoted) the house resumed the consideration of a measure that had
often been proposed in former assemblies; a measure, that every
_proprietary province in_ America had, from the same causes, found
themselves obliged to take, and had actually taken, or were about
to take; and a measure, that had happily succeeded, wherever it was
taken; I mean the recourse to an immediate _royal government_.

They therefore, after a thorough debate, and making no less than
twenty-five unanimous resolves, expressing the many grievances
this province had long laboured under, through the proprietary
government, came to the following resolution, viz. "Resolved, nemine
contradicente, That this house will adjourn, in order to _consult
their constituents_, whether an humble _address_ should be drawn
up and transmitted to _his Majesty_; praying that he would be
graciously pleased to take the people of this province under his
immediate protection and government, by completing the agreement
heretofore made with the first proprietary for the sale of the
government to the crown, or otherwise as to his wisdom and goodness
shall seem meet[66]."

This they ordered to be made public; and it was published accordingly
in all the newspapers: the house then adjourned for no less than
_seven weeks_, to give their constituents time to consider the
matter, and themselves an opportunity of taking their opinion and
advice. Could any thing be more deliberate, more fair and open, or
more respectful to the people that chose them?--During this recess,
the people, in many places, held little meetings with each other;
the result of which was, that they would manifest their sentiments
to their representatives, by petitioning the crown directly of
themselves, and requesting the assembly to transmit and support
those petitions. At the next meeting many of these petitions were
delivered to the house with that request; they were signed by a very
great[67] number of the most substantial inhabitants; and not the
least intimation was received by the assembly from any other of their
constituents, that the method was _disapproved_; except in a petition
from an obscure town-ship in Lancaster county, to which there were
about forty names indeed, but all evidently signed by three hands
only. What could the assembly infer from the expressed willingness of
a part, and silence of the rest; but that the measure was universally
agreeable! They accordingly resumed the consideration of it; and
though a small, very small opposition then appeared to it in the
house; yet as even that was founded not on the impropriety of the
thing; but on supposed unsuitableness of the time or the manner, and
a majority of nine tenths being still for it; a petition was drawn
agreeable to the former resolve, and ordered to be transmitted to his
majesty.

But the preface tells us, that these _petitioners_ for a change were
a "number of rash, ignorant, and inconsiderate people," and generally
of a _low rank_. To be sure they were not of the proprietary
officers, dependents, or expectants; and those are chiefly the people
of high rank among us; but they were otherwise generally men of the
best estates in the province, and men of reputation. The assembly,
who come from all parts of the country, and therefore may be supposed
to know them, at least as well as the prefacer, have given that
testimony of them. But what is the testimony of the assembly; who
in his opinion are equally rash, ignorant, and inconsiderate with
the petitioners? And if his judgment is right, how imprudently and
contrary to their charter, have his _three hundred thousand souls_
acted in their elections of assembly-men these twenty years past; for
the charter requires them to choose men of _most note_ for _virtue_,
_wisdom_ and _ability_!

But these are qualities engrossed, it seems, by the _proprietary_
party. For they say, "the _wiser_ and _better_ part of the province
had far different notions of this measure: they considered, that
the moment they put their hands to these petitions they might be
surrendering up their birthright." I felicitate them on the _honour_
they have thus bestowed upon themselves; on the _sincere_ compliments
thus given and accepted; and on their having with such noble freedom
discarded the snivelling pretence to modesty, couched in that
threadbare form of words, "though we say it, that should not say
it." But is it not surprising, that, during the seven weeks recess
of the assembly, expressly to consult their constituents on the
expediency of this measure, and during the fourteen days the house
sat deliberating on it after they met again, these their wisdoms and
betternesses should never be so kind as to communicate the least
scrap of their prudence, their knowledge, or their consideration, to
their rash, ignorant, and inconsiderate representatives? Wisdom in
the mind is not like money in the purse, diminished by communication
to others: they might have lighted up our farthing candles for
us, without lessening the blaze of their own flambeaux. But they
suffered our representatives to go on in the dark till the fatal
deed was done; and the petition sent to the king, praying him to
take the government of this province into his immediate care:
whereby, if it succeeds, "our glorious plan of public liberty and
charter of privileges is to be bartered away," and we are to be made
slaves for ever! Cruel parsimony! to refuse the charity of a little
understanding, when God had given you so much, and the assembly
begged it as an alms! O that you had but for once remembered and
observed the counsel of that wise poet Pope, where he says,

    Be niggards of advice on no pretence;
    For the worst avarice is that of sense.

In the constitution of our government, and in that of one more,
there still remains a particular thing that none of the other
American governments have; to wit, the appointment of a governor by
the _proprietors_, instead of an appointment by the _crown_. This
particular in government has been found inconvenient; attended with
contentions and confusions wherever it existed; and has therefore
been gradually taken away from colony after colony, and every where
greatly to the satisfaction and happiness of the people. Our wise
first proprietor and founder was fully sensible of this; and being
desirous of leaving his people happy, and preventing the mischiefs
that he foresaw must in time arise from that circumstance if it
was continued, he determined to take it away, if possible, during
his own lifetime. They accordingly entered into a contract for
the sale of the proprietary right of government to the crown, and
actually received a sum in part of the consideration. As he found
himself likely to die before that contract (and with it, his plan
for the happiness of his people) could be completed, he carefully
made it a part of his last will and testament; devising the right
of the government to two noble lords, in trust, that they should
release it to the crown. Unfortunately for us, this has never yet
been done. And this is merely what the assembly now desire to have
done. Surely he that formed our constitution, must have understood
it. If he had imagined, that all our privileges depended on the
proprietary government; will any one suppose, that he would himself
have meditated the change; that he would have taken such effectual
measures, as he thought them, to bring it about speedily, whether he
should live or die? Will any of those, who now extol him so highly,
charge him at the same time with the baseness of endeavouring thus
to defraud his people of all the liberties and privileges he had
promised them, and by the most solemn charters and grants assured
to them, when he engaged them to assist him in the settlement of
his province? Surely none can be so inconsistent!--And yet this
proprietary right of governing or appointing a governor has all of a
sudden changed its nature; and the preservation of it become of so
much importance to the welfare of the province, that the assembly's
only petitioning to have their venerable founder's will executed,
and the contract he entered into for the good of his people
completed, is stiled, an "attempt to violate the constitution for
which our fathers planted a wilderness; to barter away our glorious
plan of public liberty and charter privileges; a risquing of the
whole constitution; an offering up of our whole charter rights; a
wanton sporting with things sacred, &c."

Pleasant surely it is to hear the proprietary partizans, of all men,
bawling for the constitution, and affecting a terrible concern for
our liberties and privileges. They, who have been these twenty years
cursing our constitution, declaring that it was no constitution, or
worse than none; and that things could never be well with us till
it was new modelled, and made exactly conformable to the British
constitution: they, who have treated our distinguishing privileges
as so many illegalities and absurdities; who have solemnly declared
in print, that though such privileges might be proper in the infancy
of a colony to encourage its settlement, they became unfit for it in
its grown state, and ought to be taken away: they, who by numberless
falshoods, propagated with infinite industry in the mother country,
attempted to procure an act of parliament for the actual depriving a
very great part of the people of their privileges: they too, who have
already deprived the whole people of some of their most important
rights, and are daily endeavouring to deprive them of the rest: are
these become patriots and advocates for our constitution? Wonderful
change! astonishing conversion! Will the wolves then protect the
sheep, if they can but persuade them to give up their dogs? Yes; the
assembly would destroy all their own rights, and those of the people;
and the proprietary partizans are become the champions for liberty!
Let those who have faith now make use of it: for if it is rightly
defined, the evidence of things not seen, certainly never was there
more occasion for such evidence, the case being totally destitute of
all other.

It has been long observed, that men are with that party, angels or
demons, just as they happen to concur with or oppose their measures.
And I mention it for the comfort of _old sinners_, that in politics,
as well as in religion, repentance and amendment, though late, shall
obtain forgiveness, and procure favour. Witness the late speaker,
Mr. Norris; a steady and constant opposer of all the proprietary
encroachments; and whom, for thirty years past, they have been
therefore continually abusing, allowing him no one virtue or good
quality whatsoever: but now, as he shewed some unwillingness to
engage in this present application to the crown, he is become all
at once the "faithful servant;"--but let me look at the text, to
avoid mistakes--and indeed I was mistaken--I thought it had been
"faithful servant of the public," but I find it is only "of the
house." Well chosen that expression, and prudently guarded. The
former, from a proprietary pen, would have been praise too much, only
for disapproving the _time_ of the application. Could _you_, much
respected [Mr. Norris], go but a little farther, and disapprove the
application itself? Could you but say, the proprietary government is
a good one, and ought to be continued; then might all your political
offences be done away, and your scarlet sins become as snow and wool;
then might you end your course with (proprietary) honour. P----
should preach your funeral sermon, and S----, the poisoner of other
characters, embalm your memory. But those honours you will never
receive; for with returning health and strength you will be found in
your old post, firm for your country.

There is encouragement too for _young sinners_. Mr. Dickenson, whose
speech our prefacer has introduced to the world, (though long hated
by some, and disregarded by the rest of the proprietary faction) is
at once, for the same reason as in Mr. Norris's case, become a sage
in the law, and an oracle in matters relating to our constitution. I
shall not endeavour to pluck so much as a leaf from these the young
gentleman's laurels. I would only advise him carefully to preserve
the panegyrics with which they have adorned him: in time they may
serve to console him, by balancing the calumny they shall load him
with, when he does not go through with them in all their measures:
he will not probably do the one, and they will then assuredly do the
other. There are mouths that can blow hot as well as cold, and blast
on your brows the bays their hands have placed there. "Experto crede
Roberto." Let but the moon of _proprietary_ favour withdraw its shine
for a moment, and that "great number of the _principal gentlemen_ of
Philadelphia," who applied to you for the copy of your speech, shall
immediately despise and desert you.

"Those principal gentlemen!" What a pity it is that their names were
not given us in the preface, together with their admirable letter!
We should then have known, where to run for advice on all occasions.
We should have known, who to choose for our future representatives:
for undoubtedly these were they that are elsewhere called "the
_wiser_ and _better_ part of the province." None but their wisdoms
could have known before-hand, that a speech which they never heard,
and a copy of which they had never seen, but were then requesting
to see, was "a spirited defence," and "of our charter privileges,"
and that "the publication of it would be of great utility, and give
general satisfaction." No inferior sagacity could discover, that the
appointment of a governor by the proprietor was one of our "charter
privileges," and that those who opposed the application for a royal
government were therefore patriot members, appearing on the side of
our privileges and our charter!

Utterly to _confound the assembly_, and show the excellence of
proprietary government, the prefacer has extracted from their own
votes, the _praises_ they have from time to time bestowed on the
_first_ proprietor, in their addresses to his sons. And though
addresses are not generally the best repositories of historical
truth, we must not in this instance deny their authority.

       *       *       *       *       *

What then avails it to the honour of the present proprietors, that
our founder and their father gave us privileges, if they, the sons,
will not permit the use of them, or forcibly rend them from us? David
may have been a man after God's own heart, and Solomon the wisest
of proprietors and governors; but if Rehoboam will be a tyrant and
a ----, who can secure him the affections of the people? The virtue
and merit of his ancestors may be very great, but his presumption in
depending upon those alone may be much greater.

I lamented, a few pages ago, that we were not acquainted with the
names of those "principal gentlemen, the wiser and better part of
the province." I now rejoice that we are likely, some time or other,
to know them; for a copy of a _petition to the king_ is now before
me; which, from its similarity with their _letter_, must be of their
inditing, and will probably be recommended to the people, by their
leading up the signing.

On this petition I shall take the liberty of making a few _remarks_,
as they will save me the necessity of following farther the preface;
the sentiments of this and that being nearly the same.

It begins with a formal quotation from the [assembly's] petition,
which they own they have not seen, and of words that are not in it;
and after relating very imperfectly and unfairly the fact relating
to their application for a copy of it, which is of no importance,
proceeds to set forth, "that as we and all your American subjects
must be governed by persons authorised and approved by your Majesty,
on the best recommendation that can be obtained of them; we cannot
perceive our condition in this respect to be _different_ from our
fellow-subjects around us, or that we are thereby less under your
majesty's particular care and protection than they are; since there
can be no _governors_ of this province without your majesty's
_immediate approbation_ and authority." Such a declaration from the
wiser part of the province is really a little surprising. What! when
disputes concerning matters of property are daily arising between
you and your proprietaries, cannot your wisdoms perceive the least
difference between having the judges of those disputes appointed by
a _royal_ governor, who has no interest in the cause, and having
them appointed by the _proprietaries_ themselves, the principal
parties against you; and _during their pleasure_ too? When supplies
are necessary to be raised for your defence, can you perceive no
difference between having a royal governor, free to promote his
majesty's service by a ready assent to your laws; and a proprietary
governor, shackled by instructions, forbidding him to give that
assent, unless some private advantage is obtained, some profit got,
or unequal exemption gained for their estate, or some privilege
wrested from you? When prerogative, that in other governments is only
used for the good of the people, is here strained to the extreme,
and used to their prejudice, and the proprietaries benefit, can you
perceive no difference? When the direct and immediate rays of majesty
benignly and mildly shine on all _around_ us, but are transmitted and
thrown upon _us_ through the burning-glass of proprietary government,
can your sensibilities feel no difference? Sheltered perhaps in
proprietary offices, or benumbed with expectations, it may be you
cannot. But surely you might have known better than to tell his
majesty, "that there can be no governors of this province, without
his immediate approbation." Don't you know, who know so much, that by
our blessed constitution the _proprietors_ themselves, whenever they
please, may govern us in _person_, without such approbation?

The petition proceeds to tell his majesty, "that the particular mode
of government which we enjoy, under your majesty, is held in the
_highest estimation_ by good men of all denominations among us; and
hath _brought multitudes_ of industrious people from various parts of
the world," &c. Really! Can this be from proprietary partizans? That
constitution, which they were for ever censuring as defective in a
legislative council, defective in government powers, too popular in
many of its modes, is it now become so excellent? Perhaps, as they
have been tinkering it these twenty years, till they have stripped
it of some of its most valuable privileges, and almost spoiled it,
they now begin to like it. But then it is not surely this _present_
constitution, that brought hither those multitudes. They came
before. At least it was not that particular in our constitution (the
proprietary power of appointing a governor) which attracted them,
that single particular, which alone is now in question, which our
venerable founder first, and now the assembly, are endeavouring to
change. As to the remaining valuable part of our constitution, the
assembly have been equally full and strong in expressing their regard
for it, and perhaps stronger and fuller; for _their_ petition, in
that respect, is in the nature of a petition of right: it lays claim,
though modestly and humbly, to those privileges on the foundation
of royal grants, on laws confirmed by the crown, and on justice and
equity, as the grants were the consideration offered to induce them
to settle, and which they have in a manner purchased and paid for, by
executing that settlement without putting the crown to any expence.
Whoever would know what our constitution was, when it was so much
admired, let him peruse that elegant farewell speech of Mr. Hamilton,
father of our late governor, when, as speaker, he took his leave of
the house, and of public business, in 1739; and then let him compare
that constitution with the present. The power of _appointing public
officers_ by the representatives of the people, which he so much
extols, where is it now? Even the bare naming to the governor in a
bill, a trivial officer to receive a light-house duty (which could
be considered as no more than a mere recommendation) is, in a late
message, styled, "an encroachment on the prerogative of the crown!"
The sole power of _raising and disposing of public money_, which he
says was then lodged in the assembly, that inestimable privilege,
what is become of it? Inch by inch they have been wrested from us
in times of public distress; and the rest are going the same way.
I remember to have seen, when governor Hamilton was engaged in a
dispute with the assembly on some of those points, a copy of that
speech, which then was intended to be reprinted, with a dedication to
that honourable gentleman, and this motto from John Rogers's verses
in the Primer:

    We send you here a little book,
      For you to look upon;
    That you may see your father's face,
      Now he is dead and gone.

Many a such little book has been sent by our assemblies to the
present proprietaries: but they do not like to see their father's
face; it puts their own out of countenance.

The petition proceeds to say, "that such disagreements as have arisen
in this province, we have beheld with sorrow; but as others around
us are not exempted from the _like misfortunes_, we can by no means
conceive them incident to the nature of our government, which hath
_often_ been administered with remarkable harmony: and your majesty,
before whom our late disputes have been laid, can be at no loss, in
your great wisdom, to discover, whether they proceed from the above
cause, or should be ascribed to some others." The disagreements in
question are proprietary disagreements in government, relating to
proprietary private interests. And are not the _royal_ governments
around us exempt from _these_ misfortunes? Can you really, gentlemen,
by no means conceive, that proprietary government disagreements are
incident to the nature of proprietary governments? If your wisdoms
are so hard to conceive, I am afraid they will never bring forth. But
then our government "hath _often_ been administered with remarkable
harmony." Very true; as often as the assembly have been able and
willing to purchase that harmony, and pay for it, the mode of which
has already been shown. And yet that word _often_ seems a little
unluckily chosen: the flame that is often put out, must be as often
lit. If our government hath often been administered with remarkable
harmony, it hath as often been administered with remarkable discord:
one often is as numerous as the other. And his majesty, if he
should take the trouble of looking over our disputes (to which the
petitioners, to save themselves a little pains, modestly and decently
refer him) where will he, for twenty years past, find any but
_proprietary_ disputes concerning proprietary interests; or disputes
that have been connected with and arose from them?

The petition proceeds to assure his majesty, "that this province
(except from the Indian ravages) enjoys the _most perfect internal
tranquillity_!"--Amazing! what! the most perfect tranquillity! when
there have been three atrocious riots within a few months! when
in two of them, horrid murders were committed on twenty innocent
persons; and in the third, no less than one hundred and forty like
murders were meditated, and declared to be intended, with as many
more as should be occasioned by any opposition! when we know that
these rioters and murderers have none of them been punished, have
never been prosecuted, have not even been apprehended! when we are
frequently told, that they intend still to execute their purposes,
as soon as the protection of the king's forces is withdrawn! Is
our tranquillity more perfect now, than it was between the first
riot and the second, or between the second and the third? And why
"except the Indian ravages," is a _little intermission_ to be
denominated "the most perfect tranquillity?" For the Indians too
have been quiet lately. Almost as well might ships in an engagement
talk of the most perfect tranquillity between two broadsides. But
"a spirit of riot and violence is foreign to the general temper
of the inhabitants." I hope and believe it is; the assembly have
said nothing to the contrary. And yet is there not too much of it?
Are there not pamphlets continually written, and daily sold in our
streets, to justify and encourage it? Are not the mad armed mob in
those writings instigated to embrue their hands in the blood of their
fellow-citizens, by first applauding their murder of the Indians,
and then representing the assembly and their friends as worse than
Indians, as having privately stirred up the Indians to murder the
white people, and armed and rewarded them for that purpose? LIES,
gentlemen, villanous as ever the malice of hell invented, and which,
to do you justice, not one of you believes, though you would have the
mob believe them.

But your petition proceeds to say, "that where such disturbances
have happened, they have been _speedily quieted_." By whom were
they quieted? The _two first_, if they can be said to be quieted,
were quieted only by the rioters themselves going home quietly
(that is, without any interruption) and remaining there till their
next insurrection, without any pursuit, or attempt to apprehend
any of them. And the _third_, was it quieted, or was the mischief
they intended prevented, or could it have been prevented, without
the aid of the king's troops, marched into the province for that
purpose?--"The civil powers have been supported," in some sort.
We all know how they were supported; but have they been _fully_
supported? Has the government sufficient strength, even with all its
supports, to venture on the apprehending and punishment of those
notorious offenders? If it has not, why are you angry at those who
would strengthen its hands by a more immediate royal authority? If
it has, why is not the thing done? Why will the government, by its
conduct, strengthen the suspicions (groundless no doubt) that it
has come to a private understanding with those murderers, and that
impunity for their past crimes is to be the reward of their future
political services?--O! but says the petition, "there are perhaps
cases in all governments where it may _not be possible speedily
to discover offenders_." Probably; but is there any case in any
government where it is not possible to _endeavour_ such a discovery?
There may be cases where it is not safe to do it: and perhaps the
best thing our government can say for itself is, that that is our
case. The only objection to such an apology must be, that it would
justify that part of the assembly's petition to the crown, which
relates to the _weakness_ of our present government.[68]

Still, if there is any _fault_, it must be _in the assembly_; for,
says the petition, "if the executive part of our government should
seem in any case too weak, we conceive it is the duty of the
assembly, and in _their_ power, to strengthen it." This weakness,
however, you have just denied. "Disturbances you say _have_ been
speedily quieted, and the civil power supported," and thereby you
have deprived your insinuated charge against the assembly of its only
support. But is it not a fact known to you all, that the assembly
_did_ endeavour to strengthen the hands of the government? That, at
his honour's instance, they prepared and passed in a few hours a bill
for extending hither the act of parliament for dispersing rioters?
That they also passed and presented to him a militia bill, which he
refused, unless powers were thereby given him over the lives and
properties of the inhabitants, which the public good did not require;
and which their duty to their constituents would not permit them to
trust in the hands of any proprietary governor? You know the points,
gentlemen: they have been made public. Would you have had your
representatives give up those points? Do _you_ intend to give them
up, when at the next election _you_ are made assemblymen? If so, tell
it us honestly beforehand, that we may know what we are to expect
when we are about to choose you?

I come now to the last clause of your petition, where, with the
same wonderful sagacity with which you in another case discovered
the excellency of a speech you never heard, you undertake to
_characterise a petition_ [_from the_ assembly] _you own you never
saw_; and venture to assure his majesty, that it is "exceeding
grievous in its nature, that it by no means contains a proper
representation of the state of this province, and is repugnant to
the general sense of his numerous and loyal subjects in it." Are
then his majesty's "numerous and loyal subjects" in this province
all as great wizards as yourselves, and capable of knowing, without
seeing it, that a petition is repugnant to their general sense? But
the inconsistence of your petition, gentlemen, is not so much to be
wondered at; the _prayer_ of it is _still more_ extraordinary, "We
therefore most humbly pray, that your majesty would be graciously
pleased _wholly to disregard_ the said petition of the assembly."
What! without enquiry! without examination! without a hearing of
what the assembly might say in support of it! "wholly disregard" the
petition of your representatives in assembly, accompanied by other
petitions, signed by thousands of your fellow-subjects as loyal, if
not as wise and as good, as yourselves! Would you wish to see your
great and amiable prince act a part that could not become a dey
of Algiers? Do you, who are Americans, pray for a _precedent_ of
such contempt in the treatment of an American assembly! such "total
disregard" of their humble applications to the throne? Surely your
wisdoms here have overshot yourselves.--But as wisdom shows itself
not only in doing what is right, but in confessing and _amending_
what is wrong, I recommend the latter particularly to your present
attention; being persuaded of this consequence, that though you have
been mad enough to sign such a petition, you never will be fools
enough to present it.

There is one thing mentioned in the preface, which I find I omitted
to take notice of as I came along, _the refusal of the house to enter
Mr. Dickinson's protest_ on their minutes. This is mentioned in such
a manner there and in the newspapers, as to insinuate a charge of
some partiality and injustice in the assembly. But the _reasons_
were merely these, that though protesting may be a practice with
the lords of parliament, there is no instance of it in the house of
commons, whose proceedings are the model followed by the assemblies
of America; that there is no precedent of it on our votes, from the
beginning of our present constitution; and that the introducing
such a practice would be attended with inconveniences, as the
representatives in assembly are not, like the lords in parliament,
unaccountable to any constituents, and would therefore find it
necessary for their own justification, if the reasons of the minority
for being against a measure were admitted in the votes, to put there
likewise the reasons that induced the majority to be for it: whereby
the votes, which were intended only as a register of propositions and
determinations, would be filled with the disputes of members with
members, and the public business be thereby greatly retarded, if ever
brought to a period.

As that protest was a mere abstract of Mr. Dickinson's speech, every
particular of it will be found answered in the following speech of
Mr. Galloway, from which it is fit that I should no longer detain the
reader.[69]

FOOTNOTES:

[59] As I am very much unacquainted with the history and principles
of these provincial politics, I shall confine myself to some
imperfect anecdotes concerning the parties, &c. A speech, which Mr.
Dickinson had delivered in the Pensylvania assembly against the
abolition of the proprietary government, having been published, and
a preface having been written to it, as I think by a Dr. Smith, Mr.
Galloway's speech was held forth as a proper answer to that speech,
while the preface to it appeared balanced by the above preface from
Dr. Franklin. Mr. Galloway's speech, or probably the advertisement
that attended it, urged, I believe, Mr. Dickinson first to a
challenge, and then to a printed reply.--The controversy was quickly
republished in England, or at least the principal parts of it; and
it is from the English edition of Mr. Galloway's speech (printed in
London by Nichols in 1765) that I have copied the above.

These several gentlemen however seem, for a time, to have better
agreed in their subsequent opinions concerning American taxation
by Great Britain; Mr. Dickinson, in particular, having taken a
very spirited line in the Farmer's Letters and other pieces, which
procured him considerable reputation. The congress declaration,
nevertheless, for independence, was reported not to have given
perfect satisfaction at first, either to himself or to Mr. Galloway.
And in the event, Mr. Galloway thought proper to come over to General
Howe, and afterwards to embark for England. B. V.

[60] This act is intitled, An Act for granting to his Majesty the Sum
of One Hundred Thousand Pounds: striking the same in Bills of Credit,
and sinking the Bills by a Tax on all Estates real and personal.

[61] i. e. In England, I suppose, when the laws were brought home to
receive the king's assent. B. V.

[62] Possibly this word _where_, means _wherever_. B. V.

[63] This would have been done, and the money all sunk in the hands
of the people, if the agents, Benjamin Franklin, and Robert Charles,
had not interposed, and voluntarily, without authority from the
assembly so to do, but at their own risque, undertaken, that these
amendments should be made, or that they themselves would indemnify
the proprietaries from any damages they might sustain for want
thereof. An action which, as the prefacer says in another case,
"posterity perhaps may find a name for."

[64] It is not easy to guess from what source our proprietaries have
drawn their principles. Those who study law and justice as a science
have established it a maxim in equity, "Qui sentit commodum, sentire
debet et onus." And so consistent is this with the common sense of
mankind, that even our lowest untaught coblers and porters feel the
force of it in their own maxim (which they are honest enough never to
dispute) "Touch pot, touch penny."

[65] For a fuller account of this dispute the reader is referred to
the newspapers and votes of assembly.

[66] These words, "by completing the agreement," &c. are omitted
by the honest prefacer, in his account of the resolve, that they
might not interfere with his insinuation of the measure's being
impracticable, "have the proprietors, by any act of theirs, forfeited
the least tittle of what was granted them by his Majesty's royal
ancestors? Or can they be _deprived_ of their charter rights without
their consent?" &c. Sensible that these questions are impertinent, if
those rights are already sold.

[67] The prefacer, with great art, endeavours to represent this
number as insignificant. He says the petitioners were but 3500, and
that the province contains near three hundred thousand _souls_! His
reader is to imagine, that _two hundred and ninety six thousand
five hundred_ of them were applied to, and refused to sign it.
The truth is, that his number of souls is vastly exaggerated. The
dwelling-houses in the province in 1752 did not exceed 20,000.
Political arithmeticians reckon generally but five souls to a
house, one house with another; and therefore, allowing for houses
since built, there are not probably more than an hundred and ten
thousand souls in the province; that of these, scarce twenty two
thousand could with any propriety be petitioners. And considering
the scattered settlement of the province; the general inattention
of mankind, especially in new countries, to public affairs; and
the indefatigable pains taken by the proprietaries' new allies the
presbyterian clergy of Philadelphia, (who wrote circular letters to
every congregation in the county, to deter them from petitioning, by
dutiful intimations, that if we were reduced to a royal government,
it would be the "ruin of the province;") it is a wonder the number
(near a sixth part) was so great as it was. But if there had been
no such petitions, it would not have been material to the point.
The _assembly_ went upon another foundation. They had adjourned to
consult their constituents; they returned satisfied that the measure
was agreeable to them, and _nothing appeared to the contrary_.

[68] The assembly being called upon by the governor for their advice
on that occasion did, in a message, advise his sending for and
examining the magistrates of Lancaster county and borough, where the
murders were committed, in order to discover the actors; but neither
that nor any of the other measures recommended were ever taken.
Proclamations indeed were published, but soon discontinued.

[69] Mr. Galloway's speech is of course omitted here. _Editor._




  _Remarks on a late Protest against the Appointment of Mr. Franklin
  as Agent for this Province_ [of Pensylvania].


I have generally passed over, with a silent disregard, the _nameless_
abusive pieces that have been written against me; and though this
paper, called a _protest_, is signed by some respectable names, I
was, nevertheless, inclined to treat it with the same indifference;
but, as the assembly is therein reflected on upon my account, it is
thought more my duty to make some remarks upon it.

I would first observe then, that this mode of _protesting_ by the
minority, with a string of reasons against the proceedings of the
majority of the house of assembly, is quite new among us; the present
is the second we have had of the kind, and both within a few months.
It is unknown to the practice of the house of commons, or of any
house of representatives in America, that I have heard of; and seems
an affected imitation of the lords in parliament, which can by no
means become assemblymen of America. Hence appears the absurdity
of the complaint, that the house refused the protest an _entry_
on their minutes. The protesters know, that they are not, by any
custom or usage, intitled to such an entry; and that the practice
here is not only useless in itself, but would be highly inconvenient
to the house, since it would probably be thought necessary for the
majority also to enter their reasons, to justify themselves to their
constituents; whereby the minutes would be incumbered and the public
business obstructed. More especially will it be found inconvenient,
if such protests are made use of as a new form of libelling, as the
vehicles of personal malice, and as means of giving to private abuse
the appearance of a sanction as public acts. Your protest, gentlemen,
was therefore properly refused; and since it is no part of the
proceedings of assembly, one may with the more freedom examine it.

Your first reason against my appointment is, that you "believe me to
be the chief author of the measures pursued by the last assembly,
which have occasioned _such uneasiness_ and distraction among the
good people of this province." I shall not dispute my share in those
measures; I hope they are such as will in time do honour to all
that were concerned in them. But you seem mistaken in the order of
time: it was the uneasiness and distraction among the good people
of the province that occasioned the measures; the province was in
confusion before they were taken, and they were pursued in order to
prevent such uneasiness and distraction for the future. Make one
step farther back, and you will find proprietary injustice supported
by proprietary minions and creatures, the original cause of all our
uneasiness and distractions.

Another of your reasons is, "that I am, as you are informed, very
_unfavourably_ thought of by several of his _majesty's ministers_." I
apprehend, gentlemen, that your informer is mistaken. He indeed has
taken great pains to give unfavourable impressions of me, and perhaps
may flatter himself, that it is impossible so much true industry
should be totally without effect. His long success in maiming or
murdering all the reputations that stand in his way (which has been
the dear delight and constant employment of his life) may likewise
have given him some just ground for confidence, that he has, as
they call it, _done for me_, among the rest. But, as I said before,
I believe he is mistaken. For what have I done, that they should
think unfavourably of me? It cannot be my constantly and uniformly
promoting the measures of the crown, ever since I had any influence
in the province. It cannot, surely, be my promoting the change from a
proprietary to a royal government. If indeed I had, by speeches and
writings, endeavoured to make his majesty's government universally
odious in the province: if I had harangued by the week to all comers
and goers, on the pretended injustice and oppressions of royal
government, and the slavery of the people under it: if I had written
traitorous papers to this purpose, and got them translated into other
languages, to give his majesty's foreign subjects here those horrible
ideas of it: if I had declared, written, and printed, that "the
king's little finger we should find heavier than the proprietor's
whole loins," with regard to our liberties; _then indeed_ might the
ministers be supposed to think unfavourably of me. But these are not
exploits for a man, who holds a profitable office under the crown,
and can expect to hold it no longer than he behaves with the fidelity
and duty that becomes every good subject. They are only for officers
of proprietary appointment, who hold their commissions during his,
and not the king's pleasure; and who, by dividing among themselves
and their relations, offices of many thousands a year enjoyed by
proprietary favour, _feel_ where to place their loyalty. I wish they
were as good subjects to his majesty; and perhaps they may be so,
when the proprietary interferes no longer.

Another of your reasons is, "that the proposal of me for _an agent_
is extremely disagreeable to a very great number of the most serious
and reputable inhabitants of the province; and the _proof_ is, my
having been rejected at the last election, though I had represented
the city in assembly for fourteen years."

And do those of you, gentlemen, reproach me with this, who, among
near four thousand voters, had scarcely a score more than I had? It
seems then, that your _elections_ were very near being _rejections_,
and thereby furnishing the same proof in your case that you
produce in mine, of _your_ being likewise extremely disagreeable to
a very great number of the most serious and reputable people. Do
you, honourable sir, reproach me with this, who, for almost twice
fourteen years have been rejected (if _not being chosen_ is _to be
rejected_) by the same people? and (unable, with all your wealth and
connections, and the influence they give you, to obtain an election
in the county where you reside, and the city where you were born,
and are best known) have been obliged to accept a seat from one of
the out-counties, the remotest of the province!--It is known, sir,
to the persons who proposed me, that I was first chosen against my
inclination, and against my entreaties that I might be suffered
to remain a private man. In none of the fourteen elections you
mention, did I ever appear as a candidate. I never did, directly or
indirectly, solicit any man's vote. For six of the years in which
I was annually chosen, I was absent, residing in England; during
all which time, your secret and open attacks upon my character and
reputation were incessant; and yet you gained no ground. And can you
really, gentlemen, find matter of triumph in this _rejection_ as you
call it? A moment's reflection on the means by which it was obtained
must make you ashamed of it.

Not only my duty to the crown, in carrying the post-office act more
duly into execution, was made use of to exasperate the ignorant, as
if I was encreasing my own profits, by picking their pockets; but my
very zeal in opposing the murderers, and supporting the authority of
government; and even my humanity, with regard to the innocent Indians
under our protection, were mustered among my offences, to stir up
against me those religious bigots, who are of all savages the most
brutish. Add to this, the numberless falshoods propagated as truths,
and the many perjuries procured among the wretched rabble, brought to
swear themselves intitled to a vote: And yet so _poor a superiority_
obtained at all this expence of honour and conscience! can this,
gentlemen, be matter of triumph? Enjoy it then. Your exultation,
however, was short. Your artifices did not prevail every where; nor
your double tickets and whole boxes of forged votes. A great majority
of the new-chosen assembly were of the old members, and remain
uncorrupted. They still stood firm for the people, and will obtain
justice from the proprietaries. But what does that avail to you, who
are in the proprietary interest? And what comfort can it afford you,
when, by the assembly's choice of an agent, it appears that the same,
to you obnoxious, man (notwithstanding all your venomous invectives
against him) still retains so great a share of the public confidence?

But "this step, you say, gives you the more lively affliction, as it
is taken at the _very moment_ when you were informed by a member of
the house, that the governor had assured him of his having received
instructions from the proprietaries, to give his assent to the
taxation of their estates; in the _same manner_ that the estates
of other persons are to be taxed; and also _to confirm_, for the
public use, the several squares formerly _claimed_ by the city."
O the force of friendship! the power of interest! What politeness
they infuse into a writer, and what _delicate_ expressions they
produce!--The dispute between the proprietaries and us was about the
_quantum_, the _rate_ of their taxation, and not about the _manner_;
but now, when all the world condemns them for requiring a partial
exemption of their estates, and they are forced to submit to an
honest equality, it is called "_assenting_ to be taxed in the _same
manner_ with the people." Their _restitution_ of five public squares
in the plan of the city, which they had near forty years unjustly
and dishonourably seized and detained from us, (directing their
surveyor to map streets over them, in order to turn them into lots,
and their officers to sell a part of them;) this their _disgorging_
is softly called _confirming_ them for the public use; and instead
of the plain words "_formerly given_ to the city, by the first
proprietary, their father," we have the cautious pretty expression
of "formerly _claimed_ by the city:" Yes; not only _formerly_, but
_always_ claimed, ever since they were _promised_ and _given_ to
encourage the settlers; and ever will be _claimed_, till we are
put in actual possession of them. It is pleasant, however, to see
how lightly and tenderly you trip over these matters, as if you
trod upon eggs. But that "_very moment_," that precious moment!
Why was it so long delayed? Why were those healing instructions so
long withheld and concealed from the people? They were, it seems,
brought over by Mr. Allen:[70] intelligence was received by various
hands from London, that orders were sent by the proprietaries, from
which great hopes were entertained of an accommodation. Why was
the bringing and the delivery of such orders so long _denied_? The
reason is easily understood. Messieurs Barclays, friends to both
proprietaries and people, wished for that gentleman's happy arrival;
hoping his _influence_, added to the _power_ and _commissions_ the
proprietaries had vested him with, might prove effectual in restoring
harmony and tranquillity among us; but _he_, it seems, hoped his
_influence_ might do the business, without those additions. There
appeared on his arrival some prospect (from sundry circumstances) of
a _change_ to be made in the house by the approaching election. The
proprietary friends and creatures knew the heart of their master;
and how extremely disagreeable to him that _equal taxation_, that
_restitution_, and the other _concessions_ to be made for the sake of
a reconciliation, must necessarily be. They hoped therefore to spare
him all those mortifications, and thereby secure a greater portion
of his favour. Hence the instructions were not produced to the last
assembly, though they arrived before the September sitting, when the
governor was in town, and actually did business with the house. Nor
to the new assembly were they mentioned, till the "_very moment_,"
the fatal moment, when the house were on the point of choosing that
wicked adversary of the proprietary to be an _agent_ for the province
in England.

But I have, you say, a "fixed _enmity to the proprietaries_," and
"you believe it will _preclude all accommodation_ of our disputes
with them, even on just and reasonable terms." And why do you think
I have a fixed enmity to the proprietaries? I have never had any
personal difference with them. I am no land-jobber; and therefore
have never had any thing to do with their land-office or officers; if
I had, probably, like others, I might have been obliged to truckle
to their measures, or have had like causes of complaint. But our
private interests never clashed; and all their resentment against
me, and mine to them, has been on the public account. Let them do
justice to the people of Pensylvania, act honourably by the citizens
of Philadelphia, and become honest men; my enmity, if that's of
any consequence, ceases from the "_very moment_;" and, as soon as
I possibly can, I promise to love, honour and respect them. In the
mean time, why do you "believe it will preclude all _accommodation_
with them on just and reasonable terms?" Do you not boast, that their
gracious condescensions are in the hands of the governor; and that
"if this had been the usual time for business, his honour would have
sent them down in a message to the house." How then can my going
to England prevent this accommodation? The governor can call the
house when he pleases; and, one would think, that, at least in your
opinion, my being out of the way would be a favourable circumstance.
For then, by "cultivating the disposition shown by the proprietaries,
every _reasonable demand_ that can be made on the part of the people
might be obtained: in vigorously insisting on which, you promise to
unite most earnestly with the rest of the house." It seems then we
have "_reasonable demands_" to make, and, as you call them a little
higher, _equitable demands_. This is much for proprietary minions to
own; but you are all growing better, in imitation of your master,
which is indeed very commendable. And if the accommodation here
should fail, I hope, that though you dislike the person a majority
of two to one in the house have thought fit to appoint an agent,
you will nevertheless, in duty to your country, continue the noble
resolution of uniting with the rest of the house, in vigorously
insisting on that _equity_ and _justice_, which such an union will
undoubtedly obtain for us.

I pass over the trivial charge against the assembly, that they "acted
with _unnecessary haste_ in proceeding to this appointment, without
making a small adjournment," &c. and your affected apprehensions of
danger from that haste. The necessity of expedition on this occasion
is as obvious to every one out of doors, as it was to those within;
and the fears you mention are not, I fancy, considerable enough
to break your rest. I come then to your _high_ charge against me,
"that I heretofore ventured, _contrary_ to an act of assembly, to
place the public money in the stocks; whereby this province suffered
a loss of 6000_l._ and that sum, added to the 5000_l._ granted for my
expences, makes the whole cost of my former voyage to England amount
to _eleven thousand pounds_!" How wisely was that form in our laws
contrived, which, when a man is arraigned for his life, requires
the evidence to speak _the truth_, the _whole truth_, and _nothing
but the truth_! The reason is manifest. A falshood may destroy the
innocent, so may _part of a truth_ without _the whole_; and a mixture
of truth and falshood may be full as pernicious. You, Mr. Chief
Justice, and the other justices among the protesters, and you, sir,
who are a counsellor at law, must all of you be well acquainted with
this excellent form; and when you arraigned my reputation (dearer
to me than life) before the assembly, and now at the respectable
tribunal of the public, would it not have well become your honours
to have had some small regard at least to the spirit of that form?
You might have mentioned, that the direction of the act, to lodge
the money in the bank, subject to the drafts of the trustees of the
loan-office here, was impracticable; that the bank refused to receive
it on those terms, it being contrary to their settled rules to take
charge of money subject to the orders of unknown people living in
distant countries. You might have mentioned, that the house being
informed of this, and having no immediate call for the money, did
_themselves_ adopt the measure of placing it in the stocks, which
then were low, where it might on a peace produce a considerable
profit, and in the mean time accumulate an interest: that they even
passed a bill, directing the subsequent sums granted by parliament to
be placed with the former: that the measure was prudent and safe; and
that the loss arose, not from _placing_ the money _in_ the stocks,
but from the imprudent and unnecessary _drawing it out_ at the very
time when they were lowest, on some slight uncertain rumours of a
peace concluded: that if the assembly had let it remain another year,
instead of losing they would have gained _six thousand pounds_; and
that after all, since the exchange at which they sold their bills
was near _twenty per cent_ higher when they drew than when the
stocks were purchased, the loss was far from being so great as you
represent it. All these things you might have said; for they are, and
you know them to be, part of the _whole truth_; but they would have
spoiled your accusation. The late speaker of your honourable house,
Mr. Norris, (who has, I suppose, all my letters to him, and copies
of his own to me, relating to that transaction) can testify with how
much integrity and clearness I managed the whole affair. All the
house were sensible of it, being from time to time fully acquainted
with the facts. If I had gone to gaming in the stocks with the
public money, and through my fault a sum was lost, as your protest
would insinuate, why was I not censured and punished for it when I
returned? You, honourable sir, (my enemy of seven years standing) was
then in the house. You were appointed on the committee for examining
my accounts; you reported, that you found them just, and signed
that report.[71] I never solicited the employ of agent; I made no
bargain for my future service, when I was ordered to England by the
assembly; nor did they vote me any salary. I lived there near six
years at my own expence, and I made no charge or demand when I came
home. You, sir, of all others, was the very member that proposed (for
the honour and justice of the house) a compensation to be made me
of the _five thousand pounds_ you mention. Was it with an intent to
reproach me thus publicly for accepting it? I thanked the house for
it then, and I thank you now for proposing it: though you, who have
lived in England, can easily conceive, that besides the prejudice to
my private affairs by my absence, a _thousand pounds_ more would not
have reimbursed me. The money voted was immediately paid me. But if
I had occasioned the loss of _six thousand pounds_ to the province,
here was a fair opportunity of securing easily the greatest part
of it; why was not the _five thousand pounds_ deducted, and the
remainder called for? The reason is, this accusation was not then
invented. Permit me to add, that supposing the whole _eleven thousand
pounds_ an expence occasioned by my voyage to England, yet the
taxation of the proprietary estate now established will, when valued
by years purchase, be found in time an advantage to the public, far
exceeding that expence. And if the expence is at present a burthen,
the odium of it ought to lie on those, who, by their injustice, made
the voyage necessary; and not on me, who only submitted to the orders
of the house in undertaking it.

I am now to take leave (perhaps a last leave) of the country I
love, and in which I have spent the greatest part of my life.--ESTO
PERPETUA.--I wish every kind of prosperity to my friends,--and I
forgive my enemies.

  B. FRANKLIN.

  _Philadelphia, Nov. 5, 1764._

FOOTNOTES:

[70]

_Extract of a Letter, dated London, August 6, 1764, from David Barclay
and Sons, to Messieurs James and Drinker._

"We very much wish for William Allen's happy arrival on your side;
when we hope his influence, added to the _power_ and _commissions_
the proprietaries have invested him with, may prove effectual, in
restoring harmony and tranquillity among you, so much to be desired
by every well-wisher to your province. Pray be assured of our
sincerest and best wishes for the success of this salutary work,
and that nothing in our power, to contribute thereto, will ever be
wanting."

[71]

_Report of the Committee on Benjamin Franklin's Accounts._

"In obedience to the order of the house, we have examined the account
of Benjamin Franklin, Esq. with the vouchers to us produced in
support thereof, and do find the same account to be just, and that he
has expended, in the immediate service of this province, the sum of
_seven hundred and fourteen pounds, ten shillings and seven-pence_,
out of the sum of _fifteen hundred pounds_ sterling to him remitted
and paid, exclusive of any allowance or charge for his support and
services for the province.

  JOHN MORTON,     JOHN HUGHES,
  WILLIAM ALLEN,   SAMUEL RHOADS,
  JOHN ROSS,       JOHN WILKINSON,
  JOHN MOOR,       ISAAC PEARSON.
  JOSEPH FOX,

  February 19, 1763.

"The house taking the foregoing report of the committee of accounts
into consideration, and having spent some time therein,

  "RESOLVED,

"That the sum of _five hundred pounds_ sterling _per annum_ be
allowed and given to Benjamin Franklin, Esq. late agent for the
province of Pensylvania at the court of Great Britain, during his
absence of six years from his business and connections, in the
service of the public; and that the thanks of this house be also
given to the said gentleman by Mr. Speaker, from the chair; as
well for the faithful discharge of his duty to this province in
particular, as for the many and important services done America in
general, during his residence in Great Britain."

  _Thursday, March 31, 1763._

"Pursuant to a resolve of the nineteenth of last month, that the
thanks of this house be given to Benjamin Franklin, Esq. for his many
services not only to the province of Pensylvania, but to America in
general, during his late agency at the court of Great Britain; the
same were this day accordingly given in form from the chair.--To
which Mr. Franklin, respectfully addressing himself to the Speaker,
made answer, That he was thankful to the house, for the very
handsome and generous allowance they had been pleased to make him
for his services; but that the approbation of this house was, in his
estimation, far above every other kind of recompence." _Votes_, 1763.




  _Remarks on a Plan for the future Management of Indian Affairs[72]._


The regulations in this plan seem to me to be in general very good:
but some few appear to want explanation, or farther consideration.

_Clause_ 3. Is it intended by this clause, to prevent the trade that
Indians, living near the frontiers, may choose to carry on with the
inhabitants, by bringing their skins into the [English] settlements?
This prevention is hardly practicable; as such trade may be carried
on in many places out of the observation of government; the frontier
being of great extent, and the inhabitants thinly settled in the
woods, remote from each other. The Indians too do not every where
live in towns sufficiently numerous to encourage traders to reside
among them, but in scattered families, here and there, often shifting
their situation for the sake of better hunting; and if they _are_
near the English settlements, it would seem to them very hard to be
obliged to carry their skins for sale to remote towns or posts, when
they could dispose of them to their neighbours, with less trouble,
and to greater advantage; as the goods they want for them, are and
must be dearer at such remote posts.

4. The colony "laws for regulating Indian affairs or commerce" are
the result of long experience, made by people on the spot, interested
to make them good; and it would be well to consider the matter
thoroughly, before they are repealed, to make way for new untried
schemes.

By whom are they to be repealed? By the colony assemblies, or by
parliament? Some difficulty will arise here.

13. The districts seem too large for this. The Indians under the care
of the northern superintendant, by this plan, border on the colonies
of Nova Scotia, Quebec, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut,
New York, New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, Virginia: the
superintendant's situation, remote from many of these, may occasion
great inconvenience, if his consent is always to be necessary in such
cases.

14. This seems too much to be done, when the vastness of the district
is considered. If there were more districts and smaller, it might be
more practicable.

15 and 16. Are these agents or commissaries to try causes where life
is concerned? Would it not be better, to send the criminals into some
civil well settled government or colony for trial, where good juries
can be had?

18. "_Chief for the whole tribe; who shall constantly reside with the
commissary, &c._" Provision must then be made for his maintenance,
as particular Indians have no estates, but live by hunting, and
their public has no funds or revenues. Being used to rambling, it
would perhaps not be easy to find one, who would be obliged to this
constant residence; but it may be tried.

22. If the agent and his deputies, and the commissaries, are not to
trade, should it not be a part of their oath, that they will have no
concern in such trade, directly or indirectly? Private agreements
between them and the traders, for share of profits, should be guarded
against, and the same care taken to prevent, if possible, private
agreements between them and the purchasers of Indian lands.

31. ---- "or trading at any other post, &c." This should be so
expressed, as to make the master liable for the offence of the
servant; otherwise it will have no effect.

33. I doubt the settling of _tariffs_ will be a matter of difficulty.
There may be differences of fineness, goodness, and value, in the
goods of different traders, that cannot be properly allowed for by
general tariffs. And it seems contrary to the nature of commerce,
for government to interfere in the prices of commodities. Trade is a
voluntary thing between buyer and seller; in every article of which,
each exercises his own judgment, and is to please himself. Suppose
either Indian or trader is dissatisfied with the tariff, and refuses
barter on those terms, are the refusers to be compelled? if not, why
should an Indian be forbidden to take more goods for skins than your
tariff allows, if the trader is willing to give them, or a trader
more skins for his goods, if the Indian is willing to give them?
Where there are a number of different traders, the separate desire
of each to get more custom will operate in bringing down their goods
to a reasonable price. It therefore seems to me, that trade will
best find and make its own rates; and that government cannot well
interfere, unless it will take the whole trade into its own hands (as
in some colonies it does) and manage it by its own servants, at its
own risque.

38. I apprehend, that if the Indians cannot get _rum_ of fair
traders, it will be a great means of defeating all these regulations,
that direct the trade to be carried on at certain posts. The
countries and forests are so very large, it is scarce possible to
guard every part, so as to prevent unlicensed traders drawing the
Indians and the trade to themselves, by rum and other spiritous
liquors, which all savage people are so fond of. I think they will
generally trade where they can get rum, preferably to where it is
refused them; and the proposed prohibition will therefore be a great
encouragement to unlicensed traders, and promote such trade. If the
commissaries, or officers at the posts, can prevent the selling of
rum during the barter for other goods, and until the Indians are
about going away, it is perhaps all that is practicable or necessary.
The missionaries will, among other things, endeavour to prevail with
them to live soberly and avoid drunkenness.

39. The Indian trade, so far as _credit_ is concerned, has hitherto
been carried on wholly upon honour. They have among themselves no
such things as prisons or confinements for debt. This article seems
to imply, that an Indian may be compelled by law to pay a debt of
fifty shillings or under. Our legal method of compulsion is by
imprisonment: the Indians cannot and will not imprison one another;
and if we attempt to imprison them, I apprehend it would be generally
disliked by the nations, and occasion breaches. They have such
high ideas of the value of personal liberty, and such slight ones
of the value of personal property;[73] that they would think the
disproportion monstrous between the liberty of a man, and a debt of
a few shillings; and that it would be excessively inequitable and
unjust, to take away the one for a default in payment of the other.
It seems to me therefore best, to leave that matter on its present
footing; the debts _under_ fifty shillings as irrecoverable by law,
as this article proposes for the debts _above_ fifty shillings.
Debts of honour are generally as well paid as other debts. Where
no compulsion can be used, it is more disgraceful to be dishonest.
If the trader thinks his risque greater in trusting any particular
Indian, he will either not do it, or proportion his price to his
risque.

44. As the goods for the Indian trade all come from England, and the
peltry is chiefly brought to England; perhaps it will be best to lay
the duty here, on the exportation of the one, and the importation of
the other, to avoid meddling with the question, of the right to lay
duties in America by parliament here.

If it is thought proper to carry the trading part of this plan into
execution, would it not be well to _try it first in a few posts_,
to which the present colony laws for regulating the Indian trade do
not reach; that by experience its utility may be ascertained, or its
defects discovered and amended, before it is made general, and those
laws repealed to make way for it?--If the Indians find by experience,
that they are better used in their trade at the posts, under these
regulations, than at other places, may it not make them desirous of
having the regulations extended to other places; and when extended,
better satisfied with them upon reflection and comparison[74]?

FOOTNOTES:

[72] The plan remarked upon was under the consideration of ministry
before the close of the year 1766, and (as I am inclined to think)
after the commencement of 1765. I can go no nearer as to its date.

It is needless to enter into the particulars of it, as the remarks
explain themselves; except perhaps as to the following points. The
trade was to be open; there were to be two superintendants to it; in
the northern district the trade was to be carried on at fixed posts,
in the southern within the Indian town; the military were to have no
power over the superintendants or the Indian trade, even in war time,
unless with the superintendants' assent, or in great exigencies;
the superintendants, by themselves or deputies, were to make annual
visitations among the Indians, to see to justice, &c. and their
proceedings were to be very summary; and no credit was to be given to
the Indians beyond fifty shillings, for no higher debt was to be made
recoverable. B. V.

[73] For an account of the sentiments and manners of the Indians, see
an essay by our author in a subsequent part of this volume. _Editor._

[74] The editor has given the following memorandum of Indian
_fighting men_, inhabiting near the distant posts, in 1762; to
indulge the curious in future times. The paper is in Dr. Franklin's
hand-writing: but it must not be mistaken as containing a list of the
whole of the nations enumerated, but only such part of them as lived
near the places described. B. V.

A list of the number of fighting men of the different nations of
Indians, through which I (George Croghan) passed, living at or near
the several posts.

        SANDUSKY.

  Wyandotts and Mohickons                         200

        DETROIT.

  Poutauwautimies                       150
  Ottawas                               250
  Wyandotts                             250
  Cheapwas                              320       970

        MICHILEMAKINAC.

  Ottawas                               250
  Cheapwas                              400       650

        LA BAY.

  Meynomeneys                           110
  Pervons                               360
  Sax                                   300
  Reynard                               320      1090

        ST. JOSEPH'S.

  Poutauwautimies                       200
  Ottawas (some distance)               150       350

        THE MIAMIES.

  Mincamies or Twigtwees                          230

        OUITANON.

  Ouitanons                             200
  Thickapoose                           180
  Musquiton                              90
  Pyankishaws                           100       570

        SHAWANESE.

  At the lower town, on Scioto          240
  At the upper town, on Muskingum        60       300
                                                 ----
                                                 4360

There is a nation, back of the Bay, who used formerly to come there
to visit the French when they were in possession of that post, called
_La Sieu_, computed to be 2500 fighting men; who have this summer
sent word to Mr. Gorrell, who commands there, that they purpose
paying him a visit late this fall or in the spring.




PAPERS

ON

AMERICAN SUBJECTS,

DURING THE

_REVOLUTIONARY TROUBLES_.




PAPERS

ON

AMERICAN SUBJECTS,

DURING THE

_REVOLUTIONARY TROUBLES_.


  _Causes of the American Discontents before 1768[75]._

  The waves never rise but when the winds blow.

  PROV.

  SIR,

As the cause of the present ill humour in America, and of the
resolutions taken there to purchase less of our manufactures, does
not seem to be generally understood, it may afford some satisfaction
to your readers, if you give them the following short historical
state of facts.

From the time that the colonies were first considered as capable
of _granting aids to the crown_, down to the end of the last war,
it is said, that the constant mode of obtaining those aids was,
by requisition made from the crown, through its governors, to the
several assemblies, in circular letters from the secretary of state,
in his majesty's name, setting forth the occasion, requiring them
to take the matter into consideration, and expressing a reliance on
their prudence, duty, and affection to his majesty's government, that
they would grant such sums, or raise such numbers of men, as were
suitable to their respective circumstances.

The colonies, being accustomed to this method, have from time to time
granted money to the crown, or raised troops for its service, in
proportion to their abilities, and, during all the last war, beyond
their abilities; so that considerable sums were returned them yearly
by parliament, as they had exceeded their proportion.

Had this happy method of requisition been continued (a method that
left the king's subjects in those remote countries the pleasure
of showing their zeal and loyalty, and of imagining that they
recommended themselves to their sovereign by the liberality of their
voluntary grants) there is no doubt, but all the money that could
reasonably be expected to be raised from them in any manner, might
have been obtained, without the least heart-burning, offence, or
breach of the harmony of affections and interests, that so long
subsisted between the two countries.

It has been thought wisdom in a government exercising sovereignty
over different kinds of people, to have _some regard to prevailing
and established opinions_ among the people to be governed, wherever
such opinions might in their effects obstruct or promote public
measures. If they tend to obstruct public service, they are to be
changed, if possible, before we attempt to act against them; and they
can only be changed by reason and persuasion. But if public business
can be carried on without thwarting those opinions, if they can be,
on the contrary, made subservient to it; they are not unnecessarily
to be thwarted, how absurd such popular opinions may be in their
nature.

This had been the wisdom of our government with respect to raising
money in the colonies. It was well known, that the colonists
universally were of opinion, that no money could be levied from
English subjects but by their own consent, given by themselves or
their chosen representatives; that therefore whatever money was to be
raised from the people in the colonies must first be granted by their
assemblies, as the money raised in Britain is first to be granted by
the house of commons; that this right of granting their own money was
essential to English liberty; and that if any man, or body of men in
which they had no representative of their choosing, could tax them
at pleasure, they could not be said to have any property, any thing
they could call their own. But as these opinions did not hinder their
granting money voluntarily and amply, whenever the crown, by its
servants, came into their assemblies (as it does into its parliaments
of Britain or Ireland) and demanded aids; therefore that method was
chosen, rather than the hateful one of arbitrary taxes.

I do not undertake here to support these opinions of the Americans;
they have been refuted by a late act of parliament, declaring its own
power; which very parliament, however, showed wisely so much tender
regard to those inveterate prejudices, as to repeal a tax that had
militated against them. And those prejudices are still so fixed and
rooted in the Americans, that it has been supposed, not a single
man among them has been convinced of his error, even by that act of
parliament.

The person then, who first projected to lay aside the accustomed
method of requisition, and to raise money on America by _stamps_,
seems not to have acted wisely, in deviating from that method
(which the colonists looked upon as constitutional) and thwarting
unnecessarily the fixed prejudices of so great a number of the king's
subjects. It was not, however, for want of knowledge, that what he
was about to do would give them offence; he appears to have been
very sensible of this, and apprehensive that it might occasion some
disorders; to prevent or suppress which, he projected another bill,
that was brought in the same session with the stamp act, whereby
it was to be made lawful for military officers in the colonies to
quarter their soldiers in private houses. This seemed intended to awe
the people into a compliance with the other act. Great opposition
however being raised here against the bill by the agents from the
colonies and the merchants trading thither (the colonists declaring,
that under such a power in the army, no one could look on his house
as his own, or think he had a home, when soldiers might be thrust
into it and mixed with his family at the pleasure of an officer) that
part of the bill was dropped; but there still remained a clause, when
it passed into a law, to oblige the several assemblies to provide
quarters for the soldiers, furnishing them with firing, bedding,
candles, small beer or rum, and sundry other articles, at the expence
of the several provinces. And this act continued in force when the
stamp act was repealed; though, if obligatory on the assemblies, it
equally militated against the American principle above mentioned,
that money is not to be raised on English subjects without their
consent.

The colonies, nevertheless, being put into high good humour by the
repeal of the stamp act, chose to avoid a fresh dispute upon the
other, it being temporary and soon to expire, never, as they hoped,
to revive again; and in the mean time they, by various ways, in
different colonies, provided for the quartering of the troops, either
by acts of their own assemblies, without taking notice of the act
of parliament, or by some variety or small diminution, as of salt
and vinegar, in the supplies required by the act; that what they
did might appear a voluntary act of their own, and not done in due
obedience to an act of parliament, which, according to their ideas of
their rights, they thought hard to obey.

It might have been well if the matter had then passed without
notice; but a governor having written home an angry and aggravating
letter upon this conduct in the assembly of his province, the
outed [proposer[76]] of the stamp act and his adherents (then in
the opposition) raised such a clamour against America, as being in
rebellion, and against those who had been for the repeal of the stamp
act, as having thereby been encouragers of this supposed rebellion;
that it was thought necessary to enforce the quartering act by
another act of parliament, taking away from the province of New York
(which had been the most explicit in its refusal) all the powers of
legislation, till it should have complied with that act. The news
of which greatly alarmed the people every where in America, as the
language of such an act seemed to them to be--obey implicitly laws
made by the parliament of Great Britain to raise money on you without
your consent, or you shall enjoy no rights or privileges at all.

At the same time a person lately in high office[77] projected the
levying more money from America, by new duties on various articles
of our own manufacture (as glass, paper, painters' colours, &c.)
appointing a new board of customs, and sending over a set of
commissioners, with large salaries, to be established at Boston,
who were to have the care of collecting those duties, which were by
the act expressly mentioned to be intended for the payment of the
salaries of governors, judges, and other officers of the crown in
America; it being a pretty general opinion here, that those officers
ought not to depend on the people there, for any part of their
support.

It is not my intention to combat this opinion. But perhaps it may be
some satisfaction to your readers, to know what ideas the Americans
have on the subject. They say then, as to governors, that they
are not like princes whose posterity have an inheritance in the
government of a nation, and therefore an interest in its prosperity;
they are generally strangers to the provinces they are sent to
govern; have no estate, natural connection, or relation there, to
give them an affection for the country; that they come only to make
money as fast as they can; are sometimes men of vicious characters
and broken fortunes, sent by a minister merely to get them out of the
way; that as they intend staying in the country no longer than their
government continues, and purpose to leave no family behind them,
they are apt to be regardless of the good-will of the people, and
care not what is said or thought of them after they are gone. Their
situation at the same time gives them many opportunities of being
vexatious; and they are often so, notwithstanding their dependence
on the assemblies for all that part of their support, that does not
arise from fees established by law, but would probably be much more
so, if they were to be supported by money drawn from the people
without their consent or good-will, which is the professed design of
this new act. That if by means of these forced duties, government
is to be supported in America, without the intervention of the
assemblies, their assemblies will soon be looked upon as useless; and
a governor will not call them, as having nothing to hope from their
meeting, and perhaps something to fear from their inquiries into,
and remonstrances against, his mal-administration. That thus the
people will be deprived of their most essential right. That it being
(as at present) a governor's interest to cultivate the good-will,
by promoting the welfare of the people he governs, can be attended
with no prejudice to the mother-country, since all the laws he may be
prevailed on to give his assent to are subject to revision here, and
if reported against by the board of trade, are immediately repealed
by the crown; nor dare he pass any law contrary to his instructions;
as he holds his office during the pleasure of the crown, and his
securities are liable for the penalties of their bonds, if he
contravenes those instructions. This is what they say as to governors.

As to _judges_, they alledge, that being appointed from hence, and
holding their commissions not during good behaviour, as in Britain,
but during pleasure: all the weight of interest or influence would
be thrown into one of the scales (which ought to be held even) if
the salaries are also to be paid out of duties raised upon the
people without their consent, and independent of their assemblies
approbation or disapprobation of the judges behaviour. That it is
true, judges should be free from all influence; and therefore,
whenever government here will grant commissions to able and honest
judges during good behaviour, the assemblies will settle permanent
and ample salaries on them during their commissions; but at present,
they have no other means of getting rid of an ignorant or an unjust
judge (and some of scandalous characters have, they say, been
sometimes sent them) left, but by starving them out.

I do not suppose these reasonings of theirs will appear here to have
much weight. I do not produce them with an expectation of convincing
your readers. I relate them merely in pursuance of the task I have
imposed on myself, to be an impartial historian of American facts and
opinions. -- --

The colonists being thus greatly alarmed, as I said before, by the
news of the act for abolishing the legislature of New York, and the
imposition of these new duties, professedly for such disagreeable
purposes (accompanied by a new set of revenue officers, with large
appointments, which gave strong suspicions, that more business of
the same kind was soon to be provided for them, that they might
earn their salaries) began seriously to consider their situation;
and to revolve afresh in their minds, grievances, which, from their
respect and love for this country, they had long borne and seemed
almost willing to forget. They reflected how lightly the interest
of _all_ America had been estimated here, when the interests of
a _few_ of the inhabitants of Great Britain happened to have the
smallest competition with it. That the whole American people was
forbidden the advantage of a direct importation of wine, oil, and
fruit, from Portugal; but must take them loaded with all the expence
of a voyage one thousand leagues round about, being to be landed
first in England, to be re-shipped for America; expences amounting,
in war-time, at least to thirty pounds per cent more than otherwise
they would have been charged with; and all this merely, that a few
Portugal merchants in London may gain a commission on those goods
passing through their hands. (Portugal merchants, by the bye, that
can complain loudly of the smallest hardships laid on their trade by
foreigners, and yet even in the last year could oppose with all their
influence the giving ease to their fellow-subjects labouring under so
heavy an oppression!) That on a slight complaint of a few Virginia
merchants, nine colonies had been restrained from making paper-money,
become absolutely necessary to their internal commerce, from the
constant remittance of their gold and silver to Britain.--But not
only the interest of a particular body of _merchants_, but the
interest of any small body of British _tradesmen or artificers_ has
been found, they say, to outweigh that of all the king's subjects in
the colonies. There cannot be a stronger natural right than that of
a man's making the best profit he can of the natural produce of his
lands, provided he does not thereby hurt the state in general. Iron
is to be found every where in America, and beaver are the natural
produce of that country: hats, and nails and steel are wanted there
as well as here. It is of no importance to the common welfare of the
empire, whether a subject of the king gets his living by making hats
on this, or on that side of the water. Yet the hatters of England
have prevailed to obtain an act in their own favour, restraining
that manufacture in America; in order to oblige the Americans to
send their beaver to England to be manufactured, and purchase back
the hats, loaded with the charges of a double transportation. In
the same manner have a few nail-makers, and still a smaller body of
steel-makers (perhaps there are not half a dozen of these in England)
prevailed totally to forbid by an act of parliament the erecting of
slitting-mills, or steel furnaces in America; that the Americans may
be obliged to take all their nails for their buildings, and steel for
their tools, from these artificers, under the same disadvantages.[78]


Added to these, the Americans remembered the act authorizing the most
cruel insult that perhaps was ever offered by one people to another,
that of _emptying our gaols_ into their settlements; Scotland too
having within these two years obtained the privilege it had not
before, of sending its rogues and villains also to the plantations--I
say, reflecting on these things, they said one to another (their
newspapers are full of such discourses) "These people are not content
with making a monopoly of us (forbidding us to trade with any other
country of Europe, and compelling us to buy every thing of them,
though in many articles we could furnish ourselves ten, twenty, and
even to fifty per cent cheaper elsewhere;) but now they have as good
as declared they have a right to tax us ad libitum, internally and
externally; and that our constitutions and liberties shall all be
taken away, if we do not submit to that claim.

"They are not content with the high prices at which they sell us
their goods, but have now begun to enhance those prices by new
duties, and by the expensive apparatus of a new set of officers,
appear to intend an augmentation and multiplication of those
burthens, that shall still be more grievous to us. Our people have
been foolishly fond of their superfluous modes and manufactures,
to the impoverishing our own country, carrying off all our cash,
and loading us with debt; they will not suffer us to restrain the
luxury of our inhabitants, as they do that of their own, by laws:
they can make laws to discourage or prohibit the importation of
French superfluities: but though those of England are as ruinous to
us as the French ones are to them, if we make a law of that kind,
they immediately repeal it. Thus they get all our money from us by
trade; and every profit we can any where make by our fisheries,
our produce, or our commerce, centres finally with them;--but this
does not satisfy.--It is time then to take care of ourselves by
the best means in our power. Let us unite in solemn resolution and
engagements with and to each other, that we will give these new
officers as little trouble as possible, by not consuming the British
manufactures on which they are to levy the duties. Let us agree to
consume no more of their expensive gewgaws. Let us live frugally,
and let us industriously manufacture what we can for ourselves:
thus we shall be able honourably to discharge the debts we already
owe them; and after that, we may be able to keep some money in
our country, not only for the uses of our internal commerce, but
for the service of our gracious sovereign, whenever he shall have
occasion for it, and think proper to require it of us in the old
constitutional manner.--For notwithstanding the reproaches thrown
out against us in their public papers and pamphlets, notwithstanding
we have been reviled in their senate as rebels and traitors, we are
truly a loyal people. Scotland has had its rebellions, and England
its plots against the present royal family; but _America is untainted
with those crimes_; there is in it scarce a man, there is not a
single native of our country, who is not firmly attached to his King
by principle and by affection. But a new kind of loyalty seems to
be required of us, a loyalty to parliament; a loyalty, that is to
extend, it is said, to a surrender of all our properties, whenever
a house of commons, in which there is not a single member of our
chusing, shall think fit to grant them away without our consent, and
to a patient suffering the loss of our privileges as Englishmen, if
we cannot submit to make such surrender. We were separated too far
from Britain by the ocean, but we were united to it by respect and
love; so that we could at any time freely have spent our lives and
little fortunes in its cause: but this unhappy new system of politics
tends to dissolve those bands of union, and to sever us for ever."

These are the wild ravings of the, at present, half-distracted
Americans. To be sure, no reasonable man in England can approve
of such sentiments, and, as I said before, I do not pretend to
support or justify them: but I sincerely wish, for the sake of the
manufactures and commerce of Great Britain, and for the sake of the
strength, which a firm union with our growing colonies would give us,
that these people had never been thus needlessly driven out of their
senses.

  I am, yours, &c.

  F. S.[79]

FOOTNOTES:

[75] This letter first appeared in a London paper, January 7, 1768,
and was afterwards reprinted as a postscript to The true Sentiments
of America, printed for Almon, 1768. B. V.

[76] Mr. George Grenville. B. V.

[77] Mr. Charles Townsend. B. V.

[78] I shall here give the reader the note at the end of the fourth
paragraph of the farmer's seventh letter (written by Mr. Dickenson.)

"Many remarkable instances might be produced of the extraordinary
inattention with which bills of great importance concerning these
colonies have passed in parliament; which is owing, as it is
supposed, to the bills being brought in, by the persons who have
points to carry, so artfully framed, that it is not easy for the
members in general in the haste of business, to discover their
tendency.

"The following instances show the truth of this remark.

"When Mr. Grenville, in the violence of reformation and innovation,
formed the 4th George III. chap. 15th, for regulating the American
trade, the word 'Ireland' was dropt in the clause relating to our
iron and lumber, so that we could send these articles to no other
part of Europe, but to Great Britain. This was so unreasonable a
restriction, and so contrary to the sentiments of the legislature,
for many years before, that it is surprising it should not have been
taken notice of in the house. However, the bill passed into a law.
But when the matter was explained, this restriction was taken off in
a subsequent act.

"I cannot say, how long after the taking off this restriction, as I
have not the acts, but I think in less than eighteen months, another
act of parliament passed, in which the word 'Ireland' was left out as
it had been before. The matter being a second time explained was a
second time regulated.

"Now if it be considered, that the omission mentioned, struck off,
with one word, so very great a part of our trade, it must appear
remarkable: and equally so is the method by which rice became an
enumerated commodity, and therefore could be carried to Great Britain
only.

"The enumeration was obtained, (says Mr. Gee on Trade, p. 32) by
one Cole, a captain of a ship, employed by a company then trading
to Carolina; for several ships going from England thither, and
purchasing rice for Portugal, prevented the aforesaid captain of a
loading. Upon his coming home he possessed one Mr. Lowndes, a member
of parliament, (who was frequently employed to prepare bills) with an
opinion, that carrying rice directly to Portugal was a prejudice to
the trade of England, and privately got a clause into an act to make
it an enumerated commodity, by which means he secured a freight to
himself. But the consequence proved a vast loss to the nation.

"I find that this clause, 'privately got into an act, for the benefit
of Captain Cole, to the vast loss of the nation,' is foisted into the
3d Anne, chapter 5th, intitled, 'an act for granting to her majesty
a further subsidy on wines and merchandizes imported,' with which
it has no more connection, than with 34th Edward I. 34th and 35th
of Henry VIII. or the 25th Charles II. which provide that no person
shall be taxed but by himself or his representatives." B. V.

[79] F. S. possibly means Franklin's Seal. The paper, however, is
undoubtedly the production of Dr. Franklin.

In the _collection of tracts on the subjects of taxing the British
colonies in America, and regulating their trade_ (printed in 1773,
in 4 vols. 8vo. by Almon) I find _two_ papers, said there to have
been published originally in 1739, and to have been drawn up by a
club of American merchants, at the head of whom were Sir William
Keith (governor of Pensylvania), Joshua Gee, and many other eminent
persons. The _first_ paper proposes the raising a small body of
regular troops under the command of an officer appointed by the
crown and independent of the governors (who were nevertheless to
assist him in council on emergent occasions) in order to protect the
Indian trade, and take care of the boundaries and back settlements.
They were to be supported by a revenue to be established by _act of
parliament_, in America; which revenue was to arise out of a duty
on _stampt paper and parchment_. The _second_ paper goes into the
particulars of this proposed stamp duty, offers reasons for extending
it over all the British plantations, and recites its supposed
advantages. If these papers are at all genuine (a fact about which I
am not in the least informed) Mr. George Grenville does not appear to
have been original in conceiving _stamps_ as a proper subject for his
new tax. See ib. vol. I.  B. V.




  _Letter concerning the Gratitude of America, and the probability
  and effects of an Union with Great Britain; and concerning the
  Repeal or Suspension of the Stamp-Act._[80]


  _Jan. 6, 1766._

  SIR,

I have attentively perused the paper you sent me, and am of opinion,
that the measure it proposes, of an _union_ with the colonies, is a
wise one: but I doubt it will hardly be thought so here, till it is
too late to attempt it. The time has been, when the colonies would
have esteemed it a great advantage, as well as honour to them, to be
permitted to send members to parliament; and would have asked for
that privilege, if they could have had the least hopes of obtaining
it. The time is now come, when they are indifferent about it, and
will probably not ask it, though they might accept it if offered
them; and the time will come, when they will certainly refuse it.
But if such an union were now established (which methinks it highly
imports this country to establish) it would probably subsist as long
as Britain shall continue a nation. This people, however, is too
proud, and too much despises the Americans, to bear the thought of
admitting them to such an equitable participation in the government
of the whole. Then the _next best_ thing seems to be, leaving them
in the quiet enjoyment of their respective constitutions; and when
money is wanted for any public service in which they ought to bear
a part, calling upon them by requisitorial letters from the crown
(according to the long established custom) to grant such aids as
their loyalty shall dictate, and their abilities permit. The very
sensible and benevolent author of that paper, seems not to have
known, that such a constitutional custom subsists, and has always
hitherto been practised in America; or he would not have expressed
himself in this manner: "It is evident beyond a doubt, to the
intelligent and impartial, that after the very extraordinary efforts,
which were effectually made by Great Britain in the late war to
save the colonists from destruction, and attended of necessity with
an enormous load of debts in consequence, that the same colonists,
now firmly secured from foreign enemies, should be somehow induced
to contribute some proportion towards the exigencies of state in
future." This looks as if he conceived the war had been carried on
at the sole expence of Great Britain, and the colonies only reaped
the benefit, without hitherto sharing the burthen, and were therefore
now indebted to Britain on that account. And this is the same kind
of argument that is used by those who would fix on the colonies the
heavy charge of unreasonableness and ingratitude, which I think
your friend did not intend. Please to acquaint him then, that the
fact is not so: that every year during the war, requisitions were
made by the crown on the colonies for raising money and men; that
accordingly they made _more extraordinary_ efforts, in proportion
to their abilities, than Britain did; that they raised, paid and
clothed, for five or six years, near 25,000 men, besides providing
for other services (as building forts, equipping guard-ships, paying
transports, &c.) And that this was more than their fair proportion is
not merely an opinion of mine, but was the judgment of government
here, in full knowledge of all the facts; for the then ministry, to
make the burthen more equal, recommended the case to parliament, and
obtained a reimbursement to the Americans of about 200,000_l._ sterling
every year; which amounted only to about two fifths of their expence;
and great part of the rest lies still a load of debt upon them; heavy
taxes on all their estates, real and personal, being laid by acts
of their assemblies to discharge it, and yet will not discharge it
in many years. While then these burthens continue: while Britain
restrains the colonies in every branch of commerce and manufactures
that she thinks interferes with her own; while she drains the
colonies, by her trade with them, of all the cash they can procure
by every art and industry in any part of the world, and thus keeps
them always in her debt: (for they can make no law to discourage the
importation of your to _them_ ruinous superfluities, as _you_ do
the superfluities of France; since such a law would immediately be
reported against by your board of trade, and repealed by the crown:)
I say while these circumstances continue, and while there subsists
the established method of royal requisitions, for raising money on
them by their own assemblies on every proper occasion; can it be
necessary or prudent to distress and vex them by taxes laid here, in
a parliament wherein they have no representative, and in a manner
which they look upon to be unconstitutional and subversive of their
most valuable rights; and are they to be thought unreasonable and
ungrateful if they oppose such taxes? Wherewith, they say, shall we
show our loyalty to our gracious king, if our money is to be given
by others, without asking our consent? And if the parliament has a
right thus to take from us a penny in the pound, where is the line
drawn that bounds that right, and what shall hinder their calling
whenever they please for the other nineteen shillings and eleven
pence? Have we then any thing that we can call our own? It is more
than probable, that bringing representatives from the colonies to sit
and act here as members of parliament, thus uniting and consolidating
your dominions, would in a little time _remove_ these objections
and difficulties, and make the future government of the colonies
easy: but, till some such thing is done, I apprehend no taxes, laid
there by parliament here, will ever be collected, but such as must
be stained with blood: and I am sure the profit of such taxes will
never answer the expence of collecting them, and that the respect and
affection of the Americans to this country will in the struggle be
totally lost, perhaps never to be recovered; and therewith all the
commercial and political advantages, that might have attended the
continuance of this respect and this affection.

In my own private judgment I think an immediate repeal of the
stamp-act would be the best measure for _this_ country; but a
suspension of it for three years, the best for _that_. The _repeal_
would fill them with joy and gratitude, re-establish their respect
and veneration for parliament, restore at once their ancient and
natural love for this country, and their regard for every thing
that comes from it; hence the trade would be renewed in all its
branches; they would again indulge in all the expensive superfluities
you supply them with, and their own new assumed home industry
would languish. But the _suspension_, though it might continue
their fears and anxieties, would at the same time keep up their
resolutions of industry and frugality; which in two or three years
would grow into habits, to their lasting advantage. However, as the
repeal will probably not be now agreed to,[81] from what I think a
mistaken opinion, that the honour and dignity of government is better
supported by persisting in a wrong measure once entered into, than
by rectifying an error as soon as it is discovered; we must allow
the next best thing for the advantage of both countries is, the
suspension; for as to executing the act by force, it is madness, and
will be ruin to the whole.

The rest of your friend's reasonings and propositions appear to me
truly just and judicious; I will therefore only add, that I am as
desirous of his acquaintance and intimacy, as he was of my opinion.

  I am, with much esteem,

  Your obliged friend.

FOOTNOTES:

[80] The name of the person to whom this letter is addressed cannot
be made out in the original copy. The letter, to which it is a reply,
appears to have contained the letter of some third person equally
unknown to the editor. B. V.

[81] It was however agreed to in the same year, viz. in 1766. B. V.




  _Letter from Governor Pownall to Dr. Franklin, concerning an equal
  communication of rights, privileges, &c. to America by Great
  Britain._[82]


  DEAR SIR,

The following _objection_ against communicating to the colonies the
rights, privileges, and powers of the realm, as to parts of the
realm, has been made. I have been endeavouring to obviate it, and I
communicate [it] to you, in hopes of your promised assistance.

If, _say the objectors_, we communicate to the colonies the power
of sending representatives, and in consequence expect them to
participate in an _equal share and proportion_ of all our taxes, we
must grant to them all the powers of trade and manufacturing, which
any other parts of the realm within the isle of Great Britain enjoy:
if so, perchance the profits of the Atlantic commerce may converge to
some centre in America; to Boston, New-York, Philadelphia, or to some
of the isles: if so, then the natural and artificial produce of the
colonies, and in course of consequences the landed interest of the
colonies, will be promoted; while the natural and artificial produce
and landed interest of Great Britain will be depressed, to its utter
ruin and destruction; and consequently the balance of the power of
government, although still _within the realm_, will be _locally_
transferred from Great Britain to the colonies. Which consequence,
however it may suit a citizen of the world, must be folly and madness
to a Briton.--My fit is gone off, and though weak, both from the gout
and a concomitant and very ugly fever, I am much better.--Would be
glad to see you.

  Your friend,

  J. POWNALL.

FOOTNOTE:

[82] This letter bears no date. It was written possibly about the
time that governor Pownall was engaged in publishing his book on the
_administration of the colonies_. B. V.




  _On the back of the foregoing letter of Governor Pownall, are the
  following minutes, by Dr. Franklin._


This _objection_ goes upon the supposition, that whatever the
colonies gain, Britain must lose; and that if the _colonies_ can be
kept from gaining an advantage, _Britain will gain it_:--

If the colonies are fitter for a particular trade than Britain, they
should have it, and Britain apply to what it is more fit for. The
whole empire is a gainer. And if Britain is not so fit or so well
situated for a particular advantage, _other_ countries will get
it, _if the colonies do not_. Thus Ireland was forbid the woollen
manufacture and remains poor: but this has given to the French the
trade and wealth Ireland might have gained for the British empire.

The government cannot _long_ be retained without the union. Which is
best (supposing your case) to have a total separation, or a change
of the seat of government?--It by no means follows, that promoting
and advancing the landed interest in America will depress that
of Britain: the contrary has always been the fact. Advantageous
situations and circumstances will always secure and fix manufactures:
Sheffield against all Europe for these 300 years past.--

Impracticability.

Danger of innovation.

       *       *       *       *       *




  _The Examination of Dr. Benjamin Franklin before the English House
  of Commons, in February, 1766, relative to the Repeal of the
  American Stamp Act._[83]

_Q._ What is your name, and place of abode?

_A._ Franklin, of Philadelphia.

_Q._ Do the Americans pay any considerable taxes among themselves?

_A._ Certainly many, and very heavy taxes.

_Q._ What are the present taxes in Pensylvania, laid by the laws of
the colony?

_A._ There are taxes on all estates real and personal; a poll tax; a
tax on all offices, professions, trades and businesses, according to
their profits; an excise on all wine, rum, and other spirits; and a
duty of ten pounds per head on all negroes imported, with some other
duties.

_Q._ For what purposes are those taxes laid?

_A._ For the support of the civil and military establishments of the
country, and to discharge the heavy debt contracted in the last war.

_Q._ How long are those taxes to continue?

_A._ Those for discharging the debt are to continue till 1772, and
longer, if the debt should not be then all discharged. The others
must always continue.

_Q._ Was it not expected that the debt would have been sooner
discharged?

_A._ It was, when the peace was made with France and Spain. But a
fresh war breaking out with the Indians, a fresh load of debt was
incurred; and the taxes, of course, continued longer by a new law.

_Q._ Are not all the people very able to pay those taxes?

_A._ No. The frontier counties, all along the continent, having been
frequently ravaged by the enemy and greatly impoverished, are able
to pay very little tax. And therefore, in consideration of their
distresses, our late tax laws do expressly favour those counties,
excusing the sufferers; and I suppose the same is done in other
governments.

_Q._ Are not you concerned in the management of the _post-office_ in
America?

_A._ Yes. I am deputy post-master general of North America.

_Q._ Don't you think the distribution of stamps _by post_ to all the
inhabitants very practicable, if there was no opposition?

_A._ The posts only go along the sea-coasts; they do not, except in a
few instances, go back into the country; and if they did, sending for
stamps by post would occasion an expence of postage, amounting, in
many cases, to much more than that of the stamps themselves.

_Q._ Are you acquainted with Newfoundland?

_A._ I never was there.

_Q._ Do you know whether there are any post-roads on that island?

_A._ I have heard that there are no roads at all, but that the
communication between one settlement and another is by sea only.

_Q._ Can you disperse the stamps by post in Canada?

_A._ There is only a post between Montreal and Quebec. The
inhabitants live so scattered and remote from each other in that vast
country, that posts cannot be supported among them, and therefore
they cannot get stamps per post. The _English colonies_ too along the
frontiers are very thinly settled.

_Q._ From the thinness of the back settlements, would not the stamp
act be extremely inconvenient to the inhabitants, if executed?

_A._ To be sure it would; as many of the inhabitants could not get
stamps when they had occasion for them, without taking long journeys,
and spending perhaps three or four pounds, that the crown might get
six-pence.

_Q._ Are not the colonies, from their circumstances, very able to pay
the stamp duty?

_A._ In my opinion there is not gold and silver enough in the
colonies to pay the stamp duty for one year.[84]

_Q._ Don't you know that the money arising from the stamps was all to
be laid out in America?

_A._ I know it is appropriated by the act to the American service;
but it will be spent in the conquered colonies, where the soldiers
are; not in the colonies that pay it.

_Q._ Is there not a balance of trade due from the colonies where the
troops are posted, that will bring back the money to the old colonies?

_A._ I think not. I believe very little would come back. I know
of no trade likely to bring it back. I think it would come from
the colonies where it was spent, directly to England; for I have
always observed, that in every colony the more plenty the means of
remittance to England, the more goods are sent for, and the more
trade with England carried on.

_Q._ What number of white inhabitants do you think there are in
Pensylvania?

_A._ I suppose there may be about one hundred and sixty thousand.

_Q._ What number of them are Quakers?

_A._ Perhaps a third.

_Q._ What number of Germans?

_A._ Perhaps another third; but I cannot speak with certainty.

_Q._ Have any number of the Germans seen service, as soldiers, in
Europe?

_A._ Yes, many of them, both in Europe and America.

_Q._ Are they as much dissatisfied with the stamp duty as the English?

_A._ Yes, and more; and with reason, as their stamps are, in many
cases, to be double[85].

_Q._ How many white men do you suppose there are in North America?

_A._ About three hundred thousand, from sixteen to sixty years of
age[86].

_Q._ What may be the amount of one year's imports into Pensylvania
from Britain?

_A._ I have been informed that our merchants compute the imports from
Britain to be above 500,000_l._

_Q._ What may be the amount of the produce of your province exported
to Britain?

_A._ It must be small, as we produce little that is wanted in
Britain. I suppose it cannot exceed 40,000_l._

_Q._ How then do you pay the balance?

_A._ The balance is paid by our produce carried to the West Indies
(and sold in our own islands, or to the French, Spaniards, Danes,
and Dutch)--by the same [produce] carried to other colonies in North
America, (as to New England, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Carolina,
and Georgia)--by the same, carried to different parts of Europe, (as
Spain, Portugal, and Italy.) In all which places we receive either
money, bills of exchange, or commodities that suit for remittance to
Britain; which, together with all the profits on the industry of our
merchants and mariners, arising in those circuitous voyages, and the
freights made by their ships, centre finally in Britain to discharge
the balance, and pay for British manufactures continually used in the
province, or sold to foreigners by our traders.

_Q._ Have you heard of any difficulties lately laid on the Spanish
trade?

_A._ Yes, I have heard that it has been greatly obstructed by some
new regulations, and by the English men of war and cutters stationed
all along the coast in America.

_Q._ Do you think it right that America should be protected by this
country, and pay no part of the expence?

_A._ That is not the case. The colonies raised, clothed, and paid,
during the last war, near twenty-five thousand men, and spent many
millions.

_Q._ Were you not reimbursed by parliament?

_A._ We were only reimbursed what, in your opinion, we had advanced
beyond our proportion, or beyond what might reasonably be expected
from us; and it was a very small part of what we spent. Pensylvania,
in particular, disbursed about 500,000_l._ and the reimbursements, in
the whole, did not exceed 60,000_l._

_Q._ You have said, that you pay heavy taxes in Pensylvania, what do
they amount to in the pound?

_A._ The tax on all estates, real and personal, is eighteen pence in
the pound, fully rated; and the tax on the profits of trades and
professions, with other taxes, do, I suppose, make full half-a-crown
in the pound.

_Q._ Do you know any thing of the _rate of exchange in_ Pensylvania,
and whether it has fallen lately?

_A._ It is commonly from one hundred and seventy to one hundred
and seventy-five. I have heard, that it has fallen lately from one
hundred and seventy-five to one hundred sixty-two and a half; owing,
I suppose, to their lessening their orders for goods; and when their
debts to this country are paid, I think the exchange will probably be
at par.

_Q._ Do not you think the people of America would submit to pay the
stamp duty, if it was moderated?

_A._ No, never, unless compelled by force of arms.

_Q._ Are not the taxes in Pensylvania laid on unequally, in order to
burthen the English trade; particularly the tax on professions and
business?

_A._ It is not more burthensome in proportion, than the tax on lands.
It is intended, and supposed to take an equal proportion of profits.

_Q._ How is the assembly composed? Of what kinds of people are the
members; landholders or traders?

_A._ It is composed of landholders, merchants, and artificers.

_Q._ Are not the majority landholders?

_A._ I believe they are.

_Q._ Do not they, as much as possible, shift the tax off from the
land, to ease that, and lay the burthen heavier on trade?

_A._ I have never understood it so. I never heard such a thing
suggested. And indeed an attempt of that kind could answer no
purpose. The merchant or trader is always skilled in figures, and
ready with his pen and ink. If unequal burthens are laid on his
trade, he puts an additional price on his goods; and the consumers,
who are chiefly landholders, finally pay the greatest part, if not
the whole.

_Q._ What was the temper of America towards Great Britain _before the
year_ 1763[87]?

_A._ The best in the world. They submitted willingly to the
government of the crown, and paid, in their courts, obedience to
acts of parliament. Numerous as the people are in the several old
provinces, they cost you nothing in forts, citadels, garrisons,
or armies, to keep them in subjection. They were governed by this
country at the expence only of a little pen, ink, and paper: they
were led by a thread. They had not only a respect, but an affection
for Great Britain; for its laws, its customs, and manners, and even
a fondness for its fashions, that greatly increased the commerce.
Natives of Britain were always treated with particular regard; to be
an _Old England-man_ was, of itself, a character of some respect, and
gave a kind of rank among us.

_Q._ And what is their temper now?

_A._ O, very much altered.

_Q._ Did you ever hear the authority of parliament to make laws for
America questioned till lately?

_A._ The authority of parliament was allowed to be valid in all laws,
except such as should lay internal taxes. It was never disputed in
laying duties to regulate commerce.

_Q._ In what proportion hath population increased in America?

_A._ I think the inhabitants of all the provinces together, taken at
a medium, double in about twenty-five years. But their demand for
British manufactures increases much faster; as the consumption is not
merely in proportion to their numbers, but grows with the growing
abilities of the same numbers to pay for them. In 1723, the whole
importation from Britain to Pensylvania was but about 15,000_l._
sterling; it is now near half a million.

_Q._ In what light did the people of America use to consider the
parliament of Great Britain?

_A._ They considered the parliament as the great bulwark and
security of their liberties and privileges, and always spoke of it
with the utmost respect and veneration. Arbitrary ministers, they
thought, might possibly, at times, attempt to oppress them; but they
relied on it, that the parliament, on application, would always give
redress. They remembered, with gratitude, a strong instance of this,
when a bill was brought into parliament, with a clause, to make royal
instructions laws in the colonies, which the house of commons would
not pass, and it was thrown out.

_Q._ And have they not still the same respect for parliament?

_A._ No, it is greatly lessened.

_Q._ To what causes is that owing?

_A._ To a concurrence of causes; the restraints lately laid on their
trade, by which the bringing of foreign gold and silver into [the]
colonies was prevented; the prohibition of making paper-money among
themselves,[88] and then demanding a new and heavy tax by stamps,
taking away, at the same time, trials by juries, and refusing to
receive and hear their humble petitions.

_Q._ Don't you think they would submit to the stamp act, if it was
modified, the obnoxious parts taken out, and the duty reduced to some
particulars, of small moment?

_A._ No, they will never submit to it.

_Q._ What do you think is the reason that the people in America
increase faster than in England?

_A._ Because they marry younger, and more generally.

_Q._ Why so?

_A._ Because any young couple, that are industrious, may easily
obtain land of their own, on which they can raise a family.

_Q._ Are not the lower rank of people more at their ease in America
than in England?

_A._ They may be so, if they are sober and diligent; as they are
better paid for their labour.

_Q._ What is your opinion of a future tax, imposed on the same
principle with that of the stamp act? how would the Americans receive
it?

_A._ Just as they do this. They would not pay it.

_Q._ Have not you heard of the resolutions of this house, and of
the house of lords, asserting the right of parliament relating to
America, including a power to tax the people there?

_A._ Yes, I have heard of such resolutions.

_Q._ What will be the opinion of the Americans on those resolutions?

_A._ They will think them unconstitutional and unjust.

_Q._ Was it an opinion in America before 1763, that the parliament
had no right to lay taxes and duties there?

_A._ I never heard any objection to the right of laying duties to
regulate commerce, but a right to lay internal taxes was never
supposed to be in parliament, as we are not represented there.

_Q._ On what do you found your opinion, that the people in America
made any such distinction?

_A._ I know that whenever the subject has occurred in conversation
where I have been present, it has appeared to be the opinion of every
one, that we could not be taxed in a parliament where we were not
represented. But the payment of duties laid by act of parliament as
regulations of commerce, was never disputed.

_Q._ But can you name any act of assembly, or public act of any of
your governments, that made such distinction?

_A._ I do not know that there was any; I think there was never an
occasion to make any such act, till now that you have attempted to
tax us: _that_ has occasioned resolutions of assembly, declaring the
distinction, in which I think every assembly on the continent, and
every member in every assembly, have been unanimous.

_Q._ What then could occasion conversations on that subject before
that time?

_A._ There was in 1754 a proposition made (I think it came from
hence) that in case of a war, which was then apprehended, the
governors of the colonies should meet, and order the levying of
troops, building of forts, and taking every other necessary measure
for the general defence; and should draw on the treasury here for the
sums expended; which were afterwards to be raised in the colonies
by a general tax, to be laid on them by _act of parliament_. This
occasioned a good deal of conversation on the subject; and the
general opinion was, that the parliament neither would nor could
lay any tax on us, till we were duly represented in parliament;
because it was not just, nor agreeable to the nature of an English
constitution.

_Q._ Don't you know there was a time in New York, when it was under
consideration to make an application to parliament to lay taxes on
that colony, upon a deficiency arising from the assembly's refusing
or neglecting to raise the necessary supplies for the support of the
civil government?

_A._ I never heard of it.

_Q._ There was such an application under consideration in New
York:--and do you apprehend they could suppose the right of
parliament to lay a tax in America was only local, and confined to
the case of a deficiency in a particular colony, by a refusal of its
assembly to raise the necessary supplies?

_A._ They could not suppose such a case, as that the assembly would
not raise the necessary supplies to support its own government. An
assembly that would refuse it must want common sense; which cannot be
supposed. I think there was never any such case at New York, and that
it must be a misrepresentation, or the fact must be misunderstood.
I know there have been some attempts, by ministerial instructions
from hence, to oblige the assemblies to settle permanent salaries
on governors, which they wisely refused to do; but I believe no
assembly of New York, or any other colony, ever refused duly to
support government by proper allowances, from time to time, to public
officers.

_Q._ But in case a governor, acting by instruction, should call on
an assembly to raise the necessary supplies, and the assembly should
refuse to do it, do you not think it would then be for the good of
the people of the colony, as well as necessary to government, that
the parliament should tax them?

_A._ I do not think it would be necessary. If an assembly could
possibly be so absurd, as to refuse raising the supplies requisite
for the maintenance of government among them, they could not long
remain in such a situation; the disorders and confusion occasioned by
it must soon bring them to reason.

_Q._ If it should not, ought not the right to be in Great Britain of
applying a remedy?

_A._ A right, only to be used in such a case, I should have no
objection to; supposing it to be used merely for the good of the
people of the colony.

_Q._ But who is to judge of that, Britain or the colony?

_A._ Those that feel can best judge.

_Q._ You say the colonies have always submitted to external taxes,
and object to the right of parliament only in laying internal taxes;
now can you show, that there is any kind of _difference between the
two taxes_ to the colony on which they may be laid?

_A._ I think the difference is very great. An _external_ tax is a
duty laid on commodities imported; that duty is added to the first
cost and other charges on the commodity, and, when it is offered to
sale, makes a part of the price. If the people do not like it at
that price, they refuse it; they are not obliged to pay it. But an
_internal_ tax is forced from the people without their consent, if
not laid by their own representatives. The stamp act says, we shall
have no commerce, make no exchange of property with each other,
neither purchase nor grant, nor recover debts; we shall neither marry
nor make our wills, unless we pay such and such sums; and thus it is
intended to extort our money from us, or ruin us by the consequences
of refusing to pay it.

_Q._ But supposing the external tax or duty to be laid on the
necessaries of life imported into your colony, will not that be the
same thing in its effects as an internal tax?

_A._ I do not know a single article imported into the _northern_
colonies, but what they can either do without, or make themselves.

_Q._ Don't you think cloth from England absolutely necessary to them?

_A._ No, by no means absolutely necessary; with industry and good
management, they may very well supply themselves with all they want.

_Q._ Will it not take a long time to establish that manufacture among
them; and must they not in the mean while suffer greatly?

_A._ I think not. They have made a surprising progress already. And I
am of opinion, that before their old clothes are worn out, they will
have new ones of their own making.

_Q._ Can they possibly find wool enough in North America?

_A._ They have taken steps to increase the wool. They entered into
general combinations to eat no more lamb; and very few lambs were
killed last year. This course, persisted in, will soon make a
prodigious difference in the quantity of wool. And the establishing
of great manufactories, like those in the clothing towns here, is not
necessary, as it is where the business is to be carried on for the
purposes of trade. The people will all spin, and work for themselves,
in their own houses.

_Q._ Can there be wool and manufacture enough in one or two years?

_A._ In three years, I think there may.

_Q._ Does not the severity of the winter, in the northern colonies,
occasion the wool to be of bad quality?

_A._ No, the wool is very fine and good.

_Q._ In the more southern colonies, as in Virginia, don't you know,
that the wool is coarse, and only a kind of hair?

_A._ I don't know it. I never heard it. Yet I have been sometimes
in Virginia. I cannot say I ever took particular notice of the wool
there, but I believe it is good, though I cannot speak positively of
it; but Virginia, and the colonies south of it, have less occasion
for wool; their winters are short, and not very severe; and they
can very well clothe themselves with linen and cotton of their own
raising for the rest of the year.

_Q._ Are not the people in the more northern colonies obliged to
fodder their sheep all the winter?

_A._ In some of the most northern colonies they may be obliged to do
it, some part of the winter.

_Q._ Considering the resolutions of parliament[89], _as to the
right_; do you think, if the stamp act is repealed, that the North
Americans will be satisfied?

_A._ I believe they will.

_Q._ Why do you think so?

_A._ I think the resolutions of _right_ will give them very little
concern, if they are never attempted to be carried into practice. The
colonies will probably consider themselves in the same situation, in
that respect, with Ireland: they know you claim the same right with
regard to Ireland, but you never exercise it. And they may believe
you never will exercise it in the colonies, any more than in Ireland,
unless on some very extraordinary occasion.

_Q._ But who are to be the judges of that extraordinary occasion? Is
not the parliament?

_A._ Though the parliament may judge of the occasion, the people will
think it can never exercise such right, till representatives from
the colonies are admitted into parliament; and that, whenever the
occasion arises, representatives _will_ be ordered.

_Q._ Did you never hear that Maryland, during the last war, had
refused to furnish a quota towards the common defence?

_A._ Maryland has been much misrepresented in that matter. Maryland,
to my knowledge, never refused to contribute, or grant aids to the
crown. The assemblies, every year during the war, voted considerable
sums, and formed bills to raise them. The bills were, according
to the constitution of that province, sent up to the council, or
upper house, for concurrence, that they might be presented to the
governor, in order to be enacted into laws. Unhappy disputes between
the two houses--arising from the defects of that constitution
principally--rendered all the bills but one or two abortive. The
proprietary's council rejected them. It is true, Maryland did
contribute its proportion; but it was, in my opinion, the fault of
the government, not of the people.

_Q._ Was it not talked of in the other provinces as a proper measure,
to apply to parliament to compel them?

_A._ I have heard such discourse; but as it was well known, that the
people were not to blame, no such application was ever made, nor any
step taken towards it.

_Q._ Was it not proposed at a public meeting?

_A._ Not that I know of.

_Q._ Do you remember the abolishing of the paper-currency in New
England, by act of assembly?

_A._ I do remember its being abolished in the Massachusett's Bay.

_Q._ Was not lieutenant-governor Hutchinson principally concerned in
that transaction?

_A._ I have heard so.

_Q._ Was it not at that time a very unpopular law?

_A._ I believe it might, though I can say little about it, as I lived
at a distance from that province.

_Q._ Was not the _scarcity of gold and silver_ an argument used
against abolishing the paper?

_A._ I suppose it was[90].

_Q._ What is the present opinion there of that law? Is it as
unpopular as it was at first?

_A._ I think it is not.

_Q._ Have not instructions from hence been sometimes sent over to
governors, highly oppressive and unpolitical?

_A._ Yes.

_Q._ Have not some governors dispensed with them for that reason?

_A._ Yes, I have heard so.

_Q._ Did the Americans ever dispute the controling power of
parliament to regulate the commerce?

_A._ No.

_Q._ Can any thing less than a military force carry the stamp act
into execution?

_A._ I do not see how a military force can be applied to that purpose.

_Q._ Why may it not?

_A._ Suppose a military force sent into America, they will find
nobody in arms; what are they then to do? They cannot force a man
to take stamps who chooses to do without them. They will not find a
rebellion: they may indeed make one.

_Q._ If the act is not repealed, what do you think will be the
consequences?

_A._ A total loss of the respect and affection the people of America
bear to this country, and of all the commerce that depends on that
respect and affection.

_Q._ How can the commerce be affected?

_A._ You will find, that if the act is not repealed, they will take
very little of your manufactures in a short time.

_Q._ Is it in their power to do without them?

_A._ I think they may very well do without them.

_Q._ Is it their interest not to take them?

_A._ The goods they take from Britain are either necessaries,
mere conveniences, or superfluities. The first, as cloth, &c.
with a little industry they can make at home; the second they can
do without, till they are able to provide them among themselves;
and the last, which are much the greatest part, they will strike
off immediately. They are mere articles of fashion, purchased and
consumed, because the fashion in a respected country; but will now be
detested and rejected. The people have already struck off, by general
agreement, the use of all goods fashionable in mournings, and many
thousand pounds worth are sent back as unsaleable.

_Q._ Is it their interest to make cloth at home?

_A._ I think they may at present get it cheaper from Britain, I mean
of the same fineness and neatness of workmanship: but when one
considers other circumstances, the restraints on their trade, and the
difficulty of making remittances, it is their interest to make every
thing.

_Q._ Suppose an act of internal regulations connected with a tax, how
would they receive it?

_A._ I think it would be objected to.

_Q._ Then no regulation with a tax would be submitted to?

_A._ Their opinion is, that when aids to the crown are wanted, they
are to be asked of the several assemblies, according to the old
established usage; who will, as they always have done, grant them
freely. And that their money ought not to be given away, without
their consent, by persons at a distance, unacquainted with their
circumstances and abilities. The granting aids to the crown is the
only means they have of recommending themselves to their sovereign;
and they think it extremely hard and unjust, that a body of men, in
which they have no representatives, should make a merit to itself of
giving and granting what is not its own, but theirs; and deprive them
of a right they esteem of the utmost value and importance, as it is
the security of all their other rights.

_Q._ But is not the post-office, which they have long received, a tax
as well as a regulation?

_A._ No; the money paid for the postage of a letter is not of the
nature of a tax; it is merely a _quantum meruit_ for a service done;
no person is compellable to pay the money, if he does not choose to
receive the service. A man may still, as before the act, send his
letter by a servant, a special messenger, or a friend, if he thinks
it cheaper and safer.

_Q._ But do they not consider the regulations of the post-office, by
the act of last year, as a tax?

_A._ By the regulations of last year the rate of postage was
generally abated near thirty per cent through all America; they
certainly cannot consider such abatement _as a tax_.

_Q._ If an excise was laid by parliament, which they might likewise
avoid paying, by not consuming the articles excised, would they then
not object to it?

_A._ They would certainly object to it, as an excise is unconnected
with any service done, and is merely an aid, which they think ought
to be asked of them, and granted by them, if they are to pay it; and
can be granted for them by no others whatsoever, whom they have not
impowered for that purpose.

_Q._ You say, they do not object to the right of parliament, in
laying duties on goods to be paid on their importation: now, is there
any kind of difference between a duty on the _importation_ of goods,
and an excise on their _consumption_?

_A._ Yes; a very material one: an excise, for the reasons I have
just mentioned, they think you can have no right to lay within their
country. But _the sea_ is yours; you maintain, by your fleets, the
safety of navigation in it, and keep it clear of pirates; you may
have therefore a natural and equitable right to some _toll_ or duty
on merchandizes carried through that part of your dominions, towards
defraying the expence you are at in ships to maintain the safety of
that carriage.

_Q._ Does this reasoning hold in the case of a duty laid on the
produce of their lands _exported_? And would they not then object to
such a duty?

_A._ If it tended to make the produce so much dearer abroad, as to
lessen the demand for it, to be sure they would object to such a
duty; not to your right of laying it, but they would complain of it
as a burthen, and petition you to lighten it.

_Q._ Is not the duty paid on the tobacco exported, a duty of that
kind?

_A._ That, I think, is only on tobacco carried coast-wise, from one
colony to another, and appropriated as a fund for supporting the
college at Williamsburgh, in Virginia.

_Q._ Have not the assemblies in the West Indies the same natural
rights with those in North America?

_A._ Undoubtedly.

_Q._ And is there not a tax laid there on their sugars exported?

_A._ I am not much acquainted with the West Indies; but the duty of
four and a half per cent on sugars exported was, I believe, granted
by their own assemblies.[91]

_Q._ How much is the poll-tax in your province laid on unmarried men?

_A._ It is, I think, fifteen shillings, to be paid by every single
freeman, upwards of twenty-one years old.

_Q._ What is the annual amount of _all_ the taxes in Pensylvania?

_A._ I suppose about 20,000_l._ sterling.

_Q._ Supposing the stamp act continued and enforced, do you imagine
that ill-humour will induce the Americans to give as much for worse
manufactures of their own, and use them, preferably to better of ours?

_A._ Yes, I think so. People will pay as freely to gratify one
passion as another, their resentment as their pride.

_Q._ Would the people at Boston discontinue their trade?

_A._ The merchants are a very small number compared with the body
of the people, and must discontinue their trade, if nobody will buy
their goods.

_Q._ What are the body of the people in the colonies?

_A._ They are farmers, husbandmen, or planters.

_Q._ Would they suffer the produce of their lands to rot?

_A._ No; but they would not raise so much. They would manufacture
more, and plow less.

_Q._ Would they live without the administration of justice in civil
matters, and suffer all the inconveniencies of such a situation for
any considerable time, rather than take the stamps, supposing the
stamps were protected by a sufficient force, where every one might
have them?

_A._ I think the supposition impracticable, that the stamps should
be so protected as that every one might have them. The act requires
sub-distributors to be appointed in every county town, district,
and village, and they would be necessary. But the _principal_
distributors, who were to have had a considerable profit on the
whole, have not thought it worth while to continue in the office; and
I think it impossible to find sub-distributors fit to be trusted,
who, for the trifling profit that must come to their share, would
incur the odium, and run the hazard that would attend it; and if they
could be found, I think it impracticable to protect the stamps in so
many distant and remote places.

_Q._ But in places where they could be protected, would not the
people use them, rather than remain in such a situation, unable to
obtain any right, or recover, by law, any debt?

_A._ It is hard to say what they would do. I can only judge what
other people will think, and how they will act, by what I feel within
myself. I have a great many debts due to me in America, and I had
rather they should remain unrecoverable by any law, than submit to
the stamp act. They will be debts of honour. It is my opinion the
people will either continue in that situation, or find some way to
extricate themselves, perhaps by generally agreeing to proceed in the
courts without stamps.

_Q._ What do you think a sufficient military force to protect the
distribution of the stamps in every part of America?

_A._ A very great force, I can't say what, if the disposition of
America is for a general resistance.

_Q._ What is the number of men in America able to bear arms, or of
disciplined militia?

_A._ There are, I suppose, at least----

[_Question objected to. He withdrew. Called in again._]

_Q._ Is the American stamp act an equal tax on the country?

_A._ I think not.

_Q._ Why so?

_A._ The greatest part of the money must arise from law-suits for the
recovery of debts, and be paid by the lower sort of people, who were
too poor easily to pay their debts. It is therefore a heavy tax on
the poor, and a tax upon them for being poor.

_Q._ But will not this increase of expence be a means of lessening
the number of law-suits?

_A._ I think not; for as the costs all fall upon the debtor, and are
to be paid by him, they would be no discouragement to the creditor to
bring his action.

_Q._ Would it not have the effect of excessive usury?

_A._ Yes, as an oppression of the debtor.

_Q._ How many ships are there laden annually in North America with
_flax-seed_ for Ireland?

_A._ I cannot speak to the number of ships, but I know, that in 1752
ten thousand hogsheads of flax-seed, each containing seven bushels,
were exported from Philadelphia to Ireland. I suppose the quantity
is greatly increased since that time, and it is understood, that the
exportation from New York is equal to that from Philadelphia.

_Q._ What becomes of the flax that grows with that flax-seed?

_A._ They manufacture some into coarse, and some into a middling kind
of linen.

_Q._ Are there any _slitting-mills_ in America?[92]

_A._ I think there are three, but I believe only one at present
employed. I suppose they will all be set to work, if the interruption
of the trade continues.

_Q._ Are there any _fulling-mills_ there?

_A._ A great many.

_Q._ Did you never hear, that a great quantity of stockings were
contracted for, for the army, during the war, and manufactured in
Philadelphia?

_A._ I have heard so.

_Q._ If the stamp-act should be repealed, would not the Americans
think they could oblige the parliament to repeal every external
tax-law now in force?

_A._ It is hard to answer questions of what people at such a distance
will think.

_Q._ But what do you imagine they will think were the motives of
repealing the act?

_A._ I suppose they will think, that it was repealed from a
conviction of its inexpediency; and they will rely upon it, that
while the same inexpediency subsists, you will never attempt to make
such another.

_Q._ What do you mean by its inexpediency?

_A._ I mean its inexpediency on several accounts, the poverty and
inability of those who were to pay the tax, the general discontent it
has occasioned, and the impracticability of enforcing it.

_Q._ If the act should be repealed, and the legislature should show
its resentment to the opposers of the stamp-act, would the colonies
acquiesce in the authority of the legislature? What is your opinion
they would do?

_A._ I don't doubt at all, that if the legislature repeal the
stamp-act, the colonies will acquiesce in the authority.

_Q._ But if the legislature should think fit to ascertain its right
to lay taxes, by any act laying a small tax, contrary to their
opinion, would they submit to pay the tax?

_A._ The proceedings of the people in America have been considered
too much together. The proceedings of the assemblies have been very
different from those of the mobs, and should be distinguished, as
having no connection with each other. The _assemblies_ have only
peaceably resolved what they take to be their rights: they have
taken no measures for opposition by force, they have not built a
fort, raised a man, or provided a grain of ammunition, in order to
such opposition. The ring-leaders of riots, they think ought to be
punished; they would punish them themselves, if they could. Every
sober, sensible man would wish to see rioters punished, as otherwise
peaceable people have no security of person or estate.--But as to an
internal tax, how small soever, laid by the legislature here on the
people there, while they have no representatives in this legislature,
I think it will never be submitted to: they will oppose it to the
last.--They do not consider it as at all necessary for you to raise
money on them by your taxes; because they are, and always have been,
ready to raise money by taxes among themselves, and to grant large
sums, equal to their abilities, upon requisition from the crown. They
have not only granted equal to their abilities, but, during all the
last war, they granted far beyond their abilities, and beyond their
proportion with this country (you yourselves being judges) to the
amount of many hundred thousand pounds; and this they did freely and
readily, only on a sort of promise, from the secretary of state, that
it should be recommended to parliament to make them compensation. It
was accordingly recommended to parliament, in the most honourable
manner for them. America has been greatly misrepresented and abused
here, in papers, and pamphlets, and speeches, as ungrateful, and
unreasonable, and unjust; in having put this nation to immense
expence for their defence, and refusing to bear any part of that
expence. The colonies raised, paid, and clothed, near twenty-five
thousand men during the last war; a number equal to those sent from
Britain, and far beyond their proportion; they went deeply into debt
in doing this, and all their taxes and estates are mortgaged, for
many years to come, for discharging that debt. Government here was
at that time very sensible of this. The colonies were recommended
to parliament. Every year the king sent down to the house a written
message to this purpose, "that his majesty, being highly sensible
of the zeal and vigour with which his faithful subjects in North
America had exerted themselves, in defence of his majesty's just
rights and possessions; recommended it to the house to take the
same into consideration, and enable him to give them a proper
compensation." You will find those messages on your own journals
every year of the war to the very last; and you did accordingly
give 200,000_l._ annually to the crown, to be distributed in such
compensation to the colonies. This is the strongest of all proofs
that the colonies, far from being unwilling to bear a share of the
burthen, did exceed their proportion; for if they had done less, or
had only equalled their proportion, there would have been no room or
reason for compensation. Indeed the sums, reimbursed them, were by no
means adequate to the expence they incurred beyond their proportion:
but they never murmured at that; they esteemed their sovereign's
approbation of their zeal and fidelity, and the approbation of this
house, far beyond any other kind of compensation, therefore there
was no occasion for this act, to force money from a willing people:
they had not refused giving money for the _purposes_ of the act, no
requisition had been made, they were always willing and ready to do
what could reasonably be expected from them, and in this light they
wish to be considered.

_Q._ But suppose Great Britain should be engaged in a _war in
Europe_, would North America contribute to the support of it?

_A._ I do think they would, as far as their circumstances would
permit. They consider themselves as a part of the British empire,
and as having one common interest with it: they may be looked on
here as foreigners, but they do not consider themselves as such.
They are zealous for the honour and prosperity of this nation; and,
while they are well used, will always be ready to support it, as far
as their little power goes.--In 1739 they were called upon to assist
in the expedition against Carthagena, and they sent three thousand
men to join your army.[93] It is true Carthagena is in America, but
as remote from the northern colonies, as if it had been in Europe.
They make no distinction of wars, as to their duty of assisting in
them. I know the _last war_ is commonly spoken of here as entered
into for the defence, or for the sake of the people in America. I
think it is quite misunderstood. It began about the limits between
Canada and Nova Scotia; about territories to which the _crown_ indeed
laid claim, but [which] were not claimed by any British _colony_;
none of the lands had been granted to any colonist, we had therefore
no particular concern or interest in that dispute.--As to the Ohio,
the contest there began about your right of trading in the Indian
country, a right you had by the treaty of Utretcht, which the French
infringed; they seized the traders and their goods, which were your
manufactures; they took a fort which a company of your merchants, and
their factors and correspondents had erected there, to secure that
trade. Braddock was sent with an army to re-take that fort (which
was looked on here as another incroachment on the king's territory)
and to protect your trade. It was not till after his defeat that the
colonies were attacked.[94] They were before in perfect peace with
both French and Indians; the troops were not therefore sent for their
defence. The trade with the Indians, though carried on in America, is
not an _American interest_. The people of America are chiefly farmers
and planters, scarce any thing that they raise or produce is an
article of commerce with the Indians. The Indian trade is a _British
interest_; it is carried on with British manufactures, for the profit
of British merchants and manufacturers; therefore the war, as it
commenced for the defence of territories of the crown (the property
of no American) and for the defence of a trade purely British, was
really a British war--and yet the people of America made no scruple
of contributing their utmost towards carrying it on, and bringing it
to a happy conclusion.

_Q._ Do you think then that the taking possession of the king's
territorial rights, and _strengthening the frontiers_, is not an
American interest?

_A._ Not particularly, but conjointly a British and an American
interest.

_Q._ You will not deny that the preceding war, the _war with Spain_,
was entered into for the sake of America; was it not _occasioned by
captures made in the American_ seas?

_A._ Yes; captures of ships carrying on the British trade there with
British manufactures.

_Q._ Was not the _late war with the_ Indians, _since the peace with
France_, a war for America only?

_A._ Yes; it was more particularly for America than the former; but
it was rather a consequence or remains of the former war, the Indians
not having been thoroughly pacified; and the Americans bore by much
the greatest share of the expence. It was put an end to by the army
under General Bouquet; there were not above three hundred regulars in
that army, and above one thousand Pensylvanians.

_Q._ Is it not necessary to send troops to America, to defend the
Americans against the Indians?

_A._ No, by no means; it never was necessary. They defended
themselves when they were but an handful, and the Indians much more
numerous. They continually gained ground, and have driven the Indians
over the mountains, without any troops sent to their assistance from
this country. And can it be thought necessary now to send troops for
their defence from those diminished Indian tribes, when the colonies
are become so populous, and so strong? There is not the least
occasion for it, they are very able to defend themselves.

_Q._ Do you say there were no more than three hundred regular troops
employed in the late Indian war?

_A._ Not on the Ohio, or the frontiers of Pensylvania, which was
the chief part of the war that affected the colonies. There were
garrisons at Niagara, Fort Detroit, and those remote posts kept for
the sake of your trade; I did not reckon them; but I believe that on
the whole the number of Americans, or provincial troops, employed in
the war, was greater than that of the regulars. I am not certain, but
I think so.

_Q._ Do you think the assemblies have a right to levy money on the
subject there, to grant _to the crown_?

_A._ I certainly think so, they have always done it.

_Q._ Are they acquainted with the declaration of rights? And do they
know that, by that statute, money is not to be raised on the subject
but by consent of parliament?

_A._ They are very well acquainted with it.

_Q._ How then can they think they have a right to levy money for the
crown, or for any other than local purposes?

_A._ They understand that clause to relate to subjects only within
the realm; that no money can be levied on them for the crown, but
by consent of parliament. _The colonies_ are not supposed to be
within the realm; they have assemblies of their own, which are their
parliaments, and they are, in that respect, in the same situation
with Ireland. When money is to be raised for the crown upon the
subject in Ireland, or in the colonies, the consent is given in
the parliament of Ireland, or in the assemblies of the colonies.
They think the parliament of Great Britain cannot properly give
that consent, till it has representatives from America; for the
petition of right expressly says, it is to be by _common consent in
parliament_; and the people of America have no representatives in
parliament, to make a part of that common consent.

_Q._ If the stamp act should be repealed, and an act should pass,
ordering the assemblies of the colonies to indemnify the sufferers by
the riots, would they obey it?

_A._ That is a question I cannot answer.

_Q._ Suppose the king should require the colonies to grant a revenue,
and the parliament should be against their doing it, do they think
they can grant a revenue to the king, _without_ the consent of the
parliament of Great Britain?

_A._ That is a deep question. As to my own opinion, I should think
myself at liberty to do it, and should do it, if I liked the occasion.

_Q._ When money has been raised in the colonies, upon requisitions,
has it not been granted to the king?

_A._ Yes, always; but the requisitions have generally been for some
service expressed, as to raise, clothe, and pay troops, and not for
money only.

_Q._ If the act should pass, requiring the American assemblies to
make compensation to the sufferers, and they should disobey it, and
then the parliament should, by another act, lay an internal tax,
would they then obey it?

_A._ The people will pay no internal tax; and I think an act to
oblige the assemblies to make compensation is unnecessary; for I am
of opinion, that as soon as the present heats are abated, they will
take the matter into consideration, and if it is right to be done,
they will do it of themselves.

_Q._ Do not letters often come into the post-offices in America
directed to some inland town where no post goes?

_A._ Yes.

_Q._ Can any private person take up those letters and carry them as
directed?

_A._ Yes; any friend of the person may do it, paying the postage that
has accrued.

_Q._ But must not he pay an additional postage for the distance to
such inland town?

_A._ No.

_Q._ Can the post-master answer delivering the letter, without being
paid such additional postage?

_A._ Certainly he can demand nothing, where he does no service.

_Q._ Suppose a person, being far from home, finds a letter in a
post-office directed to him, and he lives in a place to which the
post generally goes, and the letter is directed to that place, will
the post-master deliver him the letter, without his paying the
postage receivable at the place to which the letter is directed?

_A._ Yes; the office cannot demand postage for a letter that it does
not carry, or farther than it does carry it.

_Q._ Are not ferrymen in America obliged, by act of parliament, to
carry over the posts without pay?

_A._ Yes.

_Q._ Is not this a tax on the ferrymen?

_A._ They do not consider it as such, as they have an advantage from
persons travelling with the post.

_Q._ If the stamp-act should be repealed, and the crown should make a
requisition to the colonies for a sum of money, would they grant it?

_A._ I believe they would.

_Q._ Why do you think so?

_A._ I can speak for the colony I live in; I had it in _instruction_
from the assembly to assure the ministry, that as they always had
done, so they should always think it their duty, to grant such aids
to the crown as were suitable to their circumstances and abilities,
whenever called upon for that purpose, in the usual constitutional
manner; and I had the honour of communicating this instruction to
that honourable gentleman then minister.[95]

_Q._ Would they do this for a British concern, as suppose a war in
some part of Europe, that did not affect them?

_A._ Yes, for any thing that concerned the general interest. They
consider themselves as part of the whole.

_Q._ What is the usual constitutional manner of calling on the
colonies for aids?

_A._ A letter from the secretary of state.

_Q._ Is this all you mean; a letter from the secretary of state?

_A._ I mean the usual way of requisition, in a circular letter from
the secretary of state, by his majesty's command, reciting the
occasion, and recommending it to the colonies to grant such aids as
became their loyalty, and were suitable to their abilities.

_Q._ Did the secretary of state ever write for _money_ for the crown?

_A._ The requisitions have been to raise, clothe, and pay men, which
cannot be done without money.

_Q._ Would they grant money alone, if called on?

_A._ In my opinion they would, money as well as men, when they have
money, or can make it.

_Q._ If the parliament should repeal the stamp act, will the assembly
of Pensylvania rescind their resolutions?

_A._ I think not.

_Q._ Before there was any thought of the stamp act, did they wish for
a representation in parliament?

_A._ No.

_Q._ Don't you know that there is, in the Pensylvanian charter, an
express reservation of the right of parliament to lay taxes there?

_A._ I know there is a clause in the charter, by which the king
grants that he will levy no taxes on the inhabitants, unless it be
with the consent of the assembly, or by act of parliament.

_Q._ How then could the assembly of Pensylvania assert, that laying a
tax on them by the stamp act was an infringement of their rights?

_A._ They understand it thus: by the same charter, and otherwise,
they are intitled to all the privileges and liberties of Englishmen;
they find in the great charters, and the petition and declaration
of rights, that one of the privileges of English subjects is, that
they are not to be taxed but by their _common consent_; they have
therefore relied upon it, from the first settlement of the province,
that the parliament never would, nor could, by colour of that
clause in the charter, assume a right of taxing them, _till_ it had
qualified itself to exercise such right, by admitting representatives
from the people to be taxed, who ought to make a part of that common
consent.

_Q._ Are there any words in the charter that justify that
construction?

_A._ The common rights of Englishmen, as declared by Magna Charta,
and the petition of right, all justify it.

_Q._ Does the distinction between internal and external taxes exist
in the words of the charter?

_A._ No, I believe not.

_Q._ Then may they not, by the same interpretation, object to the
parliament's right of external taxation?

_A._ They never _have_ hitherto. Many arguments have been lately
used here to show them that there is no difference, and that if you
have no right to tax them internally, you have none to tax them
externally, or make any other law to bind them. At present they do
not reason so; but in time they may possibly be convinced by these
arguments.

_Q._ Do not the resolutions of the Pensylvania assembly say--all
taxes?

_A._ If they do, they mean only internal taxes; the same words have
not always the same meaning here and in the colonies. By taxes they
mean internal taxes; by duties they mean customs; these are their
ideas of the language.

_Q._ Have you not seen the resolutions of the Massachusett's Bay
assembly?

_A._ I have.

_Q._ Do they not say, that neither external nor internal taxes can be
laid on them by parliament?

_A._ I don't know that they do; I believe not.

_Q._ If the same colony should say, neither tax nor imposition could
be laid, does not that province hold the power of parliament can lay
neither?

_A._ I suppose that by the word imposition, they do not intend to
express duties to be laid on goods imported, as _regulations of
commerce_.

_Q._ What can the colonies mean then by imposition as distinct from
taxes?

_A._ They may mean many things, as impressing of men, or of
carriages, quartering troops on private houses, and the like; there
may be great impositions that are not properly taxes.

_Q._ Is not the post-office rate an internal tax laid by act of
parliament?

_A._ I have answered that.

_Q._ Are all parts of the colonies equally able to pay taxes?

_A._ No, certainly; the frontier parts, which have been ravaged by
the enemy, are greatly disabled by that means; and therefore, in such
cases, are usually favoured in our tax-laws.

_Q._ Can we, at this distance, be competent judges of what favours
are necessary?

_A._ The parliament have supposed it, by claiming a right to make
tax-laws for America; I think it impossible.

_Q._ Would the repeal of the stamp act be any discouragement of your
manufactures? Will the people that have begun to manufacture decline
it?

_A._ Yes, I think they will; especially if, at the same time, the
trade is opened again, so that remittances can be easily made. I have
known several instances that make it probable. In the war before
last, tobacco being low, and making little remittance, the people of
Virginia went generally into family-manufactures. Afterwards, when
tobacco bore a better price, they returned to the use of British
manufactures. So fulling-mills were very much disused in the last war
in Pensylvania, because bills were then plenty, and remittances could
easily be made to Britain for English cloth and other goods.

_Q._ If the stamp act should be repealed, would it induce the
assemblies of America to acknowledge the rights of parliament to tax
them, and would they erase their resolutions?

_A._ No, never.

_Q._ Are there no means of obliging them to erase those resolutions?

_A._ None that I know of; they will never do it, unless compelled by
force of arms.

_Q._ Is there a power on earth that can force them to erase them?

_A._ No power, how great soever, can force men to change their
opinions.

_Q._ Do they consider the post-office as a tax, or as a regulation?

_A._ Not as a tax, but as a regulation and conveniency; _every
assembly_ encouraged it, and supported it in its infancy, by grants
of money, which they would not otherwise have done; and the people
have always paid the postage.

_Q._ When did you receive the instructions you mentioned?

_A._ I brought them with me, when I came to England, about fifteen
months since.

_Q._ When did you communicate that instruction to the minister?

_A._ Soon after my arrival,--while the stamping of America was under
consideration, and _before_ the bill was brought in.

_Q._ Would it be most for the interest of Great Britain, to employ
the hands of Virginia in tobacco, or in manufactures?

_A._ In tobacco, to be sure.

_Q._ What used to be the pride of the Americans?

_A._ To indulge in the fashions and manufactures of Great Britain.

_Q._ What is now their pride?

_A._ To wear their old clothes over again, till they can make new
ones.

  _Withdrew._

FOOTNOTES:

[83] 1766. Feb. 3. Benjamin Franklin, Esq. and a number of other
persons were "ordered to attend the committee of the whole house [of
commons] to whom it was referred, to consider farther the several
papers [relative to America] which were presented to the house by Mr.
Secretary Conway, &c."

Feb. 13. Benjamin Franklin, Esq. having passed through his
examination, was exempted from farther attendance.

Feb. 24. The resolutions of the committee were reported by the
chairman, Mr. Fuller, their _seventh_ and last resolution setting
forth "that it was their opinion that the house be moved, that leave
be given to bring in a bill to repeal the stamp act." A proposal for
re-committing this resolution was negatived by 240 votes to 133. (See
the Journals of the House of Commons.)

This examination of Dr. Franklin was printed in the year 1767, under
the form of a shilling pamphlet. It is prior in point of date to some
of the foregoing pieces; but I readily submitted to this derangement,
thinking by this means to provide the reader with a knowledge of the
proceedings on which the examination was grounded. B. V.

[84] "The stamp act says, that the Americans shall have no commerce,
make no exchange of property with each other, neither purchase nor
grant nor recover debts; they shall neither marry nor make their
wills, unless they pay such and such sums" in _specie_ for the stamps
which must give validity to the proceedings. The operation of such a
tax, had it obtained the consent of the people, appeared inevitable;
and its annual productiveness, if I recollect well, was estimated
by its proposer in the house of commons at the committee for
supplies, at 100,000_l._ sterling. The colonies being already reduced
to the necessity of having _paper_-money, by sending to Britain the
specie they collected in foreign trade, in order to make up for the
deficiency of their other returns for Britain's manufactures; there
were doubts where could remain the _specie_ sufficient to answer the
tax. B. V.

[85] The stamp act provides that a double duty should be laid "where
the instrument, proceedings, &c. shall be engrossed, written, or
printed, within the said colonies and plantations, in any other
than the English language." This measure, I presume, appeared to be
suggested by motives of convenience, and the policy of assimilating
persons of foreign to those of British descent, and preventing their
interference in the conduct of law business till this change should
be effected. It seems however to have been deemed too precipitate,
immediately to extend this clause to newly-conquered countries. An
exemption therefore was granted, in this particular, with respect to
Canada and Grenada, for the space of five years, to be reckoned from
the commencement of the duty. (See the Stamp Act.) B. V.

[86] Strangers excluded, some parts of the northern colonies double
their numbers in fifteen or sixteen years; to the southward they are
longer, but, taking one with another, they have doubled by natural
generation only, once in twenty-five years. Pensylvania, I believe,
_including strangers_, has doubled in about sixteen years. The
calculation for February 1766 will not then suit 1779. B. V.

[87] In the year 1733--"for the welfare and prosperity of our
sugar colonies in America," and "for remedying discouragements of
planters;" duties were "_given and granted_" to George the Second
upon all rum, spirits, molasses, syrups, sugar, and paneles of
foreign growth, produce, and manufacture, imported into our colonies.
This _regulation of trade_, for the benefit of the general empire
was acquiesced in, notwithstanding the introduction of the novel
terms "give and grant." But the act, which was made only for the
term of five years, and had been several times renewed in the
reign of George the Second, and once in the reign of George the
Third; was renewed again in the year 1763, in the reign of George
the Third, and _extended to other articles, upon new and altered
grounds_. It was stated in the preamble to this act, "that it was
expedient that new provisions and regulations should be established
for _improving the revenue of this kingdom_;" "that it was just and
necessary that a revenue should be raised in America for defending,
protecting, and securing the same;" "and that the commons of Great
Britain ... desirous of making some provision ... towards _raising
the said revenue_ in America, have resolved to give and grant to
his majesty the several rates and duties, &c." Mr. Mauduit, agent
for Massachusett's Bay, tells us, that he was instructed in the
following terms to oppose Mr. Grenville's taxing system.--"You are
to remonstrate against these measures, and, if possible, to obtain a
repeal of the sugar act, and prevent the imposition of any further
duties or taxes on the colonies. Measures will be taken that you may
be joined by all the other agents. _Boston, June 14, 1764._"

The question proposed to Dr. Franklin alludes to this sugar act in
1763. Dr. Franklin's answer appears to deserve the best attention of
the reader. B. V.

[88] Some of the colonies have been reduced to the necessity of
bartering, from the want of a medium of traffic. See p. 146. B. V.

[89] Afterwards expressed in the Declaratory-Act. B. V.

[90] See the answer to the report of the board of trade, p. 144. B. V.

[91] See the note to Lord Howe's letter to our author. B. V.

[92] i. e. Mills for the slitting of iron. B. V.

[93] Admiral Vernon and General Wentworth commanded this expedition;
with what success, is well known. B. V.

[94] When this army was in the utmost distress from the want of
waggons, &c. our author and his son voluntarily traversed the
country, in order to collect a sufficient quantity; and they had zeal
and address enough to effect their purpose, upon pledging themselves,
to the amount of many thousand pounds, for payment. It was but just
before Dr. Franklin's last return to America, that the accounts in
this transaction were passed at home. B. V.

[95] I take the following to be the history of this transaction.

Until 1763, and the years following, whenever Great Britain wanted
supplies directly from the colonies, the secretary of state, in his
majesty's name, sent them a letter of requisition, in which the
occasion for the supplies was expressed; and the colonies returned
a _free gift_, the mode of levying which _they_ wholly prescribed.
At this period, a chancellor of the exchequer (Mr. George Grenville)
steps forth and says to the house of commons: _We must call for money
from the colonies in the way of a tax_;--and to the colony-agents,
_write to your several colonies, and tell them, if they dislike a
duty upon stamps, and prefer any other method of raising the money
themselves, I shall be content, provided the_ amount _be but raised_.
"That is," observed the colonies, when commenting upon his terms, "if
we will not tax ourselves, _as we may be directed_, the parliament
will tax us," Dr. Franklin's instructions, spoken of above, related
to this gracious option. As the colonies could not choose "_another_
tax," while they disclaimed _every_ tax; the parliament passed the
stamp-act.

It seems that the only part of the offer which bore a show of favour,
was the grant of the _mode of levying_--and this was the only
circumstance which was _not new_.

See Mr. Mauduit's account of Mr. Grenville's conference with the
agents, confirmed by the agents for Georgia and Virginia, and Mr.
Burke's speech, in 1774, p. 55. B. V.




  _Attempts of Dr. Franklin for Conciliation of Great Britain with
  the Colonies[96]._


  _London, Nov. 28, 1768._

  DEAR SIR,

I received your obliging favour of the 12th instant. Your sentiments
of the importance of the present dispute between Great Britain and
the colonies, appear to me extremely just. There is nothing I wish
for more than to see it amicably and equitably settled.

But Providence will bring about its own ends by its own means; and if
it intends the downfal of a nation, that nation will be so blinded by
its pride, and other passions, as not to see its danger, or how its
fall may be prevented.

Being born and bred in one of the countries, and having lived long
and made many agreeable connexions of friendship in the other, I wish
all prosperity to both: but I have talked, and written so much and
so long on the subject, that my acquaintance are weary of hearing,
and the public of reading any more of it, which begins to make me
weary of talking and writing; especially as I do not find that I
have gained any point, in either country, except that of rendering
myself suspected, by my impartiality; in England, of being too much
an American, and in America of being too much an Englishman. Your
opinion, however, weighs with me, and encourages me to try one
effort more, in a full, though concise state of facts, accompanied
with arguments drawn from those facts; to be published about the
meeting of parliament, after the holidays.

If any good may be done I shall rejoice; but at present I almost
despair.

Have you ever seen the barometer so low as of late?

The 22d instant mine was at 28, 41, and yet the weather fine and fair.

  With sincere esteem, I am, dear friend,

  Yours, affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[96] I cannot pretend to say what is the publication promised in this
letter; unless it alludes to the one given above at p. 225; in which
case there is a mistake in the date of the year. B. V.




  _Queries from Mr. Strahan._

TO DR. FRANKLIN[97].


  _Nov. 21, 1769._

  DEAR SIR,

In the many conversations we have had together about our present
disputes with North America, we perfectly agreed in wishing they may
be brought to a speedy and happy conclusion. How this is to be done,
is not so easily ascertained.

_Two objects_, I humbly apprehend, his majesty's servants have now in
contemplation. 1st. To relieve the colonies from the taxes complained
of, which they certainly had no hand in imposing. 2dly, To preserve
the honour, the dignity, and the supremacy of the British legislature
over all his majesty's dominions.

As I know your singular knowledge of the subject in question, and
am as fully convinced of your cordial attachment to his majesty,
and your sincere desire to promote the happiness equally of all his
subjects, I beg you would in your own clear, brief, and explicit
manner, send me an answer to the following questions: I make this
request now, because this matter is of the utmost importance, and
must very quickly be agitated. And I do it with the more freedom,
as you know me and my motives too well to entertain the most remote
suspicion that I will make an improper use of any information you
shall hereby convey to me.

1st. Will not a repeal of all the duties (that on tea excepted, which
was before paid here on exportation, and of course no new imposition)
fully satisfy the colonists[98]? If you answer in the negative,

2d. Your reasons for that opinion?

3d. Do you think the only effectual way of composing the present
differences is to put the Americans precisely in the situation they
were in before the passing of the late stamp-act?--If that is your
opinion,

4th. Your reasons for that opinion?

5th. If this last method is deemed by the legislature, and his
majesty's ministers, to be repugnant to their duty, as guardians of
the just rights of the crown and of their fellow-subjects; can you
suggest any other way of terminating these disputes, consistent with
the ideas of justice and propriety conceived by the king's subjects
on both sides of the Atlantic?

6. And if this method was actually followed, do you not think it
would actually encourage the violent and factious part of the
colonists to aim at still farther concessions from the mother-country?

7th. If they are relieved in part only, what do you, as a reasonable
and dispassionate man, and an equal friend to both sides, imagine
will be the probable consequences?

The answers to these questions, I humbly conceive, will include all
the information I want; and I beg you will favour me with them as
soon as may be. Every well-wisher to the peace and prosperity of the
British empire, and every friend to our truly happy constitution,
must be desirous of seeing even the most trivial causes of dissention
among our fellow-subjects removed. Our domestic squabbles, in my
mind, are nothing to what I am speaking of. This you know much
better than I do, and therefore I need add nothing farther to
recommend this subject to your serious consideration. I am, with
the most cordial esteem and attachment, dear sir, your faithful and
affectionate humble servant,

  W. S.

FOOTNOTES:

[97] These letters have often been copied into our public prints.
Mr. Strahan, the correspondent, is printer to the king, and now
representative in parliament for Malmsbury in Wiltshire. An intimacy
of long standing had subsisted between him and Dr. Franklin. B. V.

It was the father of the present Mr. Strahan, who is also
king's-printer, and member of parliament. The friendship, which so
long subsisted between Mr. Strahan and Dr. Franklin, the latter, in
1775, formally abjured, in a letter addressed to Mr. Strahan, which
will be found in the order of its date, in a subsequent part of this
work. _Editor._

[98] In the year 1767, for the express purpose of raising a revenue
in America, glass, red-lead, white-lead, painters' colours,
paper, and _tea_ (which last article was subject to various
_home_-impositions) became charged by act of parliament, with new
_permanent_ duties payable in the American ports. Soon after, in the
same sessions, (the East-India Company promising indemnification
for the experiment) a _temporary_ alteration was made with respect
to the _home_ customs or excise upon certain teas, in the hope
that a deduction in the nominal imposition, by producing a more
extended consumption, would give an increased sum to the exchequer.
Mr. Strahan, comparing only the _amounts_ of the imposed American
duty, and the deducted home duty, determines that the Americans
had suffered no new imposition. The Americans it seems, thought
otherwise. Had we established this precedent for a revenue, we
thought we had every thing to hope; yet we affect surprise, when the
colonies avoided an acquiescence which by parity of reasoning gave
_them_ every thing to fear. B. V.




  _Answer to the preceding Queries._


  _Craven Street, Nov. 29, 1769._

  DEAR SIR,

Being just returned to town from a little excursion, I find yours
of the 21st, containing a number of queries, that would require
a pamphlet to answer them fully. You, however, desire only brief
answers, which I shall endeavour to give.

Previous to your queries, you tell me, that "you apprehend his
majesty's servants have now in contemplation, 1st, To relieve the
colonists from the taxes complained of; 2d, To preserve the honour,
the dignity, and the supremacy of the British legislature over
all his majesty's dominions." I hope your information is good;
and that what you suppose to be in contemplation will be carried
into execution, by repealing all the laws, that have been made for
raising a revenue in America by authority of parliament without
the consent of the people there. The honour and dignity of the
British legislature will not be hurt by such an act of justice and
wisdom. The wisest councils are liable to be misled, especially in
matters remote from their inspection. It is the persisting in an
error, not the correcting it, that lessens the honour of any man
or body of men. The supremacy of that legislature, I believe, will
be best preserved by making a very sparing use of it; never but
for the evident good of the colonies themselves, or of the whole
British empire; never for the partial advantage of Britain to their
prejudice. By such prudent conduct, I imagine, that supremacy may
be gradually strengthened, and in time fully established; but
otherwise, I apprehend it will be disputed, and lost in the dispute.
At present the colonies consent and submit to it, for the regulations
of general commerce; but a submission to acts of parliament was no
part of their original constitution. Our former kings governed their
colonies, as they had governed their dominions in France, without
the participation of British parliaments. The parliament of England
never presumed to interfere in that prerogative, till the time of the
great rebellion, when they usurped the government of all the king's
other dominions, Ireland, Scotland, &c. The colonies that held for
the king, they conquered by force of arms, and governed afterwards
as conquered countries; but New England, having not opposed the
parliament, was considered and treated as a sister-kingdom, in amity
with England (as appears by the Journals, _March 10, 1642_.)

1st. "Will not a repeal of all the duties (that on tea excepted,
which was before paid here on exportation, and of course no new
imposition) fully satisfy the colonists?"

_Answer_, I think not.

2d. "Your reasons for that opinion?"

_A._ Because it is not the sum paid in that duty on tea that is
complained of as a burden, but the principle of the act, expressed
in the preamble, viz. That those duties were laid for the better
support of government, and the administration of justice in the
colonies[99]. This the colonists think unnecessary, unjust, and
dangerous to their most important rights. _Unnecessary_, because in
all the colonies (two or three new ones excepted[100]) government
and the administration of justice were, and always had been, well
supported without any charge to Britain: _unjust_, as it has made
such colonies liable to pay such charge for others, in which they had
no concern or interest: _dangerous_, as such mode of raising money
for those purposes tended to render their assemblies useless; for
if a revenue could be raised in the colonies for all the purposes
of government by act of parliament, without grants from the people
there, governors, who do not generally love assemblies, would never
call them; they would be laid aside; and when nothing should depend
on the people's good-will to government, their rights would be
trampled on; they would be treated with contempt. Another reason,
why I think they would not be satisfied with such a partial repeal,
is that their agreements, not to import till the repeal takes place,
include the whole; which shows, that they object to the whole; and
those agreements will continue binding on them, if the whole is not
repealed.

3d. "Do you think the only effectual way of composing the present
differences is to put the Americans precisely in the situation they
were in before the passing of the late stamp act?"

_A._ I think so.

4th. "Your reasons for that opinion?"

_A._ Other methods have been tried. They have been refused or rebuked
in angry letters. Their petitions have been refused or rejected by
parliament. They have been threatened with the punishments of treason
by resolves of both houses. Their assemblies have been dissolved
and troops have been sent among them: but all these ways have only
exasperated their minds and widened the breach. Their agreements to
use no more British manufactures have been strengthened; and these
measures, instead of composing differences, and promoting a good
correspondence, have almost annihilated your commerce with those
countries, and greatly endanger the national peace and general
welfare.

5th. "If this last method is deemed by the legislature, and his
majesty's ministers, to be repugnant to their duty as guardians of
the just rights of the crown, and of their fellow-subjects; can you
suggest any other way of terminating these disputes, consistent with
the ideas of justice and propriety conceived by the king's subjects
on _both_ sides the Atlantic?"

_A._ I do not see how that method can be deemed repugnant to the
rights of the crown. If the Americans are put into their former
situation, it must be an act of parliament; in the passing of which
by the king, the rights of the crown are exercised, not infringed. It
is indifferent to the crown, whether the aids received from America
are granted by parliament here, or by the assemblies there, provided
the quantum be the same; and it is my opinion, that more will be
generally granted there voluntarily, than can ever be exacted or
collected from thence by authority of parliament. As to the rights
of fellow-subjects (I suppose you mean the people of Britain) I
cannot conceive how those will be infringed by that method. They will
still enjoy the right of granting their own money, and may still, if
it pleases them, keep up their claim to the right of granting ours;
a right they can never exercise properly, for want of a sufficient
knowledge of us, our circumstances and abilities (to say nothing of
the little likelihood there is that we should ever submit to it)
therefore a right that can be of no good use to them; and we shall
continue to enjoy in fact the right of granting our money, with
the opinion, now universally prevailing among us, that we are free
subjects of the king, and that fellow-subjects of one part of his
dominions are not sovereigns over fellow-subjects in any other part.
If the subjects on the different sides of the Atlantic have different
and opposite ideas of "justice and propriety," no one "method" can
possibly be consistent with both. The best will be, to let each
enjoy their own opinions, without disturbing them, when they do not
interfere with the common good.

6th. "And if this method were actually allowed, do you not think it
would encourage the violent and factious part of the colonists, to
aim at still farther concessions from the mother-country?"

_A._ I do not think it would. There may be a few among them that
deserve the name of factious and violent, as there are in all
countries; but these would have little influence, if the great
majority of sober reasonable people were satisfied. If any colony
should happen to think, that some of your regulations of trade are
inconvenient to the general interest of the empire, or prejudicial
to them without being beneficial to you, they will state these
matters to parliament in petitions as heretofore; but will, I
believe, take no violent steps to obtain what they may hope for in
time from the wisdom of government here. I know of nothing else they
can have in view: the notion that prevails here, of their being
desirous to set up a kingdom or commonwealth of their own, is to
my certain knowledge entirely groundless. I therefore think, that
on a total repeal of all duties, laid expressly for the purpose of
raising a revenue on the people of America without their consent,
the present uneasiness would subside; the agreements not to import
would be dissolved; and the commerce flourish as heretofore; and I
am confirmed in this sentiment by all the letters I have received
from America, and by the opinions of all the sensible people who have
lately come from thence, crown-officers excepted. I know, indeed,
that the people of Boston are grievously offended by the quartering
of troops among them, as they think, contrary to law, and are very
angry with the board of commissioners, who have calumniated them to
government; but as I suppose the withdrawing of those troops may be
a consequence of reconciliating measures taking place; and that the
commission also will be either dissolved, if found useless, or filled
with more temperate and prudent men, if still deemed useful and
necessary; I do not imagine these particulars would prevent a return
of the harmony so much to be wished[101].

7th. "If they are relieved in part only, what do you, as a reasonable
and dispassionate man, and an equal friend to both sides, imagine
will be the probable consequence?"

_A._ I imagine, that repealing the offensive duties in part will
answer no end to this country; the commerce will remain obstructed,
and the Americans go on with their schemes of frugality, industry,
and manufactures, to their own great advantage. How much that may
tend to the prejudice of Britain, I cannot say; perhaps not so much
as some apprehend, since she may in time find new markets. But I
think, if the union of the two countries continues to subsist, it
will not hurt the general interest; for whatever wealth Britain loses
by the failing of its trade with the colonies, America will gain; and
the crown will receive equal aids from its subjects upon the whole,
if not greater.

And now I have answered your questions, as to what may be, in my
opinion, the consequences of this or that supposed measure, I will
go a little further, and tell you, what I fear is more likely to
come to pass in _reality_. I apprehend, that the ministry, at least
the American part of it, being fully persuaded of the right of
parliament, think it ought to be enforced, whatever may be the
consequences; and at the same time do not believe, there is even now
any abatement of the trade between the two countries on account of
these disputes; or that if there is, it is small, and cannot long
continue. They are assured by the crown-officers in America, that
manufactures are impossible there; that the discontented are few,
and persons of little consequence; that almost all the people of
property and importance are satisfied, and disposed to submit quietly
to the taxing power of parliament; and that, if the revenue-acts are
continued, and those duties only that are called anti-commercial be
repealed, and others perhaps laid in their stead, the power ere long
will be patiently submitted to, and the agreements not to import be
broken, when they are found to produce no change of measures here.
From these and similar misinformations, which seem to be credited,
I think it likely, that no thorough redress of grievances will be
afforded to America this session. This may inflame matters still
more in that country; farther rash measures there may create more
resentment here, that may produce not merely ill-advised dissolutions
of their assemblies, as last year, but attempts to dissolve their
constitution[102]; more troops may be sent over, which will create
more uneasiness; to justify the measures of government, your writers
will revile the Americans in your newspapers, as they have already
begun to do, treating them as miscreants, rogues, dastards, rebels,
&c. to alienate the minds of the people here from them, and which
will tend farther to diminish their affections to this country.
Possibly too, some of their warm patriots may be distracted enough
to expose themselves by some mad action to be sent for hither, and
government here be indiscreet enough to hang them, on the act of
Henry VIII[103]. Mutual provocations will thus go on to complete the
separation; and instead of that cordial affection, that once and so
long existed, and that harmony, so suitable to the circumstances,
and so necessary to the happiness, strength, safety, and welfare of
both countries, an implacable malice and mutual hatred, such as we
now see subsisting between the Spaniards and Portuguese, the Genoese
and Corsicans, from the same original misconduct in the superior
governments, will take place: the sameness of nation, the similarity
of religion, manners, and language not in the least preventing in
our case, more than it did in theirs.--I hope, however, that this
may all prove false prophecy, and that you and I may live to see as
sincere and perfect a friendship established between our respective
countries, as has so many years subsisted between Mr. Strahan, and
his truly affectionate old friend,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[99] "Men may lose little property by an act which takes away all
their freedom. When a man is robbed of a trifle on the highway, it is
not the two-pence lost that makes the capital outrage." "Would twenty
shillings have ruined Mr. Hampden's fortune? No! but the payment of
half twenty shillings, on the principle it was demanded, would have
made him a slave." See Mr. Burke's speeches in 1774 and 1775. B. V.

[100] Nova Scotia, Georgia, the Floridas, and Canada. B. V.

[101] "The opposition [to Lord Rockingham's administration]" says
Lord Chesterfield, "are for taking vigorous, as they call them, but
I call them violent measures; not less than _les dragonades_; and to
have the tax collected by the troops we have there. For my part, I
never saw a forward child mended by whipping: and I would not have
the mother become a step-mother." Letter, No. 360.

"Is it a certain maxim," pleads Mr. Burke, "that the fewer causes of
dissatisfaction are left by government, the more the subject will be
inclined to resist and rebel?" "I confess I do not feel the least
alarm from the discontents which are to arise from putting people at
their ease. Nor do I apprehend the destruction of this empire, from
giving, by an act of free grace and indulgence, to two millions of my
fellow-citizens, some share of those rights, upon which I have always
been taught to value myself." Speeches in 1774 and 1775. B. V.

[102] This was afterwards attempted by the British legislature, in
the case of the Massachusett's Bay. B. V.

[103] The lords and commons very prudently concurred in an address
for this purpose, and the king graciously assured them of his
compliance with their wishes. B. V.




  _State of the Constitution of the Colonies, by Governor
  Pownall[104]; with Remarks by Dr. Franklin._

[PRINCIPLES.]

1. Wherever any Englishmen go forth without the realm, and make
settlements in partibus exteris, "These settlements as English
settlements, and these inhabitants as English subjects (carrying with
them the laws of the land wherever they form colonies, and receiving
his majesty's protection by virtue of his royal charter[105]"
or commissions of government) "have and enjoy all liberties and
immunities of free and natural subjects, to all intents constructions
and purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them were born
within the realm[106];" and are bound by the like allegiance as every
other subject of the realm.

Remarks. _The settlers of colonies in America did not carry with them
the_ laws of the land, _as being bound by them wherever they should
settle. They left the realm to avoid the inconveniences and hardships
they were under, where some of those laws were in force, particularly
ecclesiastical laws, those for payment of tythes and others. Had it
been understood, that they were to carry these laws with them, they
had better have staid at home among their friends, unexposed to
the risques and toils of a new settlement. They carried with them,
a right to_ such parts _of the_ laws of the land, _as they should
judge advantageous or useful to them; a right to be free from those
they thought hurtful; and a right to make such others, as they should
think necessary, not infringing the general rights of Englishmen: and
such_ new _laws they were to form, as agreeable as might be to the
laws of England_. B. F.

2. Therefore the _common law of England_, and all _such statutes_ as
were enacted and in force at _the time_ in which such settlers went
forth, and such colonies and plantations were established, (except as
hereafter excepted) together with all such alterations and amendments
as the said common law may have received, is from time to time, and
at all times, the law of those colonies and plantations.

Rem. _So far as they adopt it, by express laws or by practice._ B. F.

3. Therefore all statutes, touching the _right of the succession_,
and settlement of the crown, with the statutes of treason relating
thereto[107]; all statutes, _regulating_ or limiting the general
powers and _authority of the crown_, and the exercise of the
jurisdiction thereof; all statutes, _declaratory of the rights and
liberty of the subject_, do extend to all British subjects in the
colonies and plantations as of common right, and as if they and every
of them were born within the realm.

Rem. _It is doubted, whether any settlement of the crown by
parliament, takes place in the colonies, otherwise than by consent
of the assemblies there. Had the rebellion in 1745 succeeded so
far as to settle the Stuart family again on the throne, by act of
parliament, I think the colonies would not have thought themselves
bound by such act. They would still have adhered to the present
family as long as they could._ B. F.

Observation in reply. _They are bound to the king and his successors,
and we know no succession but by act of parliament._ T. P.

4. All statutes enacted _since_ the establishment of colonies and
plantations do extend to and operate within the said colonies and
plantations, in which statutes the same _are specially named_.

Rem. _It is doubted, whether any act of parliament should_ of right
_operate in the colonies_: in fact _several of than have and do
operate_. B. F.

5. Statutes and customs, which respect only the _special and local
circumstances_ of the realm, do not extend to and operate within
said colonies and plantations, where no such special and local
circumstances are found.--(Thus the _ecclesiastical and canon_ law,
and all _statutes respecting tythes_, the laws respecting _courts
baron and copyholds_, the _game acts_, the statutes _respecting
the poor_ and settlements, and all other laws and statutes,
having special reference to special and local circumstances and
establishments within the realm, do not extend to and operate within
these settlements, in partibus exteris, where no such circumstances
or establishments exist.)

Rem. _These laws have no force in America: not merely because local
circumstances differ, but because they have never been adopted, or
brought over by acts of assembly or by practice in the courts._ B. F.

6. No statutes made _since_ the establishment of said colonies and
plantations (_except_ as above described in articles 3 and 4) do
extend to and operate within said colonies and plantations.

Query.--Would any statute made since the establishment of said
colonies and plantations, which statute imported, to _annul_
and abolish the powers and jurisdictions of their respective
constitutions of government, where the same was not contrary to
the laws, or any otherwise forfeited or abated; or which statute
imported, to take away, or did take away, the rights and privileges
of the settlers, as British subjects: would such statute, as of
right, extend to and operate within said colonies and plantations?

Answer. _No. The parliament has no such power. The charters cannot be
altered but by consent of both parties--the king and the colonies._
B. F.


[COROLLARIES FROM THE FOREGOING PRINCIPLES.]

Upon the matters of fact, right and law, as above stated, it is, that
the British subjects thus settled in partibus exteris without the
realm, so long as they are excluded from an intire union with the
realm as parts of and within the same, have a right to have (as they
have) and to be governed by (as they are) a _distinct intire civil
government_, of the like powers, pre-eminences and jurisdictions
(conformable to the like rights, privileges, immunities, franchises,
and civil liberties) as are to be found and are established in the
British government, respecting the British subject within the realm.

Rem. _Right._ B. F.

Hence also it is, that the _rights of the subject_, as declared
in the petition of right, that the _limitation of prerogative_ by
the act for abolishing the star-chamber and for regulating the
privy-council, &c. that the habeas corpus act, the statute of frauds,
the bill of rights, do of common right extend to and are in force
within said colonies and plantations.

Rem. _Several of these rights are established by special colony laws.
If any are not yet so established, the colonies have right to such
laws: and the covenant having been made in the charters by the king,
for himself and his successors, such laws ought to receive the royal
assent_ as of right. B. F.

Hence it is, that the _freeholders_ within the precincts of these
jurisdictions have (as of right they ought to have) a _share in the
power of making those laws_ which they are to be governed by, by the
right which they have of sending their representatives to act for
them and to consent for them in all matters of legislation, which
representatives, when met in general assembly, have, together with
the crown, a right to perform and do all the like acts respecting
the matters, things and rights within the precincts of their
jurisdiction, as the parliament hath respecting the realm and British
dominions.

Hence also it is, that all the _executive offices_ (from the supreme
civil magistrate, as locum tenens to the king, down to that of
constable and head-borough) must of right be established with all
and the like powers, neither more nor less than as defined by the
constitution and law, as in fact they are established.

Hence it is, that the _judicial offices and courts of justice_,
established within the precincts of said jurisdictions, have, as
they ought of right to have, all those jurisdictions and powers "as
fully and amply to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as the courts
of king's bench, common pleas, and exchequer, within his majesty's
kingdom of England, have, and ought to have, and are empowered to
give judgment and award execution thereupon[108]."

Hence it is, that by the possession enjoyment and exercise of his
majesty's _great seal_, delivered to his majesty's governor, there
is established within the precincts of the respective jurisdictions
all the same and like _powers of chancery_ (except where by charters
specially excluded) as his majesty's chancellor within his majesty's
kingdom of England hath, and of right ought to have, by delivery
of the great seal of England.--And hence it is, that all the like
rights, privileges and powers, follow the use, exercise and
application of the great seal of each colony and plantation within
the precincts of said jurisdiction, as doth, and ought of right to
follow the use, exercise, and application of the great seal.

Hence also it is, that _appeals in real actions_, "whereby the lands,
tenements, and hereditaments of British subjects may be drawn into
question and disposed of[109]," do not lie, as of right and by law
they ought not to lie, to the king in council.

Hence also it is, that there is _not_ any law now in being,
whereby _the subject_ within said colonies and plantations can be
_removed[110] from the jurisdiction to which he is amenable_ in
all his right, and through which his service and allegiance must
be derived to the crown, and from which no appeal lies in criminal
causes, so as that such subject may become amenable to a jurisdiction
foreign to his natural and legal resiancy; to which he may be thereby
transported, and under which he may be brought to trial and receive
judgment, contrary to the rights and privileges of the subject, as
declared by the spirit and intent and especially by the 16th § of
the habeas corpus act. And if the person of any subject within the
said colonies and plantations _should_ be seized or detained by any
power issuing from any court, without the jurisdiction of the colony
where he then had his legal resiancy, it would become the duty of the
courts of justice _within_ such colony (it is undoubtedly of their
jurisdiction so to do) to issue the writ of _habeas corpus_[111].

Hence also it is, that in like manner as "the _command and
disposition of the militia, and of all forces by sea and land_,
and of all forts and places of strength, is, and by the laws of
England ever was, the undoubted right of his majesty and his royal
predecessors, kings and queens of England, within all his majesty's
realms and dominions[112]," in like manner as the supreme military
power and command (so far as the constitution knows of and will
justify its establishment) is inseparably annexed to, and forms
an essential part of the office of supreme civil magistrate, the
office of king: in like manner, in all _governments under the king_,
where the constituents are British subjects and of full and perfect
right entitled to the British laws and constitution, the supreme
military command within the precincts of such jurisdictions must
be inseparably annexed to the office of supreme civil magistrate,
(his majesty's regent, vice-regent, lieutenant, or locum tenens, in
what form soever established) so that the king cannot, by any[113]
commission of regency, by any commission or charter of government,
separate or withdraw the supreme command of the military from the
office of supreme civil magistrate--either by reserving this command
in his own hands, to be exercised and executed independent of the
civil power; or by granting a distinct commission to any military
commander in chief, so to be exercised and executed; but more
especially not within such jurisdictions where such supreme military
power (so far as the constitution knows and will justify the same)
is _already_ annexed and granted to the office of supreme civil
magistrate.--And hence it is, that the king cannot erect or establish
any law martial or military command, by any commission which may
supersede and not be subject to the supreme civil magistrate,
within the respective precincts of the civil jurisdictions of said
colonies and plantations, otherwise than in such manner as the said
law martial and military commissions are annexed or subject to the
supreme civil jurisdiction within his majesty's realms and dominions
of Great Britain and Ireland; and hence it is, that the establishment
and exercise of such commands and commissions would be illegal[114].

Rem. _The king has the command of all military force in his
dominions: but in every distinct state of his dominions there should
be the consent of the parliament or assembly (the representative
body) to the_ raising and keeping up _such military force. He cannot
even raise troops and quarter them in another, without the consent
of that other. He cannot_ of right _bring troops raised in Ireland
and quarter them in Britain, but with the consent of the parliament
of Britain: nor carry to Ireland and quarter there, soldiers raised
in Britain, without the consent of the Irish parliament, unless in
time of war and cases of extreme exigency.--In 1756, when the Speaker
went up to present the money-bills, he said among other things,
that "England was capable of fighting her own battles and defending
herself; and although ever attached to your majesty's person, ever at
ease under your just government, they cannot forbear taking notice
of some circumstances in the present situation of affairs, which
nothing but the confidence in your justice could hinder from alarming
their most serious apprehensions. Subsidies to foreign princes, when
already burthened with a debt scarce to be borne, cannot but be
severely felt._ An army of foreign troops, a thing unprecedented,
unheard of, unknown, brought into England, _cannot but alarm, &c.
&c._" (_See the Speech._)

_N. B. These_ foreign troops _were part of the king's subjects,
Hanoverians, and all in _his_ service, which the same thing as_**** B.
F.

FOOTNOTES:

[104] This State of the Constitution of the Colonies was printed
at the close of 1769, and communicated to various persons, with a
view to prevent mischief, from the misunderstandings between the
government of Great Britain and the people of America. I have taken
the liberty of ascribing it to governor Pownall, as his name could
have been no secret at the time. Dr. Franklin's remarks (which from
their early date are the more curious) are in manuscript, and from an
observation in reply signed T. P. appear to have been communicated to
governor Pownall. B. V.

[105] Pratt and York.

[106] General words in all charters.

[107] [i. e.] All statutes respecting the general relation between
the crown and the subject, not such as respect any particular or
peculiar establishment of the realm of England. As for instance: by
the 13th and 14th of Car. II. c. 2, the supreme military power is
declared to be in general, without limitation, in his majesty, and to
have always been of right annexed to the office of king of England,
throughout all his majesty's realms and dominions; yet the enacting
clause, which respects only the peculiar establishment of the militia
of England, extends to the realm of England only: so that the supreme
military power of the crown in all other his majesty's realms and
dominions stands, _as to this statute_, on the basis of its general
power, unlimited. However, the several legislatures of his majesty's
kingdom of Ireland, of his dominions of Virginia, and of the several
colonies and plantations in America, have, by laws to which the king
hath given his consent, operating within the precincts of their
several jurisdictions, limited the powers of it and regulated the
exercise thereof.

[108] Law in New England, confirmed by the crown, Oct. 22, 1700.

[109] 16th Car. I. c. 10.

[110] The case of the court erected by act of parliament 11 and
12th of William III. c. 7, (since the enacting of the habeas corpus
act) for the trial of piracies, felonies and robberies committed in
or upon the sea, or in any haven, river, creek or place _where the
admiral has jurisdiction_, does no way affect this position: nor doth
the 14 § of the said statute, directing that the commissioners, of
whom such court consists, may issue their warrant for apprehending
such pirates, &c. in order to their being tried in the colonies,
or _sent into England_, any way militate with the doctrine here
laid down: nor can it be applied as _the case of a jurisdiction
actually existing_, which supersedes the jurisdictions of the courts
in the colonies and plantations, and as what authorises the taking
the accused of such piracies &c. _from those jurisdictions_, and
the sending such _so taken_ to England for trial.--It cannot be
applied as a case similar and in point to the application of an act
of parliament (passed in the 35th of Henry VIII. concerning the
_trial of treasons_) lately recommended in order to the sending
persons accused of committing crimes in the plantations to England
for trial: because this act of the 11th and 12th of William, c.
7, respects _crimes_ committed in places, "_where the admiral has
jurisdiction_," and _cases_ to which the jurisdiction of those
provincial courts _do not extend_. In the _case of treasons committed
within the jurisdiction of the colonies and plantations_, there are
courts competent to try such crimes and to give judgment thereupon,
where the trials of such are regulated by laws to which the king
hath given his consent: from which there lies no appeal, and wherein
the king hath given power and instruction to his governor as to
execution or respite of judgment. The said act of Henry VIII, which
provides remedy for a case which supposes _the want_ of due legal
jurisdiction, cannot be any way, or by any rule, applied to a case
where there _is_ due legal and competent jurisdiction.

[111] [The] referring to an old act made for the trial of treasons
committed out of the realm, by such persons as had no legal resiancy
but within the realm, and who were of the realm, applying the purview
of that statute, which was made to bring subjects of the realm who
had committed treason out of the realm (where there was _no criminal
jurisdiction to which they could be amenable_) to trial within the
realm, under that criminal jurisdiction to which alone by their
legal resiancy and allegiance they were amenable; applying this to
the case of subjects whose _legal_ resiancy is _without_ the realm,
and who are by that resiancy and their allegiance amenable to a
jurisdiction authorized and empowered to try and give judgment upon
all capital offences whatsoever without appeal; thus applying this
statute so as to take up a proceeding, for which there is no legal
process either by common or statute law as now established, but in
defiance of which there is a legal process established by the habeas
corpus act;----would be, to disfranchise the subject in America of
those rights and liberties which by statute and common law he is now
entitled to.

[112] 13th and 14th Car. II. c. 2.

[113] If the king was to absent himself for a time from the realm,
and did as usual leave a regency in his place, (his locum tenens
as supreme civil magistrate) could he authorize and commission any
military commander in chief to command the militia forts and forces,
_independent of such regency_? Could he do this in Ireland? Could
he do this in the colonies and plantations, where the governor is
already, by commission or charter or both under the great seal,
military commander in chief, as part of (and inseparably annexed
to) the office of supreme civil magistrate, his majesty's locum
tenens within said jurisdictions? If he could, then, while openly,
by patent according to law, he appeared to establish a free British
constitution, he might by a fallacy establish a military power and
government.

[114] Governor P. accompanied this paper to Dr. F. with a sort
of prophetic remark. After stating, that these theorems, and
their application to existing cases, were intended to remedy the
prejudice, indigestion, indecision and errors, then prevailing
either in opinions or conduct; he adds, "the very attention to the
investigation may lead to the discovery of _some truths respecting
the whole British empire_, then little thought of and scarce even
suspected, and which perhaps it would not be _prudent_ at this time
to mark and point out."--The minister however judged the _discussion_
of _dubious_ rights over growing states, a better policy than
possession, discretion and silence; he turned civilian, and lost an
empire. B. V.




TO MR. DUBOURG.

  _Concerning the Dissentions between England and America._[115]


  _London, October 2, 1770._

I see with pleasure that we think pretty much alike on the subjects
of English America. We of the colonies have never insisted, that we
ought to be exempt from contributing to the common expences necessary
to support the prosperity of the empire. We only assert, that having
parliaments of our own, and not having representatives in that of
Great Britain, our parliaments are the only judges of what we can
and what we ought to contribute in this case; and that the English
parliament has no right to take our money without our consent. In
fact, the British empire is not a single state; it comprehends many;
and though the parliament of Great Britain has arrogated to itself
the power of taxing the colonies, it has no more right to do so,
than it has to tax Hanover. We have the same king, but not the same
legislatures.

The dispute between the two countries has already cost England many
millions sterling, which it has lost in its commerce, and America has
in this respect been a proportionable gainer. This commerce consisted
principally of superfluities; objects of luxury and fashion, which we
can well do without; and the resolution we have formed, of importing
no more till our grievances are redressed, has enabled many of our
infant manufactures to take root; and it will not be easy to make our
people abandon them in future, even should a connection more cordial
than ever succeed the present troubles. I have indeed no doubt,
that the parliament of England will finally abandon its present
pretensions, and leave us to the peaceable enjoyment of our rights
and privileges.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[115] Re-translated from the French edition of Dr. Franklin's works.
_Editor._




  _A Prussian Edict, assuming Claims over Britain._


  _Dantzick, Sept. 5, 1773._[116]

We have long wondered here at the supineness of the English nation,
under the Prussian impositions upon its trade entering our port. We
did not, till lately, know the claims, ancient and modern, that hang
over that nation, and therefore could not suspect, that it might
submit to those impositions from a sense of duty, or from principles
of equity. The following edict, just made public, may, if serious,
throw some light upon this matter:

"FREDERICK, by the grace of God, king of Prussia &c. &c. &c. to all
present and to come,[117] health. The peace now enjoyed throughout
our dominions, having afforded us leisure to apply ourselves to the
regulation of commerce, the improvement of our finances, and at the
same time the easing our _domestic_ subjects in their taxes: for
these causes, and other good considerations us thereunto moving, we
hereby make known, that, after having deliberated these affairs in
our council, present our dear brothers, and other great officers of
the state, members of the same; we, of our certain knowledge, full
power, and authority royal, have made and issued this present edict,
viz.

"Whereas it is well known to all the world, that the first German
settlements made in the island of Britain, were by colonies of
people, subjects to our renowned ducal ancestors, and drawn from
their dominions, under the conduct of Hengist, Horsa, Hella, Uffa,
Cerdicus, Ida, and others; and that the said colonies have flourished
under the protection of our august house, for ages past, have never
been emancipated therefrom, and yet have hitherto yielded little
profit to the same: and whereas we ourself have in the last war
fought for and defended the said colonies, against the power of
France, and thereby enabled them to make conquests from the said
power in America, for which we have not yet received adequate
compensation: and whereas it is just and expedient that a revenue
should be raised from the said colonies in Britain towards our
indemnification; and that those who are descendants of our ancient
subjects, and thence still owe us due obedience, should contribute to
the replenishing of our royal coffers: (as they must have done, had
their ancestors remained in the territories now to us appertaining)
we do therefore hereby ordain and command, that, from and after
the date of these presents, there shall be levied and paid to our
officers of the _customs_, on all goods, wares, and merchandizes,
and on all grain and other produce of the earth, exported from the
said island of Britain, and on all goods of whatever kind imported
into the same, a duty of four and a half per cent ad valorem, for
the use of us and our successors.--And that the said duty may more
effectually be collected, we do hereby ordain, that all ships or
vessels bound from Great Britain to any other part of the world, or
from any other part of the world to Great Britain, shall in their
respective voyages touch at our port of Koningsberg, there to be
unladen, searched, and charged with the said duties.

"And whereas there hath been from time to time discovered in the
said island of Great Britain, by our colonists there, many mines or
beds of _iron_-stone; and sundry subjects of our ancient dominion,
skilful in converting the said stone into metal, have in time past
transported themselves thither, carrying with them and communicating
that art; and the inhabitants of the said island, presuming that
they had a natural right to make the best use they could of the
natural productions of their country, for their own benefit, have
not only built furnaces for smelting the said stone into iron, but
have erected plating-forges, slitting-mills, and steel-furnaces, for
the more convenient manufacturing of the same, thereby endangering
a diminution of the said manufacture in our ancient dominion; we
do therefore hereby farther ordain, that, from and after the date
hereof, no mill or other engine for slitting or rolling of iron, or
any plating-forge to work with a tilt-hammer, or any furnace for
making steel, shall be erected or continued in the said island of
Great Britain: and the lord lieutenant of every county in the said
island is hereby commanded, on information of any such erection
within his county, to order, and by force to cause the same to be
abated and destroyed, as he shall answer the neglect thereof to us
at his peril. But we are nevertheless graciously pleased to permit
the inhabitants of the said island to transport their iron into
Prussia, there to be manufactured, and to them returned, they paying
our Prussian subjects for the workmanship, with all the costs of
commission, freight, and risk, coming and returning; any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

"We do not, however, think fit to extend this our indulgence to
the article of _wool_; but meaning to encourage not only the
manufacturing of woollen cloth, but also the raising of wool in
our ancient dominions, and to prevent both, as much as may be, in
our said island, we do hereby absolutely forbid the transportation
of wool from thence even to the mother-country, Prussia: and that
those islanders may be farther and more effectually restrained in
making any advantage of their own wool, in the way of manufacture,
we command, that none shall be carried out of one country into
another; nor shall any worsted, bay, or woollen-yarn, cloth, says,
bays, kerseys, serges, frizes, druggets, cloth-serges, shalloons, or
any other drapery stuffs or woollen manufactures whatsoever, made
up or mixed with wool in any of the said counties, be carried into
any other county, or be water-borne even across the smallest river
or creek, on penalty of forfeiture of the same, together, with the
boats, carriages, horses, &c. that shall be employed in removing
them.--Nevertheless, our loving subjects there are hereby permitted
(if they think proper) to use all their wool as manure, for the
improvement of their lands.

"And whereas the art and mystery of making _hats_ hath arrived at
great perfection in Prussia, and the making of hats by our remoter
subjects ought to be as much as possible restrained: and forasmuch
as the islanders before mentioned, being in possession of wool,
beaver, and other furs, have presumptuously conceived they had a
right to make some advantage thereof, by manufacturing the same into
hats, to the prejudice of our domestic manufacture: we do therefore
hereby strictly command and ordain, that no hats or felts whatsoever,
dyed or undyed, finished or unfinished, shall be loaden or put into
or upon any vessel, cart, carriage, or horse, to be transported or
conveyed out of one county in the said island into another county, or
to any other place whatsoever, by any person or persons whatsoever,
on pain of forfeiting the same, with a penalty of five hundred
pounds sterling for every offence. Nor shall any hat-maker in any
of the said counties employ more than two apprentices, on penalty
of five pounds sterling per month: we intending hereby that such
hat-makers, being so restrained, both in the production and sale of
their commodity, may find no advantage in continuing their business.
But, lest the said islanders should suffer inconveniency by the want
of hats, we are farther graciously pleased to permit them to send
their beaver furs to Prussia, and we also permit hats made thereof to
be exported from Prussia to Britain; the people thus favored to pay
all costs and charges of manufacturing, interest, commission to our
merchants, insurance and freight going and returning, as in the case
of iron.

"And lastly, being willing farther to favour our said colonies
in Britain, we do hereby also ordain and command, that all the
_thieves_, highway and street robbers, housebreakers, forgerers,
murderers, s--d--tes, and villains of every denomination, who have
forfeited their lives to the law in Prussia, but whom we, in our
great clemency, do not think fit here to hang, shall be emptied out
of our gaols into the said island of Great Britain, for the better
peopling of that country.

"We flatter ourselves, that these our royal regulations and commands
will be thought _just and reasonable_ by our much-favoured colonists
in England; the said regulations being copied from their statutes
of 10 and 11 Will. III. c. 10.--5 Geo. II. c. 22.--23 Geo. II. c.
29.--4 Geo. I. c. 11. and from other equitable laws made by their
parliaments, or from instructions given by their princes, or from
resolutions of both houses, entered into for the good government of
their _own colonies in Ireland and America_.

"And all persons in the said island are hereby cautioned, not to
oppose in any wise the execution of this our edict, or any part
thereof, such opposition being high-treason; of which all who are
suspected shall be transported in fetters from Britain to Prussia,
there to be tried and executed according to the Prussian law.

  "Such is our pleasure.

  "Given at Potsdam, this twenty-fifth day of the month of August,
  one thousand seven hundred and seventy-three, and in the
  thirty-third year of our reign.

  "By the king, in his council.

  "RECHTMÆSSIG, Sec."


Some take this edict to be merely one of the king's _jeux d'esprit_:
others suppose it serious, and that he means a quarrel with England:
but all here think the assertion it concludes with, "that these
regulations are copied from acts of the English parliament respecting
their colonies," a very injurious one; it being impossible to
believe, that a people distinguished for their love of liberty; a
nation so wise, so liberal in its sentiments, so just and equitable
towards its neighbours, should, from mean and injudicious views
of petty immediate profit, treat its own children in a manner so
arbitrary and tyrannical!

FOOTNOTES:

[116] This _intelligence extraordinary_, I believe, first appeared in
the Public Advertiser. I have reprinted it from a copy which I found
in the Gentleman's Magazine. B. V.

[117] _A tous presens et à venir._ ORIGINAL.




  _Preface by the British Editor [Dr. Franklin] to "The Votes and
  Proceedings of the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of the Town
  of Boston, in Town-Meeting assembled according to Law (published by
  Order of the Town), &c[118]._"


All accounts of the discontent, so general in our colonies, have
of late years been industriously smothered and concealed here, it
seeming to suit the views of the American minister[119] to have it
understood, that by his great abilities, all faction was subdued,
all opposition suppressed, and the whole country quieted. That the
true state of affairs there may be known, and the true causes of that
discontent well understood, the following piece (not the production
of a private writer, but the unanimous act of a large American city)
lately printed in New England, is republished here. This nation, and
the other nations of Europe, may thereby learn, with more certainty,
the grounds of a dissention, that possibly may, sooner or later, have
consequences interesting to them all.

The colonies had, from their first settlement, been governed with
more ease than perhaps can be equalled by any instance in history
of dominions so distant. Their affection and respect for this
country, while they were treated with kindness, produced an almost
implicit obedience to the instructions of the prince, and even to
acts of the British parliament, though the right of binding them by
a legislature, in which they were unrepresented, was never clearly
understood. That respect and affection produced a partiality in
favour of every thing that was English; whence their preference of
English modes and manufactures; their submission to restraints on
the importation of foreign goods, which they had but little desire
to use; and the monopoly we so long enjoyed of their commerce, to
the great enriching of our merchants and artificers. The mistaken
policy of the stamp act first disturbed this happy situation; but the
flame thereby raised was soon extinguished by its repeal, and the old
harmony restored, with all its concomitant advantage to our commerce.
The subsequent act of another administration, which, not content
with an established exclusion of foreign manufactures, began to make
our own merchandize dearer to the consumers there by heavy duties,
revived it again; and combinations were entered into throughout the
continent, to stop trading with Britain till those duties should be
repealed. All were accordingly repealed but one--_the duty on tea_.
This was reserved (professedly so) as a standing claim and exercise
of the right, assumed by parliament, of laying such duties[120].
The colonies, on this repeal, retracted their agreement, so far
as related to all other goods, except that on which the duty was
retained. This was trumpeted here by the minister for the colonies
as a triumph; there it was considered only as a decent and equitable
measure, showing a willingness to meet the mother-country in
every advance towards a reconciliation; and this disposition to
a good understanding was so prevalent, that possibly they might
soon have relaxed in the article of tea also. But the system of
commissioners of customs, officers without end, with fleets and
armies for collecting and enforcing those duties, being continued;
and these acting with much indiscretion and rashness (giving great
and unnecessary trouble and obstruction to business, commencing
unjust and vexatious suits, and harassing commerce in all its
branches, while that minister kept the people in a constant state of
irritation by instructions which appeared to have no other end than
the gratifying his private resentment[121]) occasioned a persevering
adherence to their resolutions in that particular; and the event
should be a lesson to ministers, not to risque, through pique, the
obstructing any one branch of trade; since the course and connection
of general business may be thereby disturbed to a degree, impossible
to be foreseen or imagined. For it appears, that the colonies,
finding their humble petitions to have this duty repealed were
rejected and treated with contempt, and that the produce of the duty
was applied to the rewarding, with undeserved salaries and pensions,
every one of their enemies; the duty itself became more odious, and
their resolution to starve it more vigorous and obstinate. The Dutch,
the Danes, and French, took this opportunity, thus offered them by
our imprudence, and began to smuggle their teas into the plantations.
At first this was something difficult; but at length, as all business
is improved by practice, it became easy. A coast fifteen hundred
miles in length could not in all parts be guarded, even by the whole
navy of England; especially where their restraining authority was
by all the inhabitants deemed unconstitutional, the smuggling of
course considered as patriotism. The needy wretches too, who, with
small salaries, were trusted to watch the ports day and night, in all
weathers, found it easier and more profitable, not only to wink, but
to sleep in their beds; the merchants' pay being more generous than
the king's. Other India goods also, which, by themselves, would not
have made a smuggling voyage sufficiently profitable, accompanied
tea to advantage; and it is feared the cheap French silks, formerly
rejected as not to the taste of the colonies, may have found their
way with the wares of India, and now established themselves in the
popular use and opinion.

It is supposed, that at least a million of Americans drink tea
twice a day, which, at the first cost here, can scarce be reckoned
at less than half-a-guinea a head per annum. This market, that,
in the five years which have run on since the act passed, would
have paid 2,500,000 guineas for tea alone into the coffers of the
company, we have wantonly lost to foreigners. Meanwhile it is said
the duties have so diminished, that the whole remittance of the
last year amounted to no more than the pitiful sum of 85_l._[122]
for the expence of some hundred thousands, in armed ships and
soldiers to support the officers. Hence the tea, and other India
goods, which might have been sold in America, remain rotting in the
company's warehouses[123]; while those of foreign ports are known
to be cleared by the American demand. Hence, in some degree, the
company's inability to pay their bills; the sinking of their stock,
by which millions of property have been annihilated; the lowering
of their dividend, whereby so many must be distressed; the loss to
government of the stipulated 400,000_l._ a year[124], which must
make a proportionable reduction in our savings towards the discharge
of our enormous debt: and hence in part the severe blow suffered by
credit in general[125], to the ruin of many families; the stagnation
of business in Spitalfields and at Manchester, through want of vent
for their goods; with other future evils, which, as they cannot, from
the numerous and secret connections in general commerce, easily be
foreseen, can hardly be avoided.

FOOTNOTES:

[118] "Boston printed: London reprinted, and sold by J. Wilkie, in
St. Paul's Church-yard. 1773."--I have given the reader _only the
preface_.

It is said, that this little piece very much irritated the ministry.
It was their determination, that the Americans should receive teas
only from Great Britain. And accordingly the East-India company
sent out large cargoes under their protection. The colonists every
where refused, either entrance, or else permission of sale, except
at Boston, where, the force of government preventing more moderate
measures, certain persons in disguise threw it into the sea.

The preamble of the stamp act produced the tea act; the tea act
produced violence; violence, acts of parliament; acts of parliament,
a revolt.

----"A little neglect," says _poor Richard_, "may breed great
mischief: for want of a nail the shoe was lost; for want of a shoe
the horse was lost; for want of a horse the rider was lost; being
overtaken and slain by the _enemy_; all for want of a little care
about a horse-shoe nail." B. V.

[119] Lord Hilsborough.--This nobleman, already first lord of trade,
was introduced in 1768 into the _new-titled office_ of secretary of
state for the colonies. B. V.

[120] Mr. Burke tells us (in his speech in 1774) that this
preambulary tax had lost us at once the benefit of the west and of
the east; had thrown open folding-doors to contraband; and would be
the means of giving the profits of the colony-trade to every nation
but ourselves. He adds in the same place, "It is indeed a tax of
sophistry, a tax of pedantry, a tax of disputation, a tax of war
and rebellion, a tax for any thing but benefit to the imposers, or
satisfaction to the subject." B. V.

[121] Some of his circular letters had been criticised, and exposed
by one or two of the American assemblies.

[122] "Eighty-five pounds I am assured, my lords, is the whole
equivalent, we have received for all the hatred and mischief, and
all the infinite losses this kingdom has suffered during that year,
in her disputes with North America." See the bishop of St. Asaph's
intended speech. B. V.

[123] At this time they contained many millions of pounds of tea,
including the usual stock on hand. Mr. Burke, in his speech in 1774,
supposes, that America might have given a vent for ten millions
of pounds. This seems to have been the greater part of the whole
quantity. B. V.

[124] On account of a temporary compromise of certain disputes with
government. B. V.

[125] Seen in certain memorable mercantile failures in the year 1772.
B. V.




  _Account of Governor Hutchinson's Letters[126]._

  TO THE CLERK OF THE COUNCIL IN WAITING.

  (Copy.)


  _Whitehall, Dec. 3, 1773._

  SIR,

The agent for the house of representatives of the province of
Massachusett's Bay [Dr. Franklin] having delivered to lord
Dartmouth, an address of that house to the king, signed by their
speaker; complaining of the conduct of the governor [Hutchinson] and
lieutenant governor [Andrew Oliver] of that province, in respect to
certain private letters written by them to their correspondent in
England, and praying that they may be removed from their posts in
that government; his lordship hath presented the said address to his
majesty, and his majesty having signified his pleasure, that the said
address should be laid before his majesty in his privy council, I am
directed by lord Dartmouth to transmit the same accordingly, together
with a copy of the agent's letter to his lordship, accompanying the
said address.

  I am, sir,

  Your most obedient humble servant,

  (Signed) J. POWNALL.


TO THE RIGHT HON. THE EARL OF DARTMOUTH.

  (Copy.)

  _London, Aug. 21, 1773._

  MY LORD,

I have just received from the house of representatives of the
Massachusett's Bay, their address to the king, which I now inclose,
and send to your lordship, with my humble request in their behalf,
that you would be pleased to present it to his majesty the first
convenient opportunity.

I have the pleasure of hearing from that province by my late letters,
that a sincere disposition prevails in the people there to be on good
terms with the mother-country; that the assembly have declared their
desire only to be put into the situation they were in before the
stamp act: _They aim at no novelties_. And it is said, that having
lately discovered, as they think, the authors of their grievances
to be some of their own people, their resentment against Britain is
thence much abated.

This good disposition of theirs (will your lordship permit me to say)
may be cultivated by a favourable answer to this address, which I
therefore hope your goodness will endeavour to obtain.

  With the greatest respect,

  I have the honour to be, my lord, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN,

  _Agent for the House of Representatives_.


THE PETITION.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.

  MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN,

We your majesty's loyal subjects, the representatives of your ancient
colony of Massachusett's Bay, in general court legally assembled,
by virtue of your majesty's writ under the hand and seal of the
governor, beg leave to lay this our humble petition before your
majesty.

Nothing but the sense of duty we owe to our sovereign, and the
obligation we are under to consult the peace and safety of the
province, could induce us to remonstrate to your majesty [concerning]
the mal-conduct of persons, who have heretofore had the confidence
and esteem of this people; and whom your majesty has been pleased,
from the purest motives of rendering your subjects happy, to advance
to the highest places of trust and authority in the province.

Your majesty's humble petitioners, with the deepest concern and
anxiety, have seen the discords and animosities which have too long
subsisted between your subjects of the parent-state and those of the
American colonies. And we have trembled with apprehensions, that the
consequences, naturally arising therefrom, would at length prove
fatal to both countries.

Permit us humbly to suggest to your majesty, that your subjects here
have been inclined to believe, that the grievances which they have
suffered, and still continue to suffer, have been occasioned by your
majesty's ministers and principal servants being, unfortunately for
us, _misinformed_ in certain facts of very interesting importance to
us. It is for this reason that former assemblies have, from time to
time, prepared a true state of facts to be laid before your majesty;
but their humble remonstrances and petitions, it is presumed, have by
some means been prevented from reaching your royal hand.

Your majesty's petitioners have very lately had before them _certain
papers_, from which they humbly conceive, it is most reasonable
to suppose, that there has been long a conspiracy of evil men in
this province, who have contemplated measures and formed a plan
to advance themselves to power, and raise their own fortunes, by
means destructive of the charter of the province, at the expence of
the quiet of the nation, and to the annihilating of the rights and
liberties of the American colonies.

And we do with all due submission to your majesty beg leave
particularly to complain of the conduct of his excellency Thomas
Hutchinson, Esq. governor, and the honourable Andrew Oliver, Esq.
lieutenant-governor of this your majesty's province, as having a
natural and efficacious tendency to interrupt and alienate the
affections of your majesty, our rightful sovereign, from this your
loyal province; to destroy that harmony and good-will between Great
Britain and this colony, which every honest subject should strive to
establish; to excite the resentment of the British administration
against this province; to defeat the endeavours of our agents and
friends to serve us by a fair representation of our state of facts;
to prevent our humble and repeated petitions from reaching the ear
of your majesty, or having their desired effect. And finally, that
the said Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver have been among the
chief instruments in introducing a fleet and army into this province,
to establish and perpetuate their plans, whereby they have been not
only greatly instrumental [in] disturbing the peace and harmony
of the government, and causing unnatural and hateful discords and
animosities between the several parts of your majesty's extensive
dominions; but are justly chargeable with all that corruption of
morals, and all that confusion, misery, and bloodshed, which have
been the natural effects of posting an army in a populous town.

Wherefore we most humbly pray, that your majesty would be pleased
to remove from their posts in this government the said Thomas
Hutchinson, Esquire, and Andrew Oliver, Esquire; who have, by
their above-mentioned conduct, and otherwise, rendered themselves
justly obnoxious to your loving subjects, and entirely lost their
confidence; and place such good and faithful men in their stead, as
your majesty in your wisdom shall think fit.

  In the name and by order of the house of
  representatives,

  THOMAS CUSHING, _Speaker_.


TO THE LORDS COMMITTEE OF HIS MAJESTY'S PRIVY COUNCIL FOR PLANTATION
AFFAIRS.

  THE PETITION OF ISRAEL MAUDUIT,

  _Humbly sheweth unto your lordships_,

That having been informed, that an address, in the name of
the house of representatives of his majesty's colony of
Massachusett's Bay, has been presented to his majesty by Benjamin
Franklin, Esquire, praying the removal of his majesty's governor
and lieutenant-governor, which is appointed to be taken into
consideration on Thursday next; your petitioner, on the behalf of the
said governor and lieutenant governor, humbly prays, that he may be
heard by counsel in relation to the same, before your lordships shall
make any report on the said address.

  ISRAEL MAUDUIT.

  _Clement's Lane, Jan. 10, 1775._


  _The Examination of Dr. Franklin, at the Council Chamber, Jan. 17,
  1774[127]. Present, Lord President, the Secretaries of State, and
  many other Lords; Dr. Franklin and Mr. Bollan; Mr. Mauduit and Mr.
  Wedderburn._

Dr. Franklin's Letter and the Address, Mr. Pownall's Letter, and
Mr. Mauduit's Petition, were read.

_Mr. Wedderburn._ The address mentions certain papers: I could wish
to be informed what are those papers?

_Dr. Franklin._ They are the letters of Mr. Hutchinson and Mr. Oliver.

_Court._ Have you brought them?

_Dr. Franklin._ No, but here are attested copies.

_Court._ Do you mean to found a charge upon them? if you do, you must
produce the letters.

_Dr. Franklin._ These copies are attested by several gentlemen at
Boston, and a notary public.

_Mr. Wedderburn._ My lords, we shall not take advantage of any
imperfection in the proof. We admit that the letters are Mr.
Hutchinson's and Mr. Oliver's hand writing: reserving to ourselves
the right of inquiring how they were obtained.

_Dr. Franklin._ I did not expect that counsel would have been
employed on this occasion.

_Court._ Had you not notice sent you of Mr. Mauduit's having
petitioned to be heard by counsel on behalf of the governor and
lieutenant governor.

_Dr. Franklin._ I did receive such notice; but I thought this had
been a matter of _politics_, not of law, and have not brought my
counsel.

_Court._ Where a charge is brought, the parties have a right to be
heard by counsel or not, as they choose.

_Mr. Mauduit._ My lords, I am not a native of that country, as these
gentlemen are. I know well Dr. Franklin's abilities, and wish to
put the defence of my friends more upon a parity with the attack;
he will not therefore wonder that I choose to appear before your
lordships with the assistance of counsel. My friends, in their
letters to me, have desired (if any proceedings, as they say, should
be had upon this address) that they may have a hearing in their own
justification, that their innocence may be fully cleared, and their
honour vindicated, and have made provision accordingly. I do not
think myself at liberty therefore to give up the assistance of my
counsel, in defending them against this unjust accusation.

_Court._ Dr. Franklin may have the assistance of counsel, or go on
without it, as he shall choose.

_Dr. Franklin._ I desire to have counsel.

_Court._ What time do you want?

_Dr. Franklin._ Three weeks.

_Ordered_ that the further proceedings be on Saturday 29th
instant[128].


_To the Printer of the Public Advertiser._[129]

  SIR,

Finding that two gentlemen have been unfortunately engaged in a duel
about a transaction and its circumstances, of which both of them
are totally ignorant and innocent, I think it incumbent upon me to
declare (for the prevention of farther mischief, as far as such a
declaration may contribute to prevent it) that I alone am the person,
who obtained and transmitted to Boston the letters in question.
Mr. W. could not communicate them, because they were never in his
possession; and for the same reason they could not be taken from him
by Mr. T. They were not of the nature of _private_ letters between
friends. They were written by public officers to persons in public
stations, on public affairs, and intended to procure public measures;
they were therefore handed to other public persons, who might be
influenced by them to produce those measures. Their tendency was to
incense the mother-country against her colonies, and, by the steps
recommended, to widen the breach, which they effected. The chief
caution expressed with regard to privacy was, to keep their contents
from the colony agents, who, the writers apprehended, might return
them, or copies of them, to America. That apprehension was, it seems,
well founded, for the first agent who laid his hands on them thought
it his duty to transmit them to his constituents[130].

  _Craven Street, Dec. 25, 1773._

  B. FRANKLIN,

  _Agent for the House of Representatives
  of the Massachusett's Bay_.

FOOTNOTES:

[126] Governor Hutchinson, lieutenant-governor Andrew Oliver,
Charles Paxton, Esq. Nathaniel Rogers, Esq. and Mr. G. Roome,
having sent from Boston certain representations and informations
to Thomas Whately, Esq. member of parliament, private secretary to
Mr. George Grenville (the father of the stamp act) when in office,
and afterwards one of the lords of trade; these letters were, by a
particular channel, conveyed back to Boston. The assembly of the
province were so much exasperated, that they returned home attested
copies of the letters, accompanied with a petition and remonstrance,
for the removal of governor Hutchinson, and lieutenant-governor
Andrew Oliver, from their posts. The council of the province
likewise, on their part, entered into thirteen resolves, in tendency
and import similar to the petition of the assembly; five of which
resolves were unanimous, and only one of them had so many as three
dissentients. In consequence of the assembly's petition, the above
proceedings and examination took place.

Dr. Franklin having naturally a large share in these transactions,
made still larger by the impolitic and indecent persecution of his
character, I have exhibited the whole more at length, than I should
otherwise have thought proper. B. V.

[127] The editor has taken this examination from Mr. Mauduit's copy
of the Letters of Governor Hutchinson, &c. second edition, 1774,
p. 17. He has Mr. Mauduit's authority for supposing it faithfully
represented. B. V.

[128] The privy council accordingly met on the 29th of January,
1774, when Mr. Dunning and Mr. John Lee appeared as counsel for
the assembly, and Mr. Wedderburn as counsel for the governor and
lieutenant governor. Mr. Wedderburn was very long in his answer,
which chiefly related to the mode of obtaining and sending away Mr.
Whately's letters; and spoke of Dr. Franklin in terms of abuse, which
never escape from one gentleman towards another. In the event, the
committee of the privy council made a report, in which was expressed
the following opinion: "The lords of the committee do agree humbly
to report, as their opinion to your majesty, that the petition is
founded upon resolutions formed on false and erroneous allegations;
and is groundless, vexatious, and scandalous, and calculated only
for the seditious purposes of keeping up a spirit of clamour and
discontent in the said province. And the lords of the committee do
further humbly report to your majesty, that nothing has been laid
before them which does or can, in their opinion, in any manner, or
in any degree, impeach the honour, integrity, or conduct of the said
governor or lieutenant-governor; and their lordships are humbly of
opinion, that the said petition ought to be dismissed."

Feb. 7th, 1774. "His majesty, taking the said report into
consideration, was pleased, with the advice of his privy-council, to
approve thereof; and to order, that the said petition of the house of
representatives of the province of Massachusett's Bay be dismissed
the board--as groundless, vexatious, and scandalous; and calculated
only for the seditious purpose of keeping up a spirit of clamour and
discontent in the said province."--A former petition against governor
Bernard met with a dismission couched in similar terms. B. V.

[129] Some letters had passed in the public prints between Mr. Thomas
Whately's brother and Mr. John Temple, concerning the manner in which
the letters of Governor Hutchinson &c. had escaped from among the
papers of Mr. Thomas Whately, at this time deceased.

The one gentleman wished to avoid the charge of having given them,
the other of having taken them. At length the dispute became so
personal and pointed, that Mr. Temple thought it necessary to call
the brother into the field. The letter of provocation appeared in
the morning, and the parties met in the afternoon. Dr. Franklin, was
not then in town; it was after some interval that he received the
intelligence. What had passed he could not foresee; he endeavoured to
prevent what still might follow. B. V.

[130] It was in consequence of this letter that Mr. Wedderburn
ventured to make the most odious personal applications. Mr. Mauduit
has prudently omitted part of them in his account of the proceedings
before the privy-council. They are given here altogether however (as
well as they could be collected) to mark the politics of the times,
and the nature of the censures passed in England upon Dr. Franklin's
character.

"The letters could not have come to Dr. Franklin," said Mr.
Wedderburn, "by fair means. The writers did not give them to him, nor
yet did the deceased correspondent, who, from our intimacy, would
otherwise have told me of it: nothing then will acquit Dr. Franklin
of the charge of obtaining them by fraudulent or corrupt means, for
the most malignant of purposes; unless he stole them, from the person
who stole them. This argument is irrefragable."----

"I hope, my lords, you will mark [and brand] the man, for the honour
of this country, of Europe, and of mankind. Private correspondence
has hitherto been held sacred in times of the greatest party
rage, not only in politics but religion."--"He has forfeited all
the respect of societies and of men. Into what companies will he
hereafter go with an unembarassed face, or the honest intrepidity of
virtue. Men will watch him with a jealous eye, they will hide their
papers from him, and lock up their escrutoires. He will henceforth
esteem it a libel to be called a _man of letters, homo_ trium[131]
_literarum_!

"But he not only took away the letters from one brother, but kept
himself concealed till he nearly occasioned the murder of the other.
It is impossible to read his account, expressive of the coolest and
most deliberate malice, without horror." [_Here he read the letter
above, Dr. Franklin being all the time present._]--Amidst these
tragical events, of one person nearly murdered, of another answerable
for the issue, of a worthy governor hurt in his dearest interests,
the fate of America in suspense; here is a man, who, with the utmost
insensibility of remorse, stands up and avows himself the author of
all. I can compare it only to Zanga in Dr. Young's _Revenge_.[132]

    "Know then 'twas----I:
    I forged the letter, I disposed the picture;
    I hated, I despised, and I destroy.

"I ask, my lords, whether the revengeful temper, attributed by poetic
fiction only to the bloody African, is not surpassed by the coolness
and apathy of the wily American?"

These pleadings for a time worked great effect: the lords
assented, the town was convinced, Dr. Franklin was disgraced[133],
and Mr. Wedderburn seemed in the road for every kind of
advancement.--Unfortunately for Mr. Wedderburn, the events of the
war did not correspond with his systems. Unfortunately too for his
"irrefragable argument," Dr. Franklin afterwards took an oath in
chancery[134], that at the time that he transmitted the letters he
was ignorant of the party to whom they had been addressed, having
himself received them from a third person, and for the express
purpose of their being conveyed to America. Unfortunately also for
Mr. Wedderburn's "worthy governor," that governor himself, _before_
the arrival of Dr Franklin's packet in Boston, sent over one of
Dr. Franklin's own "private" letters to England, expressing some
little coyness indeed upon the occasion, but desiring secrecy, lest
he should be prevented procuring _more_ useful intelligence from
the same source[135]. Whether Mr. Wedderburn in his speech intended
to draw a particular case and portraiture, for the purpose only of
injuring Dr. Franklin, or meant that his language and epithets should
apply generally to all, whether friends or foes, whose practice
should be found similar to it, is a matter that must be left to be
adjusted between governor Hutchinson and Mr. Wedderburn.

But to return to Dr. Franklin. It was not singular perhaps, that,
as a man of honour, he should surrender his name to public scrutiny
in order to prevent mischief to others, and yet not betray his
coadjutor (even to the present moment) to relieve his own fame from
the severest obloquy; but perhaps it belonged to few besides Dr.
Franklin, to possess mildness and magnanimity enough to refrain from
intemperate expressions and measures against Mr. Wedderburn and his
supporters, after all that had passed. B. V.

[131] i. e. Fur (or _thief_).

[132] Act Vth.

[133] He was dismissed from his place in the post-office.

[134] A copy of the proceedings in chancery has been in my
possession, but being at present mislaid I speak only from memory
here.

[135] See the Remembrancer for the year 1776, part 2d. p. 61 col.
1st, and 2d.




  _Rules for reducing a Great Empire to a small one, presented to a
  late Minister, when he entered upon his Administration._[136]


An ancient sage valued himself upon this, that though he could
not fiddle, he knew how to make a great city of a little one. The
science, that I, a modern, simpleton, am about to communicate, is the
very reverse.

I address myself to all ministers, who have the management of
extensive dominions, which, from their very greatness, are become
troublesome to govern--because the multiplicity of their affairs
leaves no time for fiddling.

I. In the first place, gentlemen, you are to consider, that a great
empire, like a great cake, is most easily diminished at the edges.
Turn your attention therefore first to your _remotest_ provinces;
that, as you get rid of them, the next may follow in order.

II. That the possibility of this separation may always exist,
take special care the provinces are _never incorporated with the
mother-country_; that they do not enjoy the same common rights, the
same privileges in commerce, and that they are governed by severer
laws, all of your enacting, without allowing them any share in the
choice of the legislators. By carefully making and preserving such
distinctions, you will (to keep to my simile of the cake) act like a
wise gingerbread-baker; who, to facilitate a division, cuts his dough
half through in those places, where, when baked, he would have it
broken to pieces.

III. Those remote provinces have perhaps been acquired, purchased, or
conquered, at the sole expence of the settlers or their ancestors,
without the aid of the mother-country. If this should happen to
increase her strength, by their growing numbers, ready to join in her
wars; her commerce, by their growing demand for her manufactures; or
her naval power, by greater employment for her ships and seamen, they
may probably suppose some merit in this, and that it entitles them
to some favour: you are therefore to _forget it all, or resent it_,
as if they had done you injury. If they happen to be zealous whigs,
friends of liberty, nurtured in revolution principles; remember
all that to their prejudice, and contrive to punish it: for such
principles, after a revolution is thoroughly established, are of no
more use; they are even odious and abominable.

IV. However peaceably your colonies have submitted to your
government, shown their affection to your interests, and patiently
borne their grievances, you are to suppose them _always inclined
to revolt_, and treat them accordingly. Quarter troops among them,
who, by their insolence, may provoke the rising of mobs, and by their
bullets and bayonets suppress them. By this means, like the husband
who uses his wife ill from suspicion, you may in time convert your
suspicions into realities.

V. Remote provinces must have governors and judges, to represent
the royal person and execute every where the delegated parts of his
office and authority. You, ministers, know, that much of the strength
of government depends on the opinion of the people, and much of that
opinion on the _choice of rulers_ placed immediately over them. If
you send them wise and good men for governors, who study the interest
of the colonists, and advance their prosperity; they will think their
king wise and good, and that he wishes the welfare of his subjects.
If you send them learned and upright men for judges, they will think
him a lover of justice. This may attach your provinces more to his
government. You are therefore to be careful who you recommend for
those offices.--If you can find prodigals, who have ruined their
fortunes, broken gamesters or stock-jobbers, these may do well as
governors, for they will probably be rapacious, and provoke the
people by their extortions. Wrangling proctors and pettyfogging
lawyers too are not amiss, for they will be for ever disputing and
quarrelling with their little parliaments. If withal they should be
ignorant, wrong-headed and insolent, so much the better. Attorneys
clerks and Newgate solicitors will do for chief justices, especially
if they hold their places during your pleasure:--and all will
contribute to impress those ideas of your government, that are
proper for a people you would wish to renounce it.

VI. To confirm these impressions, and strike them deeper,
whenever the injured come to the capital with complaints of
mal-administration, oppression, or injustice, _punish such suitors_
with long delay, enormous expence, and a final judgment in favour
of the oppressor. This will have an admirable effect every way.
The trouble of future complaints will be prevented, and governors
and judges will be encouraged to farther acts of oppression and
injustice, and thence the people may become more disaffected, and at
length desperate.

VII. When such governors have crammed their coffers, and made
themselves so odious to the people, that they can no longer remain
among them with safety to their persons, _recal and reward_ them with
pensions. You may make them baronets too, if that respectable order
should not think fit to resent it. All will contribute to encourage
new governors in the same practice, and make the supreme government
detestable.

VIII. If, when you are engaged in war, your colonies should vie in
liberal aids of men and money against the common enemy upon your
simple requisition, and give far beyond their abilities,--reflect,
that a penny, taken from them by your power, is more honourable to
you, than a pound presented by their benevolence; _despise therefore
their voluntary grants_, and resolve to harass them with _novel
taxes_.--They will probably complain to your parliament, that they
are taxed by a body in which they have no representative, and that
this is contrary to common right. They will petition for redress. Let
the parliament flout their claims, reject their petitions, refuse
even to suffer the reading of them, and treat the petitioners with
the utmost contempt. Nothing can have a better effect in producing
the alienation proposed; for though many can forgive injuries, none
ever forgave contempt.

IX. In laying these taxes, _never regard the heavy burthens_ those
remote people already undergo, in defending their own frontiers,
supporting their own provincial government, making new roads,
building bridges, churches, and other public edifices, which in
old countries have been done to your hands, by your ancestors, but
which occasion constant calls and demands on the purses of a new
people.--Forget the restraint you lay on their trade for your own
benefit, and the advantage a monopoly of this trade gives your
exacting merchants. Think nothing of the wealth those merchants and
your manufacturers acquire by the colony commerce, their increased
ability thereby to pay taxes at home, their accumulating, in the
price of their commodities, most of those taxes, and so levying them
from their consuming customers: all this, and the employment and
support of thousands of your poor by the colonists, you are entirely
to forget. But remember to make your arbitrary tax more grievous to
your provinces, by public declarations, importing, that your power of
taxing them has _no limits_, so that when you take from them without
their consent a shilling in the pound, you have a clear right to the
other nineteen. This will probably weaken every idea of security
in their property, and convince them, that under such a government
they have nothing they can call their own; which can scarce fail of
producing the happiest consequences!

X. Possibly indeed some of them might still comfort themselves and
say, "though we have no property, we have yet something left that
is valuable, we have constitutional _liberty, both of person and of
conscience_. This king, these lords, and these commons, who it seems
are too remote from us to know us and feel for us, cannot take from
us our habeas corpus right, or our right of trial by a jury of our
neighbours: they cannot deprive us of the exercise of our religion,
alter our ecclesiastical constitution, and compel us to be papists,
if they please, or Mahometans." To annihilate this comfort, begin by
laws to perplex their commerce with infinite regulations, impossible
to be remembered and observed: ordain seizures of their property for
every failure, take away the trial of such property by jury, and give
it to arbitrary judges of your own appointing, and of the lowest
characters in the country, whose salaries and emoluments are to arise
out of the duties or condemnations, and whose appointments are during
pleasure. Then let there be a formal declaration of both houses, that
opposition to your edicts is treason, and that persons suspected of
treason in the provinces may, according to some obsolete law, be
seized and sent to the metropolis of the empire for trial; and pass
an act, that those there charged with certain other offences shall
be sent away in chains from their friends and country, to be tried
in the same manner for felony. Then erect a new court of inquisition
among them, accompanied by an armed force, with instructions to
transport all such suspected persons, to be ruined by the expence,
if they bring over evidences to prove their innocence, or be found
guilty and hanged, if they cannot afford it. And lest the people
should think you cannot possibly go any farther, pass another solemn
declaratory act, "that king, lords, and commons had, have, and of
right ought to have, full power and authority to make statutes of
sufficient force and validity to bind the unrepresented provinces _in
all cases whatsoever_." This will include spiritual with temporal,
and taken together must operate wonderfully to your purpose, by
convincing them, that they are at present under a power, something
like that spoken of in the Scriptures, which can not only kill their
bodies, but damn their souls to all eternity, by compelling them, if
it pleases, to worship the devil.

XI. To make your taxes more odious, and more likely to procure
resistance, send from the capital a _board of officers_ to
superintend the collection, _composed of the most indiscreet_,
ill-bred, and insolent you can find. Let these have large salaries
out of the extorted revenue, and live in open grating luxury upon
the sweat and blood of the industrious, whom they are to worry
continually with groundless and expensive prosecutions, before the
above-mentioned arbitrary revenue-judges; all at the cost of the
party prosecuted, though acquitted, because the king is to pay no
costs. Let these men, by your order, be exempted from all the common
taxes and burthens of the province, though they and their property
are protected by its laws. If any revenue officers are suspected of
the least tenderness for the people, discard them. If others are
justly complained of, protect and reward them. If any of the under
officers behave so as to provoke the people to drub them, promote
those to better offices: this will encourage others to procure for
themselves such profitable drubbings, by multiplying and enlarging
such provocations, and all will work towards the end you aim at.

XII. Another way to make your tax odious is, to _misapply the
produce of it_. If it was originally appropriated for the defence
of the provinces, and the better support of government, and
the administration of justice, where it may be necessary; then
apply none of it to that defence, but bestow it, where it is not
necessary, in augmenting salaries or pensions to every governor,
who has distinguished himself by his enmity to the people, and by
calumniating them to their sovereign. This will make them pay it more
unwillingly, and be more apt to quarrel with those that collect it,
and those that imposed it, who will quarrel again with them, and all
shall contribute to your own purpose, of making them weary of your
government.

XIII. If the people of any province have been accustomed to _support
their own governors and judges_ to satisfaction, you are to
apprehend, that such governors and judges may be thereby influenced
to treat the people kindly, and to do them justice. This is another
reason for applying part of that revenue in larger salaries to such
governors and judges, given, as their commissions are, during _your_
pleasure only, forbidding them to take any salaries from their
provinces; that thus the people may no longer hope any kindness from
their governors, or (in crown cases) any justice from their judges.
And as the money, thus misapplied in one province, is extorted from
all, probably all will resent the misapplication.

XIV. If the parliaments of your provinces should dare to claim
rights, or complain of your administration, order them to be harassed
with _repeated dissolutions_. If the same men are continually
returned by new elections, adjourn their meetings to some country
village, where they cannot be accommodated, and there keep them
during pleasure; for this, you know, is your prerogative, and an
excellent one it is, as you may manage it, to promote discontents
among the people, diminish their respect, and increase their
disaffection.

XV. Convert the brave honest officers of your _navy_ into pimping
tide-waiters and colony officers of the _customs_. Let those, who
in time of war fought gallantly in defence of the commerce of their
countrymen, in peace be taught to prey upon it. Let them learn
to be corrupted by great and real smugglers; but (to show their
diligence) scour with armed boats every bay, harbour, river, creek,
cove or nook, throughout the coast of your colonies; stop and detain
every coaster, every wood-boat, every fisherman, tumble their
cargoes and even their ballast inside out, and upside down; and if
a pennyworth of pins is found un-entered, let the whole be seized
and confiscated. Thus shall the trade of your colonists suffer more
from their friends in time of peace, than it did from their enemies
in war. Then let these boats' crews land upon every farm in their
way, rob their orchards, steal their pigs and poultry, and insult
the inhabitants. If the injured and exasperated farmers, unable to
procure other justice, should attack the aggressors, drub them, and
burn their boats, you are to call this _high treason and rebellion_,
order fleets and armies into their country, and threaten to carry
all the offenders three thousand miles to be hanged, drawn, and
quartered.--O! this will work admirably!

XVI. If you are told of _discontents_ in your colonies, never
believe that they are general, or that you have given occasion for
them; therefore do not think of applying any remedy, or of changing
any offensive measure. Redress no grievance, lest they should be
encouraged to demand the redress of some other grievance. Grant no
request, that is just and reasonable, lest they should make another,
that is unreasonable. Take all your informations of the state of
the colonies from your governors and officers in enmity with them.
Encourage and reward these leasing-makers, secrete their lying
accusations, lest they should be confuted, but act upon them as the
clearest evidence; and believe nothing you hear from the friends
of the people. Suppose all _their_ complaints to be invented and
promoted by a few factious demagogues, whom if you could catch and
hang, all would be quiet. Catch and hang a few of them accordingly,
and the blood of the martyrs shall work miracles in favour of your
purpose[137].

XVII. If you see _rival nations_ rejoicing at the prospect of your
disunion with your provinces, and endeavouring to promote it, if
they translate, publish and applaud all the complaints of your
discontented colonists, at the same time privately stimulating you to
severer measures, let not that alarm or offend you. Why should it?
since you all mean the same thing?

XVIII. If any colony should _at their own charge erect a fortress_,
to secure their _port_ against the fleets of a foreign enemy, get
your governor to betray that fortress into your hands. Never think
of paying what it cost the country, for that would look, at least,
like some regard for justice; but turn it into a citadel, to awe
the inhabitants and curb their commerce. If they should have lodged
in such fortress the very arms they bought and used to aid you in
your conquests, seize them all; it will provoke like ingratitude
added to robbery. One admirable effect of these operations will be,
to discourage every other colony from erecting such defences, and
so their and your enemies may more easily invade them, to the great
disgrace of your government, and of course the furtherance of your
project.

XIX. Send armies into their country, under pretence of protecting the
inhabitants; but, instead of garrisoning the forts on their frontiers
with those troops, to prevent incursions, demolish those forts, and
order the troops into the heart of the country, that the savages may
be encouraged to attack the frontiers[138], and that the troops may
be protected by the inhabitants: this will seem to proceed from your
_ill-will or your ignorance_, and contribute farther to produce
and strengthen an opinion among them, that you are no longer fit to
govern them[139].

XX. Lastly, invest the _general of your army in the provinces_ with
great and unconstitutional powers, and free him from the controul of
even your own civil governors. Let him have troops enow under his
command, with all the fortresses in his possession, and who knows but
(like some provincial generals in the Roman empire, and encouraged
by the universal discontent you have produced) he may take it into
his head to set up for himself? If he should, and you have carefully
practised these few excellent rules of mine, take my word for it,
all the provinces will immediately join him--and you will that day
(if you have not done it sooner) get rid of the trouble of governing
them, and all the plagues attending their commerce and connection
from thenceforth and for ever.

FOOTNOTES:

[136] These rules first appeared in a London newspaper about the
beginning of the year 1774, and have several times since been
introduced into our public prints.--The minister alluded to is
supposed to be the Earl of Hillsborough.

"The causes and motions of seditions (says Lord Bacon) are,
innovation in religion, taxes, alteration of laws and customs,
breaking of privileges, general oppression, advancement of unworthy
persons, strangers, dearths, disbanded soldiers, factions grown
desperate, and whatsoever in offending people joineth and knitteth
them in a common cause." B. V.

[137] One of the American writers affirms, "That there has not been
a single instance in which _they_ have complained, without being
rebuked, or in which they have been complained _against_, without
being punished."--A fundamental mistake in the minister occasioned
this. Every individual in New England (the peccant country) was held
a coward or a knave, and the disorders, which spread abroad there,
were treated as the result of the _too great lenity_ of Britain! By
the aid of this short and benevolent rule, judgment was ever wisely
predetermined, to the shutting out redress on the one hand, and
inforcing every rigour of punishment on the other. B. V.

[138] I am not versed in Indian affairs, but I find, that in April,
1773, the assembled chiefs of the western nations told one of our
Indian agents, "that they remembered their father, the king of Great
Britain's message, delivered to them last fall, of demolishing
Fort Pittsburg (on the Ohio) and removing the soldiers with their
sharp-edged weapons out of the country:--this gave them great
pleasure, as it was a strong proof of his paternal kindness towards
them." (See Considerations on the Agreement with Mr. T. Walpole for
Lands upon the Ohio, p. 9). This is general history: I attempt no
application of facts, personally invidious. B. V.

[139] As the reader may be inclined to divide his belief between
the wisdom of ministry and the candor and veracity of Dr. Franklin,
I shall inform him that two contrary objections may be made to the
truth of this representation. The first is, that the conduct of Great
Britain is made _too_ absurd for possibility, and the second, that
it is not made absurd _enough_ for fact. If we consider that this
piece does not include the measures subsequent to 1773, the latter
difficulty is easily set aside. The former I can only solve by the
many instances in history, where the infatuation of individuals has
brought the heaviest calamities upon nations. B. V.




  _State of America on Dr. Franklin's Arrival there._


  _Philadelphia, May 16, 1775._

  DEAR FRIEND[140],

You will have heard before this reaches you, of a march stolen by the
regulars into the country by night, and of their _expedition_ back
again. They retreated 20 miles in [6] hours.

The governor had called the assembly to propose Lord North's pacific
plan, but, before the time of their meeting, began cutting of
throats.--You know it was said he carried the sword in one hand, and
the olive branch in the other; and it seems he chose to give them a
taste of the sword first.

He is doubling his fortifications at Boston, and hopes to secure
his troops till succour arrives. The place indeed is naturally so
defensible, that I think them in no danger.

All America is exasperated by his conduct, and more firmly united
than ever. The breach between the two countries is grown wider, and
in danger of becoming irreparable.

I had a passage of six weeks, the weather constantly so moderate that
a London wherry might have accompanied us all the way. I got home
in the evening, and the next morning was unanimously chosen by the
assembly a delegate to the congress, now sitting.

In coming over, I made a valuable philosophical discovery, which I
shall communicate to you when I can get a little time. At present am
extremely hurried.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Yours most affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[140] I run much risque in the publication of the three following
letters[141]; but I think they contain such valuable facts, and
show so well the nature of Dr. Franklin's temper, that I ought to
encounter some difficulty, rather than suffer them to be lost. B. V.

[141] The other two letters will be found in the order of their
dates, July 7, and Oct. 3, 1775. _Editor._




  _Proposed Vindication and Offer from Congress to Parliament, in
  1775[142]._


Forasmuch as the enemies of America, in the parliament of Great
Britain, to render us odious to the nation, and give an ill
impression of us in the minds of other European powers, have
represented us as unjust and ungrateful in the highest degree;
asserting on every occasion, that the colonies were settled at the
expence of Britain; that they were, at the expence of the same,
protected in their infancy; that they now ungratefully and unjustly
refuse to contribute to their own protection, and the common defence
of the nation; that they aim at independence; that they intend an
abolition of the navigation acts; and that they are fraudulent in
their commercial dealings, and purpose to cheat their creditors in
Britain, by avoiding the payment of their just debts:--

[And] as, by frequent repetition, these groundless assertions and
malicious calumnies may, if not contradicted and refuted, obtain
farther credit, and be injurious throughout Europe to the reputation
and interest of the confederate colonies, it seems proper and
necessary to examine them in our own just vindication.

With regard to the first, _that the colonies were_ settled _at
the expence of Britain_, it is a known fact, that none of the
twelve united colonies were settled, or even discovered, at the
expence of England. Henry the VIIth indeed granted a commission to
Sebastian Cabot, a Venetian, and his sons, to sail into the western
seas for the discovery of new countries; but it was to be "_suis_
eorum propriis sumptibus et expensis," at their _own_ costs and
charges[143]. They discovered, but soon slighted and neglected, these
northern territories; which were, after more than a hundred years
dereliction, purchased of the natives, and settled at the charge
and by the labour of private men and bodies of men, our ancestors,
who came over hither for that purpose. But our adversaries have
never been able to produce any record, that ever the _parliament_ or
government of England was at the smallest expence on these accounts:
on the contrary, there exists on the journals of parliament a
solemn declaration in 1642, (only twenty-two years after the first
settlement of the Massachusetts, when, if such expence had ever been
incurred, some of the members must have known and remembered it)
"That these colonies had been planted and established _without any
expence to the state_.[144]" _New-York_ is the only colony in the
founding of which England can pretend to have been at any expence,
and that was only the charge of a small armament to take it from the
Dutch, who planted it. But to retain this colony at peace, another at
that time, full as valuable, planted by private countrymen of _ours_,
was given up by the crown to the Dutch in exchange, viz. Surinam, now
a wealthy sugar-colony in Guiana, and which, but for that cession,
might still have remained in our possession. Of late, indeed, Britain
has been at some expence in planting two colonies, _Georgia_[145]
and _Nova Scotia_; but those are not in our confederacy; and the
expence she has been at in their name, has chiefly been in grants of
sums unnecessarily large, by way of salaries to officers sent from
England, and in jobs to friends, whereby dependants might be provided
for; those excessive grants not being requisite to the welfare and
good government of the colonies; which good government (as experience
in many instances of other colonies has taught us) may be much more
frugally, and full as effectually provided for, and supported.

With regard to the second assertion, _that these colonies were_
protected _in their infant state by England_, it is a notorious fact,
that in none of the many wars with the Indian natives, sustained
by our infant settlements for a century after our first arrival,
were ever any troops or forces of any kind sent from England to
assist us; nor were any forts built at her expence to secure our
sea-ports from foreign invaders; nor any ships of war sent to protect
our trade, till many years after our first settlement, when our
commerce became an object of revenue, or of advantage to British
merchants, and then it was thought necessary to have a frigate in
some of our ports, during peace, to give weight to the authority of
custom-house officers, who were to restrain that commerce for the
benefit of England. Our own arms, with our poverty, and the care of
a kind providence, were all this time our only protection, while
we were neglected by the English government; which either thought
us not worth its care, or, having no good will to some of us, on
account of our different sentiments in religion and politics, was
indifferent what became of us. On the other hand, the colonies have
not been wanting to do what they could in every war for annoying the
enemies of Britain. They formerly assisted her in the conquest of
Nova Scotia. In the war before last they took Louisbourg, and put
it into her hands. She made her peace with that strong fortress, by
restoring it to France, greatly to their detriment. In the last war,
it is true, Britain sent a fleet and army, who acted with an equal
army of ours, in the reduction of Canada; and perhaps thereby did
more for us, than we in the preceding wars had done for her. Let it
be remembered however, that she rejected the plan we formed in the
congress at Albany, in 1754, for our own defence, by an union of the
colonies; an union she was jealous of, and therefore chose to send
her own forces; otherwise her aid to protect us was not wanted. And
from our first settlement to that time, her military operations in
our favour were small, compared with the advantages she drew from
her exclusive commerce with us. We are however willing to give full
weight to this obligation; and as we are daily growing stronger, and
our assistance to her becomes of more importance, we should with
pleasure embrace the first opportunity of showing our gratitude, by
returning the favour in kind. But when Britain values herself as
affording us protection, we desire it may be considered, that we
have followed _her_ in all _her_ wars, and joined with her at our
own expence against all she thought fit to quarrel with. This she
has required of us, and would never permit us to keep peace with any
power she declared her enemy, though by separate treaties we might
well have done it. Under such circumstances, when, at her instance,
we made nations our enemies, whom we might otherwise have retained
our friends; we submit it to the common sense of mankind, whether
her protection of us in these wars was not our _just due_, and to
be claimed of _right_, instead of being received as a _favour_?
And whether, when all the parts of an empire exert themselves to
the utmost in their common defence, and in annoying the common
enemy, it is not as well the _parts_ that protect the _whole_, as
the _whole_ that protects the _parts_? The protection then has
been proportionably mutual. And whenever the time shall come, that
our abilities may as far exceed hers, as hers have exceeded ours,
we hope we shall be reasonable enough to rest satisfied with her
proportionable exertions, and not think we do too much for a part of
the empire, when that part does as much as it can for the whole.

The charge against us, _that we refuse to_ contribute _to our own
protection_, appears from the above to be groundless: but we farther
declare it to be absolutely false; for it is well known, that we ever
held it as our duty to grant aids to the crown, upon requisition,
towards carrying on its wars; which duty we have cheerfully complied
with, to the utmost of our abilities; insomuch that frequent and
grateful acknowledgments thereof by king and parliament appear
on their records[146]. But as Britain has enjoyed a most gainful
monopoly of our commerce, the same, with our maintaining the dignity
of the king's representative in each colony, and all our own separate
establishments of government, civil and military, has ever hitherto
been deemed an equivalent for such aids, as might otherwise be
expected from us in time of peace. And we hereby declare, that on a
reconciliation with Britain, we shall _not only_ continue _to grant
aids in time of war_, as aforesaid; but, whenever she shall think fit
to abolish her monopoly, and give us the same privileges of trade as
Scotland received at the union, and allow us a free commerce with
all the rest of the world, we shall willingly agree (and we doubt
not it will be ratified by our constituents) to _give and pay_ into
the sinking fund [100,000_l._] sterling per annum for the term of one
hundred years, which, duly, faithfully, and inviolably applied to
that purpose, is demonstrably more than sufficient to extinguish _all
her present national_ debt, since it will in that time amount, at
legal British interest, to more than 230,000,000_l._[147]

But if Britain does not think fit to accept this proposition, we,
in order to remove her groundless jealousies, _that we aim at
independence, and an abolition of the navigation act_, (which hath
in truth never been our intention) and to avoid all future disputes
about the right of making that and other acts for regulating our
commerce, do hereby declare ourselves ready and willing to enter
into a _covenant with Britain_, that she shall fully possess,
enjoy, and exercise that right, for an hundred years to come, the
same being _bonâ fide_ used for the common benefit; and in case of
such agreement, that every assembly be advised by us, to confirm it
solemnly, by laws of their own, which, once made, cannot be repealed
without the assent of the crown.

The last charge, _that we are dishonest traders, and aim at
defrauding our creditors in Britain_, is sufficiently and
authentically refuted by the solemn declarations of the British
merchants to parliament, (both at the time of the stamp-act and in
the last session) who bore ample testimony to the general good faith
and fair dealing of the Americans, and declared their confidence in
our integrity, for which we refer to their petitions on the journals
of the house of commons. And we presume we may safely call on the
body of the British tradesmen, who have had experience of both, to
say, whether they have not received much more punctual payment from
us than they generally have from the members of their own two houses
of parliament.

On the whole of the above it appears, that the charge of
_ingratitude_ towards the mother country, brought with so much
confidence against the colonies, is totally without foundation; and
that there is much more reason for retorting that charge on Britain,
who not only never contributes any aid, nor affords, by an exclusive
commerce, any advantages to Saxony, _her_ mother country; but no
longer since than in the last war, without the least provocation,
subsidized the king of Prussia while he ravaged that _mother
country_, and carried fire and sword into its capital, the fine city
of Dresden. An example we hope no provocation will induce us to
imitate.

FOOTNOTES:

[142] The following paper was drawn up in a committee of congress,
June 25, 1775, but does not appear on their minutes, a severe act of
parliament, which arrived about that time, having determined them not
to give the sum proposed in it.--[It was first printed in the Public
Advertiser for July 18, 1777. B. V.]

[143] See the Commission in the Appendix to Pownall's Administration
of the Colonies. Edit. 1775.

[144] "Veneris, 10 March, 1642. Whereas the plantations in New
England have, by the blessing of the Almighty, had good and
prosperous success, _without any public charge to this state_, and
are now likely to prove very happy for the propagation of the gospel
in those parts, and very beneficial and commodious to this kingdom
and nation: the commons, now assembled in parliament, &c. &c. &c."
See Governor Hutchinson's History. B. V.

[145] Georgia has since acceded, July, 1775.

[146] Supposed to allude to certain passages in the Journals of the
house of commons on the 4th of April, 1748, 28th January, 1756, 3d
February, 1756, 16th and 19th of May, 1757, 1st of June, 1758, 26th
and 30th of April, 1759, 26th and 31st of March, and 28th of April,
1760, 9th and 20th January, 1761, 22d and 26th January, 1762, and
14th and 17th March, 1763. B. V.

[147] See Dr. Price's Appeal on the National Debt. B. V.




  _Reprobation of Mr. Strahan's parliamentary Conduct._[148]


  _Philadelphia, July 5, 1775._

  MR. STRAHAN,

You are a member of that parliament, and have formed part of that
majority, which has condemned my native country to destruction.

You have begun to burn our towns, and to destroy their inhabitants!

Look at your hands!--they are stained with the blood of your
relations and your acquaintances.

You and I were long friends; you are at present my enemy, and I am
yours.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[148] This letter appeared, shortly after the period of its date,
in most of the public papers. We extract it from the Gentleman's
Magazine. _Editor._




  _Conciliation hopeless from the Conduct of Great Britain to
  America._


  _Philadelphia, July 7, 1775._

  DEAR FRIEND[149],

       *       *       *       *       *

The congress met at a time when all minds were so exasperated by the
perfidy of general Gage, and his attack on the country people, that
propositions of attempting an accomodation were not much relished;
and it has been with difficulty that we have carried another
humble petition to the crown, to give Britain one more chance, one
opportunity more of recovering the friendship of the colonies;
which however I think she has not sense enough to embrace, and so I
conclude she has lost them for ever.

She has begun to burn our sea-port towns; secure, I suppose, that we
shall never be able to return the outrage in kind. She may doubtless
destroy them all; but if she wishes to recover our commerce, are
these the probable means? She must certainly be distracted; for no
tradesman out of Bedlam ever thought of encreasing the number of his
customers by knocking them [on] the head; or of enabling them to pay
their debts by burning their houses.

If she wishes to have us subjects and that we should submit to her as
our compound sovereign, she is now giving us such miserable specimens
of her government, that we shall ever detest and avoid it, as a
complication of robbery, murder, famine, fire and pestilence.

You will have heard, before this reaches you, of the treacherous
conduct * * * to the remaining people in Boston, in detaining their
goods, after stipulating to let them go out with their effects, on
pretence that merchants' goods were not effects; the defeat of a
great body of his troops by the country people at Lexington; some
other small advantages gained in skirmishes with their troops; and
the action at Bunker's-hill, in which they were twice repulsed, and
the third time gained a dear victory. Enough has happened, one would
think, to convince your ministers, that the Americans will fight, and
that this is a harder nut to crack than they imagined.

We have not yet applied to any foreign power for assistance, nor
offered our commerce for their friendship. Perhaps we never may: yet
it is natural to think of it, if we are pressed.

We have now an army on the establishment which still holds yours
besieged.

My time was never more fully employed. In the morning at six, I am
at the committee of safety, appointed by the assembly to put the
province in a state of defence; which committee holds till near nine,
when I am at the congress, and that sits till after four in the
afternoon. Both these bodies proceed with the greatest unanimity,
and their meetings are well attended. It will scarce be credited in
Britain, that men can be as diligent with us from zeal for the public
good, as with you for thousands per annum. Such is the difference
between uncorrupted new states, and corrupted old ones.

Great frugality and great industry are now become fashionable here:
gentlemen, who used to entertain with two or three courses, pride
themselves now in treating with simple beef and pudding. By these
means, and the stoppage of our consumptive trade with Britain, we
shall be better able to pay our voluntary taxes for the support of
our troops. Our savings in the article of trade amount to near five
million sterling per annum.

I shall communicate your letter to Mr. Winthrop, but the camp is at
Cambridge, and he has as little leisure for philosophy as myself. * *
* Believe me ever, with sincere esteem, my dear friend,

  Yours most affectionately.

FOOTNOTE:

[149] This and the two following letters were addressed to Dr.
Priestley, as appears by a letter from that gentleman to the editor
of the Monthly Magazine, which will be found in the appendix to the
present volume. _Editor._




  _Account of the first Campaign made by the British Forces in
  America[150]._


  _Philadelphia, Oct. 3, 1775._

  DEAR SIR,

I am to set out to-morrow for the camp[151], and having but just
heard of this opportunity, can only write a line to say that I am
well and hearty.--Tell our dear good friend * * *, who sometimes has
his doubts and despondencies about our firmness, that America is
determined and unanimous; a very few tories and place-men excepted,
who will probably soon export themselves.--Britain, at the expence
of three millions, has killed one hundred and fifty Yankies this
campaign, which is 20,000_l._ a head; and at Bunker's Hill she gained
a mile of ground, half of which she lost again by our taking post on
Ploughed Hill. During the same time sixty thousand children have been
born in America. From these _data_ his mathematical head will easily
calculate the time and expence necessary to kill us all, and conquer
our whole territory. My sincere respects to * * * *, and to the club
of honest whigs at * * * * *. Adieu. I am ever

  Yours most affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[150] This letter has been several times very incorrectly printed: it
is here given from a genuine copy. B. V.

[151] Dr. Franklin, col. Harrison, and Mr. Lynch, were at this time
appointed by congress (of which they were members) to confer on
certain subjects with gen. Washington. The American army was then
employed in blocking up gen. Howe in Boston; and I believe it was
during this visit, that gen. Washington communicated the following
memorable anecdote to Dr. Franklin; _viz._ "that there had been a
time, when this army had been so destitute of military stores, as
not to have powder enough in all its magazines, to furnish more than
_five_ rounds per man for their small arms." Great guns were out
of the question; they were fired now and then, only to show that
they had them. Yet this secret was kept with so much address and
good countenance from both armies, that gen. Washington was enabled
effectually to continue the blockade. B. V.




  _Probability of a Separation._


  _Philadelphia, Oct. 3, 1775._

I wish as ardently as you can do for peace, and should rejoice
exceedingly in co-operating with you to that end. But every ship from
Britain brings some intelligence of new measures, that tend more and
more to exasperate: and it seems to me, that until you have found
by dear experience the reducing us by force impracticable, you will
think of nothing fair and reasonable. We have as yet resolved only on
defensive measures. If you would recal your forces and stay at home,
we should meditate nothing to injure you. A little time so given for
cooling on both sides would have excellent effects. But you will goad
and provoke us. You despise us too much; and you are insensible of
the Italian adage, that _there is no little enemy_. I am persuaded
the body of the British people are our friends; but they are
changeable, and by your lying gazettes may soon be made our enemies.
Our respect for them will proportionally diminish; and I see clearly
we are on the high road to mutual enmity, hatred, and detestation. A
separation will of course be inevitable. It is a million of pities
so fair a plan, as we have hitherto been engaged in for increasing
strength and empire with _public felicity_, should be destroyed by
the mangling hands of a few blundering ministers. It will not be
destroyed: God will protect and prosper it: you will only exclude
yourselves from any share in it. We hear, that more ships and troops
are coming out. We know you may do us a great deal of mischief, but
we are determined to bear it patiently as long as we can; but if you
flatter yourselves with beating us into submission, you know neither
the people nor the country.

The congress is still sitting, and will wait the result of their
_last_ petition.




  _Letter to Monsieur Dumas, urging him to sound the several Courts
  of Europe, by Means of their Ambassadors at the Hague, as to any
  Assistance they may be disposed to afford America in her Struggle
  for Independence[152]._


  _Philadelphia, Dec. 9, 1775._

  DEAR SIR,

I received your several favours, of May 18, June 30, and July 8,
by Messrs. Vaillant and Pochard; whom, if I could serve upon your
recommendation, it would give me great pleasure. Their total want of
English is at present an obstruction to their getting any employment
among us; but I hope they will soon obtain some knowledge of it. This
is a good country for artificers or farmers, but gentlemen of mere
science in _les belles lettres_ cannot so easily subsist here, there
being little demand for their assistance among an industrious people,
who, as yet, have not much leisure for studies of that kind.

I am much obliged by the kind present you have made us of your
edition of _Vattel_. It came to us in good season, when the
circumstances of a rising state make it necessary frequently to
consult the law of nations. Accordingly that copy which I kept
(after depositing one in our own public library here, and sending
the other to the college of Massachusett's Bay, as you directed) has
been continually in the hands of the members of our congress, now
sitting, who are much pleased with your notes and preface, and have
entertained a high and just esteem for their author. Your manuscript
_Idée sur le government et la royauté_, is also well relished, and
may, in time, have its effect. I thank you, likewise, for the other
smaller pieces, which accompanied Vattel. _Le court exposé de ce qui
s'est passé entre la cour Br. et les colonies, &c._ being a very
concise and clear statement of facts, will be reprinted here for the
use of our new friends in Canada. The translations of the proceedings
of our congress are very acceptable. I send you herewith what of them
has been farther published here, together with a few newspapers,
containing accounts of some of the successes providence has favoured
us with. We are threatened from England with a very powerful force,
to come next year against us. We are making all the provision in our
power here to oppose that force, and we hope we shall be able to
defend ourselves. But, as the events of war are always uncertain,
possibly, after another campaign, we may find it necessary to ask
aid of some foreign power. It gives us great pleasure to learn from
you, that _toute l'Europe nous souhaite le plus heureux succes pour
le maintien de nos libertés_. But we wish to know, whether any one
of them, from principles of humanity, is disposed magnanimously to
step in for the relief of an oppressed people, or whether, if, as
it seems likely to happen, we should be obliged to break off all
connection with Britain, and declare ourselves an independent people,
there is any state or power in Europe, who would be willing to enter
into an alliance with us for the benefit of our commerce, which
amounted, before the war, to near seven millions sterling per annum,
and must continually increase, as our people increase most rapidly.
Confiding, my dear friend, in your good will to us and our cause,
and in your sagacity and abilities for business, the committee of
congress, appointed for the purpose of establishing and conducting
a correspondence with our friends in Europe, of which committee
I have the honour to be a member, have directed me to request of
you, that, as you are situated at the Hague, where ambassadors from
all the courts reside, you would make use of the opportunity that
situation affords you, of discovering, if possible, the disposition
of the several courts with respect to such assistance or alliance,
if we should apply for the one, or propose the other. As it may
possibly be necessary, in particular instances, that you should, for
this purpose, confer directly with some great ministers, and show
them this letter as your credential, we only recommend it to your
discretion, that you proceed therein with such caution, as to keep
the same from the knowledge of the English ambassador, and prevent
any public appearance, at present, of your being employed in any such
business, as thereby, we imagine, many inconveniences may be avoided,
and your means of rendering us service, increased.

That you may be better able to answer some questions, which will
probably be put to you, concerning our present situation, we inform
you--that the whole continent is very firmly united--the party for
the measures of the British ministry being very small, and much
dispersed--that we have had on foot, the last campaign, an army of
near twenty-five thousand men, wherewith we have been able, not only
to block up the king's army in Boston, but to spare considerable
detachments for the invasion of Canada, where we have met with
great success, as the printed papers sent herewith will inform
you, and have now reason to expect the whole province may be soon
in our possession--that we purpose greatly to increase our force
for the ensuing year; and thereby we hope, with the assistance
of well-disciplined militia, to be able to defend our coast,
notwithstanding its great extent--that we have already a small
squadron of armed vessels, to protect our coasting trade, who have
had some success in taking several of the enemy's cruisers, and some
of their transport vessels and store-ships. This little naval force
we are about to augment, and expect it may be more considerable in
the next summer.

We have hitherto applied to no foreign power. We are using the
utmost industry in endeavouring to make salt-petre, and with daily
increasing success. Our artificers are also every where busy in
fabricating small arms, casting cannon, &c. yet both arms and
ammunition are much wanted. Any merchants, who would venture to send
ships, laden with those articles, might make great profit; such is
the demand in every colony, and such generous prices are and will be
given; of which, and of the manner of conducting such a voyage, the
bearer, Mr. Storey, can more fully inform you: and whoever brings in
those articles, is allowed to carry off the value in provisions, to
our West Indies, where they will probably fetch a very high price,
the general exportation from North America being stopped. This you
will see more particularly in a printed resolution of the congress.

We are in great want of good engineers, and wish you could engage,
and send us two able ones, in time for the next campaign, one
acquainted with field service, sieges, &c. and the other with
fortifying of sea-ports. They will, if well recommended, be made
very welcome, and have honourable appointments, besides the expences
of their voyage hither, in which Mr. Storey can also advise them. As
what we now request of you, besides taking up your time, may put you
to some expense, we send you for the present, enclosed, a bill for
one hundred pounds sterling, to defray such expences, and desire you
to be assured that your services will be considered, and honourably
rewarded by the congress.

We desire, also, that you would take the trouble of receiving from
Arthur Lee, esquire, agent for the congress in England, such letters
as may be sent by him to your care, and of forwarding them to us with
your dispatches. When you have occasion to write to him to inform
him of any thing, which it may be of importance that our friends
there should be acquainted with, please to send your letters to him,
under cover, directed to Mr. Alderman Lee, merchant, on Tower-hill,
London; and do not send it by post, but by some trusty shipper, or
other prudent person, who will deliver it with his own hand. And
when you send to us, if you have not a direct safe opportunity, we
recommend sending by way of St. Eustatia, to the care of Messrs.
Robert and Cornelius Stevenson, merchants there, who will forward
your dispatches to me.

  With sincere and great esteem and respect,

  I am, sir,

  Your most obedient, humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

  Mons. Dumas.

FOOTNOTE:

[152] This letter is taken from an American periodical publication
entitled The Port Folio, in which it appeared July 31, 1802. _Editor._




  _Letter from Lord Howe to Dr. Franklin[153]._


  _Eagle, June the 20th, 1776._

I cannot, my worthy friend, permit the letters and parcels, which I
have sent (in the state I received them) to be landed, without adding
a word upon the subject of the injurious extremities in which our
unhappy disputes have engaged us.

You will learn the nature of my mission, from the official
dispatches which I have recommended to be forwarded by the same
conveyance. Retaining all the earnestness I ever expressed, to see
our differences accommodated; I shall conceive, if I meet with the
disposition in the colonies which I was once taught to expect, the
most flattering hopes of proving serviceable in the objects of
the king's paternal solicitude, by promoting the establishment of
lasting peace and union with the colonies. But if the deep-rooted
prejudices of America, and the necessity of preventing her trade from
passing into foreign channels, must keep us still a divided people;
I shall, from every private as well as public motive, most heartily
lament, that this is not the moment wherein those great objects of my
ambition are to be attained; and that I am to be longer deprived of
an opportunity, to assure you personally of the regard with which I am

  Your sincere and faithful

  humble servant,

  HOWE.

P. S. I was disappointed of the opportunity I expected for sending
this letter, at the time it was dated; and have ever since been
prevented by calms and contrary winds from getting here, to inform
general Howe of the commission with which I have the satisfaction to
be charged, and of his being joined in it.

  _Off of Sandy Hook, 12th of July._

  Superscribed, HOWE.

  _To Benjamin Franklin, Esq.
  Philadelphia._

FOOTNOTE:

[153] In the year 1776 an act of parliament passed, to prohibit
and restrain, on the one hand, the trade and intercourse of the
refractory colonies respectively during the revolt; and on the other
hand, to enable persons appointed by the crown to grant _pardons_
and declare any particular district at the _king's peace, &c._ Lord
Howe (who had been previously appointed commander of the fleet in
North America) was, on May 3, declared joint _commissioner_ with his
brother gen. Howe, for the latter purposes of the act. He sailed May
12; and while off the Massachusett's coast prepared a declaration
announcing this commission, and accompanied it with circular letters.
July 4, independence had been declared; but nevertheless congress
(invited by various attempts made to procure a conference) resolved
to send Messieurs Franklin, J. Adams, and E. Rutledge, to learn
the propositions of the commissioners, by whom authorized, and to
whom addressed. The commissioners having no power to treat with
congress in its public capacity, and congress not being impowered
by their representatives to rescind the act of independence, the
conference was broken off. It remains only to add, that, on Sept.
19, the commissioners declared themselves ready to confer with any
of the well-affected, on the means of restoring peace and permanent
union with every colony as part of the British empire; and promised
a _revision_ of the several royal _instructions_ supposed to lay
improper restraints on colony-legislation, and also the king's
_concurrence_ in a revision of the objectionable acts of parliament:
which seemed the ultimatum of the commission.--Parliament however,
by a subsequent act (which, among other things, formally renounced
taxation in North America and the West Indies) authorized five
commissioners to treat, settle, and agree, even with congress; but
subject to the farther confirmation of parliament. Lord Carlisle, and
Messieurs Johnson and Eden, with the commanders in chief of the land
and sea forces, were the commissioners appointed by the crown under
this act; and Dr. Adam Ferguson was made secretary to the commission.

Mr. Henry Strachey had been secretary to the _first_ commission,
attended with the following singular circumstance, as stated in the
house of lords. In this commission for restoring peace to America,
"(or _in other words_ to induce America at once to put a confidence
in the crown, and to believe that the parliament of England is a
sufficiently powerful and honest barrier for them to trust to) the
secretary (Mr. Strachey) had 500_l._ granted for life out of the _four
and a half_ per cent. duty, filched by the crown from the West-India
Islands, and in opposition to a solemn address of parliament desiring
that it might be applied to the original purposes for which it was
granted by the respective assemblies of the islands."--What these
original purposes of the grants were, I meant very briefly to have
stated: but have not been able to procure the proper documents in
time. B. V.




  _Dr. Franklin's Answer to Lord Howe._


  _Philadelphia, July 30, 1776._

  MY LORD,

I received safe the letters your lordship so kindly forwarded to me,
and beg you to accept _my_ thanks.

The official dispatches to which you refer me, contain nothing more
than what we had seen in the act of parliament, viz. "Offers of
pardon upon submission;" which I was sorry to find; as it must give
your lordship pain to be sent so far on so hopeless a business.

Directing pardons to be offered to the colonies, who are the very
parties injured, expresses indeed that opinion of our ignorance,
baseness, and insensibility, which your uninformed and proud nation
has long been pleased to entertain of us; but it can have no other
effect than that of encreasing our resentments.----It is impossible
we should think of submission to a government, that has, with the
most wanton barbarity and cruelty, burned our defenceless towns in
the midst of winter; excited the savages to massacre our (peaceful)
farmers; and our slaves to murder their masters; and is even now[154]
bringing foreign mercenaries to deluge our settlements with blood.
These atrocious injuries have extinguished every spark of affection
for that parent country we once held so dear: but were it possible
for _us_ to forget and forgive them, it is not possible for _you_ (I
mean the British nation) to forgive the people you have so heavily
injured; you can never confide again in those as fellow-subjects, and
permit them to enjoy equal freedom, to whom you know you have given
such just causes of lasting enmity; and this must impel you, were we
again under your government, to endeavour the breaking our spirit by
the severest tyranny, and obstructing by every means in your power
our growing strength and prosperity.

But your lordship mentions "the king's paternal solicitude for
promoting the establishment of lasting peace and union with the
colonies." If by _peace_ is here meant, a peace to be entered into
by distinct states, now at war; and his majesty has given your
lordship powers to treat with us of such a peace, I may venture to
say, though without authority, that I think a treaty for that purpose
not quite impracticable, before we enter into foreign alliances.
But I am persuaded you have no such powers. Your nation, though, by
punishing those American governors who have fomented the discord,
rebuilding our burnt towns, and repairing as far as possible the
mischiefs done us, she might recover a great share of our regard; and
the greatest share of our growing commerce, with all the advantages
of that additional strength, to be derived from a friendship with
us; yet I know too well her abounding pride and deficient wisdom, to
believe she will ever take such salutary measures. Her fondness for
conquest as a warlike nation; her lust of dominion as an ambitious
one; and her thirst for a gainful monopoly as a commercial one (none
of them legitimate causes of war) will join to hide from her eyes
every view of her true interest, and continually goad her on in these
ruinous distant expeditions, so destructive both of lives and of
treasure, that they must prove as pernicious to her in the end, as
the Croisades formerly were to most of the nations of Europe.

I have not the vanity, my lord, to think of intimidating, by thus
predicting the effects of this war; for I know it will in England
have the fate of all my former predictions; not to be believed till
the event shall verify it.

Long did I endeavour, with unfeigned and unwearied zeal, to preserve
from breaking that fine and noble porcelaine vase----the British
empire; for I knew that being once broken, the separate parts could
not retain even their _share_ of the strength and value that existed
in the whole; and that a perfect _re-union_ of those parts could
scarce ever be hoped for. Your lordship may possibly remember the
tears of joy that wetted my cheek, when, at your good sister's in
London, you once gave me expectations, that a reconciliation might
soon take place. I had the misfortune to find these expectations
disappointed, and to be treated as the cause of the mischief I was
labouring to prevent. My consolation under that groundless and
malevolent treatment was, that I retained the friendship of many wise
and good men in that country; and among the rest, some share in the
regard of lord Howe.

The well-founded esteem, and permit me to say affection, which I
shall always have for your lordship, make it painful to me to see you
engaged in conducting a war, the great ground of which (as described
in your letter) is "the necessity of preventing the American _trade_
from passing into foreign channels." To me it seems, that neither the
obtaining or retaining any trade, how valuable soever, is an object
for which men may justly spill each other's blood; that the true
and sure means of extending and securing commerce are the goodness
and cheapness of commodities; and that the profits of no trade can
ever be equal to the expence of compelling it, and holding it by
fleets and armies. I consider this war against us, therefore, as both
unjust and unwise; and I am persuaded, that cool and dispassionate
posterity will condemn to infamy those who advised it; and that even
success will not save from some degree of dishonour, those who have
voluntarily engaged to conduct it.

I know your great motive in coming hither, was the hope of being
instrumental in a reconciliation; and I believe, when you find that
to be impossible, on any terms given you to propose, you will then
relinquish so odious a command, and return to a more honourable
private station.

With the greatest and most sincere respect, I have the honour to be,

  My lord,

  Your lordship's most obedient, humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN[155].

FOOTNOTES:

[154] About this time the Hessians, &c. had just arrived from Europe,
at Staten Island and New York. B. V.

[155] It occurs to me to mention that Dr. Franklin was supposed to
have been the inventor of a little _emblematical design_ at the
commencement of our disputes, representing the state of Great Britain
and her colonies, should the former persist in restraining the
latter's trade, destroying their currency, and taxing their people by
laws made by a legislature in which they were not represented.--Great
Britain was supposed to have been placed upon the globe: but the
colonies, her limbs, being severed from her, she was seen lifting
her eyes and mangled stumps to heaven; her shield, which she was
unable to wield, lay useless by her side; her lance had pierced New
England; the laurel branch was fallen from the hand of Pensylvania;
the English oak had lost its head, and stood a bare trunk with a few
withered branches; briars and thorns were on the ground beneath it;
our ships had brooms at their topmast heads, denoting their being
upon sale; and Britannia herself was seen sliding off the world, no
longer able to hold its balance; her fragments overspread with the
label _date obolum Belisario_.--This in short, was the fable of the
belly and the members reversed. But I tell the story chiefly for the
sake of the _moral_, which has the air of having been suggested by
Dr. Franklin[156]; and is as follows.--"The political moral of this
picture is now easily discovered. History affords us many instances
of the ruin of states, by the prosecution of measures ill suited
to the temper and genius of its people. The ordaining of laws in
favour of _one_ part of the nation, to the prejudice and oppression
of _another_, is certainly the most erroneous and mistaken policy.
An _equal_ dispensation of protection, rights, privileges, and
advantages, is what every part is intitled to, and ought to enjoy;
it being a matter of no moment to the state, whether a subject
grows rich and flourishing on the Thames or the Ohio, in Edinburgh
or Dublin. These measures never fail to create great and violent
jealousies and animosities between the people favoured and the people
oppressed: from whence a total separation of affections, interests,
political obligations, and all manners of connections, necessarily
ensues; by which the whole state is weakened and perhaps ruined for
ever."

This language is part of the same system with the following fragment
of a sentence, which Dr. Franklin inserted in a political publication
of one of his friends. "The attempts to establish _arbitrary power_
over so great a part of the British empire, [are] to the imminent
hazard of our most valuable commerce, and of that national strength,
security, and felicity, which depend on _union_ and _liberty_;"--The
preservation of which, I am told, he used to say, had been the great
object and labour of his life; the whole being such a thing _as the
world before never saw_. B. V.

[156] This design was printed on a _card_, and Dr. Franklin at the
time I believe occasionally used to write his notes on such cards.
It was also printed on a _half sheet of paper_, with an explanation
by some other person, and the moral given above. The drawing was but
moderately executed.




  _Comparison of Great Britain and America as to Credit, in
  1777[157]._


In borrowing money a man's credit depends on some or all of the
following particulars.

First, His known conduct respecting former loans, and his punctuality
in discharging them.

Secondly, His industry.

Thirdly, His frugality.

Fourthly, The amount and the certainty of his income, and the freedom
of his estate from the incumbrances of prior debts.

Fifthly, His well founded prospects of greater future ability, by the
improvement of his estate in value, and by aids from others.

Sixthly, His known prudence in managing his general affairs, and the
advantage they will probably receive from the loan which he desires.

Seventhly, His known probity and honest character, manifested by
his voluntary discharge of debts, which he could not have been
legally compelled to pay. The circumstances which give credit to an
_individual_ ought to have, and will have, their weight upon the
lenders of money to _public bodies_ or nations. If then we consider
and compare Britain and America, in these several particulars, upon
the question, "To which is it safest to lend money?" We shall find,

1. Respecting _former loans_, that America, which borrowed ten
millions during the last war for the maintenance of her army of
25,000 men and other charges, had faithfully discharged and paid
that debt, and all her other debts, in 1772. Whereas Britain, during
those ten years of peace and profitable commerce, had made little or
no reduction of her debt; but on the contrary, from time to time,
diminished the hopes of her creditors, by a wanton diversion and
misapplication of the sinking fund destined for discharging it.

2. Respecting _industry_; every man [in America] is employed, the
greater part in cultivating their own lands, the rest in handicrafts,
navigation, and commerce. An idle man there is a rarity, idleness
and inutility are disgraceful. In England, the number of that
character is immense, fashion has spread it far and wide; hence
the embarrassments of private fortunes, and the daily bankruptcies
arising from an universal fondness for appearance and expensive
pleasures; and hence, in some degree, the mismanagement of public
business; for habits of business, and ability in it, are acquired
only by practice; and where universal dissipation, and the perpetual
pursuit of amusement are the mode, the youth, educated in it,
can rarely afterwards acquire that patient attention and close
application to affairs, which are so necessary to a statesman charged
with the care of national welfare. _Hence_ their frequent errors in
policy, and hence the weariness at public councils, and backwardness
in going to them, the constant unwillingness to engage in any measure
that requires thought and consideration, and the readiness for
postponing every new proposition; which postponing is therefore the
only part of business that they come to be expert in, an expertness
produced necessarily by so much daily practice. Whereas in America,
men bred to close employment in their private affairs, attend with
ease to those of the public, when engaged in them, and nothing fails
through negligence.

3. Respecting _frugality_; the manner of living in America is more
simple and less expensive than that in England: plain tables, plain
clothing, and plain furniture in houses prevail, with few carriages
of pleasure; there, an expensive appearance hurts credit, and
is avoided: in England, it is often assumed to gain credit, and
continued to ruin. Respecting _public_ affairs, the difference is
still greater. In England, the salaries of officers, and emoluments
of office are enormous. The king has a million sterling per annum,
and yet cannot maintain his family free of debt: secretaries of
state, lords of treasury, admiralty, &c. have vast appointments: an
auditor of the exchequer has sixpence in the pound, or a fortieth
part of all the public money expended by the nation; so that when a
war costs forty millions one million is paid to him: an inspector
of the mint, in the last new coinage, received as his fee 65,000_l._
sterling per annum; to all which rewards no service these gentlemen
can render the public is by any means equivalent. All this is paid
by the people, who are oppressed by taxes so occasioned, and thereby
rendered less able to contribute to the payment of necessary national
debts. In America, salaries, where indispensible, are extremely
low; but much of the public business is done gratis. The honour of
serving the public ably and faithfully is deemed sufficient. _Public
spirit_ really exists there, and has great effects. In England it
is universally deemed a non-entity, and whoever pretends to it is
laughed at as a fool, or suspected as a knave. The committees of
congress which form the board of war, the board of treasury, the
board of foreign affairs, the naval board, that for accounts, &c. all
attend the business of their respective functions, without any salary
or emolument whatever, though they spend in it much more of their
time than any lord of treasury or admiralty in England can spare from
his amusements. A British minister lately computed, that the whole
expence of the Americans, in their _civil_ government over three
millions of people amounted to but 70,000_l._ sterling, and drew from
thence a conclusion, that they ought to be taxed, until their expence
was equal in proportion to that which it costs Britain to govern
eight millions. He had no idea of a contrary conclusion, that if
three millions may be well governed for 70,000_l._ eight millions may
be as well governed for three times that sum, and that therefore the
expence of his own government should be diminished. In that corrupted
nation no man is ashamed of being concerned in lucrative _government
jobs_, in which the public money is egregiously misapplied and
squandered, the treasury pillaged, and more numerous and heavy taxes
accumulated, to the great oppression of the people. But the prospect
of a greater number of such jobs by a war is an inducement with
many, to cry out for war upon all occasions, and to oppose every
proposition of peace. Hence the constant increase of the national
debt, and the absolute improbability of its ever being discharged.

4. Respecting the _amount and certainty of income, and solidity of
security_; the _whole_ thirteen states of America are engaged for
the payment of every debt contracted by the congress, and the debt
to be contracted by the present war is the _only_ debt they will
have to pay; all, or nearly all, the former debts of particular
colonies being already discharged. Whereas England will have to pay
not only the enormous debt this war must occasion, but all their
vast preceding debt, or the interest of it,--and while America is
enriching itself by prizes made upon the British commerce, more than
it ever did by any commerce of its own, under the restraints of a
British monopoly; Britain is growing poorer by the loss of that
monopoly, and the diminution of its revenues, and of course less able
to discharge the present indiscreet increase of its expences.

5. Respecting prospects of greater future ability, Britain has none
such. Her islands are circumscribed by the ocean; and excepting a
few parks or forests, she has no new land to cultivate, and cannot
therefore extend her improvements. Her numbers too, instead of
increasing from increased subsistence, are continually diminishing
from growing luxury, and the increasing difficulties of maintaining
families, which of course discourage early marriages. Thus she
will have fewer people to assist in paying her debts, and that
diminished number will be poorer. America, on the contrary, has,
besides her lands already cultivated, a vast territory yet to be
cultivated; which, being cultivated, continually increases in value
with the increase of people; and the people, who double themselves
by a _natural propagation_ every twenty-five years, will double yet
faster, by the accession of _strangers_, as long as lands are to be
had for new families; so that every twenty years there will be a
double number of inhabitants obliged to discharge the public debts;
and those inhabitants, being more opulent, may pay their shares with
greater ease.

6. Respecting _prudence_ in general affairs, and the advantages to
be expected from the loan desired; the Americans are cultivators of
land; those engaged in fishery and commerce are few, compared with
the others. They have ever conducted their several governments with
wisdom, avoiding wars, and vain expensive projects, delighting only
in their peaceable occupations, which must, considering the extent of
their uncultivated territory, find them employment still for ages.
Whereas England, ever unquiet, ambitious, avaricious, imprudent,
and quarrelsome, is half of the time engaged in war, always at an
expence infinitely greater than the advantage to be obtained by it,
if successful. Thus they made war against Spain in 1739, for a claim
of about 95,000_l._ (scarce a groat for each individual of the nation)
and spent forty millions sterling in the war, and the lives of fifty
thousand men; and finally made peace without obtaining satisfaction
for the sum claimed. Indeed, there is scarce a nation in Europe,
against which she has not made war on some frivolous pretext or
other, and thereby imprudently accumulated a debt, that has brought
her on the verge of bankruptcy. But the most indiscreet of all her
wars, is the present against America, with whom she might, for ages,
have preserved her profitable connection only by a just and equitable
conduct. She is now acting like a mad shop-keeper, who, by beating
those that pass his doors, attempts to make them come in and be his
customers. America cannot submit to such treatment, without being
first ruined, and, being ruined, her custom will be worth nothing.
England, to effect this, is increasing her debt, and irretrievably
ruining herself. America, on the other hand, aims only to establish
her liberty, and that freedom of commerce which will be advantageous
to all Europe; and by abolishing that monopoly which she laboured
under, she will profit infinitely more than enough to repay any debt,
which she may contract to accomplish it.

7. Respecting _character in the honest payment of debts_; the
punctuality with which America has discharged her public debts was
shown under the first head. And the general good disposition of the
people to such punctuality has been manifested in their faithful
payment of _private_ debts to England, since the commencement of
this war. There were not wanting some politicians [in America] who
proposed _stopping that payment_, until peace should be restored,
alleging, that in the usual course of commerce, and of the credit
given, there was always a debt existing equal to the trade of
eighteen months: that the trade amounting to five millions sterling
per annum, the debt must be seven millions and an half; that this sum
paid to the British merchants would operate to prevent that distress,
intended to be brought upon Britain, by our stoppage of commerce
with her; for the merchants, receiving this money, and no orders
with it for farther supplies, would either lay it out in the public
funds, or in employing manufacturers to accumulate goods for a future
hungry market in America upon an expected accommodation, by which
means the funds would be kept up and the manufacturers prevented
from murmuring. But _against this it was alleged_, that injuries
from ministers should not be revenged on merchants; that the credit
was in consequence of private contracts, made in confidence of good
faith; that these ought to be held sacred and faithfully complied
with; for that, whatever public utility might be supposed to arise
from a breach of private faith, it was unjust, and would in the end
be found unwise--honesty being in truth the best policy. On this
principle the proposition was universally rejected; and though the
English prosecuted the war with unexampled barbarity, burning our
defenceless towns in the midst of winter, and arming savages against
us; the debt was punctually paid; and the merchants of London have
testified to the parliament, and will testify to all the world, that
from their experience in dealing with us they had, before the war, no
apprehension of our unfairness; and that since the war they have been
convinced, that their good opinion of us was well founded. England,
on the contrary, an old, corrupt, extravagant, and profligate nation,
sees herself deep in debt, which she is in no condition to pay; and
yet is madly, and dishonestly running deeper, without any possibility
of discharging her debt, but by a public bankruptcy.

It appears, therefore, from the general industry, frugality,
ability, prudence, and virtue of America, that she is a much safer
debtor than Britain;--to say nothing of the satisfaction generous
minds must have in reflecting, that by loans to America they are
opposing tyranny, and aiding the cause of liberty, which is the cause
of all mankind.

FOOTNOTE:

[157] This paper was written, translated, printed, and circulated,
while Dr. Franklin was at the court of Paris, for the purpose of
inducing foreigners to lend money to America in preference to Great
Britain.




  PAPERS,

  DESCRIPTIVE OF AMERICA,

  OR

  RELATING TO THAT COUNTRY,

  WRITTEN

  _SUBSEQUENT TO THE REVOLUTION_.




  PAPERS,

  DESCRIPTIVE OF AMERICA,

  OR

  RELATING TO THAT COUNTRY,

  WRITTEN

  _SUBSEQUENT TO THE REVOLUTION_.




  _Remarks concerning the Savages of North-America[158]._


Savages we call them, because their manners differ from ours, which
we think the perfection of civility; they think the same of theirs.

Perhaps, if we could examine the manners of different nations with
impartiality, we should find no people so rude, as to be without any
rules of politeness; nor any so polite, as not to have some remains
of rudeness.

The Indian men, when young, are hunters and warriors; when old,
counsellors; for all their government is by the council or advice
of the sages; there is no force, there are no prisons, no officers
to compel obedience, or inflict punishment. Hence they generally
study oratory, the best speaker having the most influence. The
Indian women till the ground, dress the food, nurse and bring up
the children, and preserve and hand down to posterity the memory
of public transactions. These employments of men and women are
accounted natural and honourable. Having few artificial wants, they
have abundance of leisure for improvement by conversation. Our
laborious manner of life, compared with theirs, they esteem slavish
and base; and the learning on which we value ourselves, they regard
as frivolous and useless. An instance of this occurred at the treaty
of Lancaster, in Pensylvania, anno 1744, between the government
of Virginia and the six nations. After the principal business was
settled, the commissioners from Virginia acquainted the Indians by a
speech, that there was at Williamsburg a college, with a fund, for
educating Indian youth; and that if the chiefs of the Six Nations
would send down half a dozen of their sons to that college, the
government would take care that they should be well provided for,
and instructed in all the learning of the white people. It is one of
the Indian rules of politeness, not to answer a public proposition
the same day that it is made; they think it would be treating it
as a light matter, and that they show it respect by taking time
to consider it, as of a matter important. They therefore deferred
their answer till the day following; when their speaker began,
by expressing their deep sense of the kindness of the Virginia
government, in making them that offer; "for we know," says he, "that
you highly esteem the kind of learning taught in those colleges, and
that the maintenance of our young men, while with you, would be very
expensive to you. We are convinced therefore, that you mean to do us
good by your proposal; and we thank you heartily. But you, who are
wise, must know, that different nations have different conceptions
of things; and you will therefore not take it amiss, if our ideas of
this kind of education happen not to be the same with yours. We have
had some experience of it: several of our young people were formerly
brought up at the colleges of the northern provinces; they were
instructed in all your sciences; but when they came back to us, they
were bad runners, ignorant of every means of living in the woods,
unable to bear either cold or hunger, knew neither how to build a
cabin, take a deer, or kill an enemy, spoke our language imperfectly,
were therefore neither fit for hunters, warriors, or counsellors;
they were totally good for nothing. We are however not the less
obliged by your kind offer, though we decline accepting it: and to
show our grateful sense of it, if the gentlemen of Virginia will send
us a dozen of their sons, we will take great care of their education,
instruct them in all we know, and make _men_ of them."

Having frequent occasions to hold public councils, they have acquired
great order and decency in conducting them. The old men sit in the
foremost ranks, the warriors in the next, and the women and children
in the hindmost. The business of the women is to take exact notice of
what passes, imprint it in their memories, for they have no writing,
and communicate it to their children. They are the records of the
council, and they preserve tradition of the stipulations in treaties
a hundred years back; which, when we compare with our writings, we
always find exact. He that would speak, rises. The rest observe a
profound silence. When he has finished and sits down, they leave him
five or six minutes to recollect, that, if he has omitted any thing
he intended to say, or has any thing to add, he may rise again and
deliver it. To interrupt another, even in common conversation, is
reckoned highly indecent. How different this is from the conduct of
a polite British house of commons, where scarce a day passes without
some confusion, that makes the speaker hoarse in calling _to order_;
and how different from the mode of conversation in many polite
companies of Europe, where, if you do not deliver your sentence with
great rapidity, you are cut off in the middle of it by the impatient
loquacity of those you converse with, and never suffered to finish it!

The politeness of these savages in conversation is indeed carried to
excess, since it does not permit them to contradict or deny the truth
of what is asserted in their presence. By this means they indeed
avoid disputes; but then it becomes difficult to know their minds,
or what impression you make upon them. The missionaries who have
attempted to convert them to christianity, all complain of this as
one of the great difficulties of their mission. The Indians hear with
patience the truths of the gospel explained to them, and give their
usual tokens of assent and approbation: you would think they were
convinced. No such matter. It is mere civility.

A Swedish minister, having assembled the chiefs of the Sasquehannah
Indians, made a sermon to them, acquainting them with the principal
historical facts on which our religion is founded; such as the fall
of our first parents by eating an apple, the coming of Christ to
repair the mischief, his miracles and suffering, &c.--When he had
finished, an Indian orator stood up to thank him. "What you have told
us," says he, "is all very good. It is indeed bad to eat apples. It
is better to make them all into cyder. We are much obliged by your
kindness in coming so far, to tell us those things which you have
heard from your mothers. In return, I will tell you some of those we
have heard from ours.

"In the beginning, our fathers had only the flesh of animals to
subsist on, and if their hunting was unsuccessful, they were
starving. Two of our young hunters having killed a deer, made a fire
in the woods to broil some parts of it. When they were about to
satisfy their hunger, they beheld a beautiful young woman descend
from the clouds, and seat herself on that hill which you see yonder
among the Blue Mountains. They said to each other, it is a spirit
that perhaps has smelt our broiling venison, and wishes to eat of
it: let us offer some to her. They presented her with the tongue:
she was pleased with the taste of it, and said, Your kindness shall
be rewarded. Come to this place after thirteen moons, and you shall
find something that will be of great benefit in nourishing you and
your children to the latest generations. They did so, and to their
surprise, found plants they had never seen before; but which, from
that ancient time, have been constantly cultivated among us, to
our great advantage. Where her right hand had touched the ground,
they found maize; where her left hand had touched it, they found
kidney-beans; and where her backside had sat on it, they found
tobacco." The good missionary, disgusted with this idle tale, said,
"What I delivered to you were sacred truths, but what you tell me is
mere fable, fiction, and falsehood." The Indian, offended, replied,
"My brother, it seems your friends have not done you justice in your
education; they have not well instructed you in the rules of common
civility. You saw that we, who understand and practice those rules,
believed all your stories, why do you refuse to believe ours?"

When any of them come into our towns, our people are apt to crowd
round them, gaze upon them, and incommode them where they desire to
be private; this they esteem great rudeness, and the effect of the
want of instruction in the rules of civility and good manners. "We
have," say they, "as much curiosity as you, and when you come into
our towns, we wish for opportunities of looking at you; but for this
purpose we hide ourselves behind bushes, where you are to pass, and
never intrude ourselves into your company."

Their manner of entering one another's villages has likewise its
rules. It is reckoned uncivil in travelling strangers, to enter a
village abruptly, without giving notice of their approach. Therefore,
as soon as they arrive within hearing, they stop and hollow,
remaining there till invited to enter. Two old men usually come
out to them, and lead them in. There is in every village a vacant
dwelling, called the strangers' house. Here they are placed, while
the old men go round from hut to hut, acquainting the inhabitants,
that strangers are arrived, who are probably hungry and weary;
and every one sends them what he can spare of victuals, and skins
to repose on. When the strangers are refreshed, pipes and tobacco
are brought; and then, but not before, conversation begins, with
enquiries who they are, whither bound, what news, &c. and it usually
ends with offers of service, if the strangers have occasion for
guides, or any necessaries for continuing their journey; and nothing
is exacted for the entertainment.

The same hospitality, esteemed among them as a principal virtue,
is practised by private persons; of which _Conrad Weiser_, our
interpreter, gave me the following instance. He had been naturalized
among the Six Nations, and spoke well the Mohuck language. In going
through the Indian country, to carry a message from our governor to
the council at Onondaga, he called at the habitation of Canassetego,
an old acquaintance, who embraced him, spread furs for him to sit
on, and placed before him some boiled beans and venison, and mixed
some rum and water for his drink. When he was well refreshed, and
had lit his pipe, Canassetego began to converse with him: asked how
he had fared the many years since they had seen each other, whence
he then came, what occasioned the journey, &c. Conrad answered all
his questions; and when the discourse began to flag, the Indian,
to continue it, said, "Conrad, you have lived long among the white
people, and know something of their customs; I have been sometimes
at Albany, and have observed, that once in seven days they shut up
their shops, and assemble all in the great house; tell me what it
is for? What do they do there?" "They meet there," says Conrad, "to
hear and learn _good things_." "I do not doubt," says the Indian,
"that they tell you so; they have told me the same: but I doubt the
truth of what they say, and I will tell you my reasons. I went lately
to Albany to sell my skins and buy blankets, knives, powder, rum,
&c. You know I used generally to deal with Hans Hanson; but I was a
little inclined this time to try some other merchants. However, I
called first upon Hans, and asked him what he would give for beaver.
He said he could not give more than four shillings a pound: but,
says he, I cannot talk on business now; this is the day when we meet
together to learn _good things_, and I am going to the meeting. So
I thought to myself, since I cannot do any business to-day, I may
as well go to the meeting too, and I went with him. There stood up
a man in black, and began to talk to the people very angrily. I did
not understand what he said; but perceiving that he looked much at
me, and at Hanson, I imagined he was angry at seeing me there; so
I went out, sat down near the house, struck fire, and lit my pipe,
waiting till the meeting should break up. I thought too, that the
man had mentioned something of beaver, and I suspected it might be
the subject of their meeting. So when they came out I accosted my
merchant. Well, Hans, says I, I hope you have agreed to give more
than four shillings a pound? No, says he, I cannot give so much, I
cannot give more than three shillings and sixpence. I then spoke
to several other dealers, but they all sung the same song, three
and sixpence, three and sixpence. This made it clear to me that my
suspicion was right; and that whatever they pretended of meeting to
learn _good things_, the real purpose was to consult how to cheat
Indians in the price of beaver. Consider but a little, Conrad, and
you must be of my opinion. If they met so often to learn _good
things_, they would certainly have learned some before this time.
But they are still ignorant. You know our practice. If a white man,
in travelling through our country, enters one of our cabins, we all
treat him as I do you; we dry him if he is wet, we warm him if he is
cold, and give him meat and drink, that he may allay his thirst and
hunger; and we spread soft furs for him to rest and sleep on: we
demand nothing in return[159]. But if I go into a white man's house
at Albany, and ask for victuals and drink, they say, Where is your
money? and if I have none, they say, Get out you Indian dog. You see
they have not yet learned those little _good things_, that we need
no meetings to be instructed in, because our mothers taught them
to us when we were children; and therefore it is impossible their
meetings should be, as they say, for any such purpose, or have any
such effect; they are only to contrive _the cheating of Indians in
the price of beaver_."

FOOTNOTES:

[158] This paper and the two next in order were published in separate
pamphlets in this country, in the year 1784, and afterwards, in 1787,
formed part of a small collection of our author's papers, printed for
Dilly. It is from this collection we extract them. _Editor._

[159] It is remarkable, that in all ages and countries, hospitality
has been allowed as the virtue of those, whom the civilized were
pleased to call Barbarians. The Greeks celebrated the Scythians for
it, the Saracens possessed it eminently; and it is to this day the
reigning virtue of the wild Arabs. St. Paul too, in the relation
of his voyage and shipwreck, on the island of Melita, says, "The
barbarous people shewed us no little kindness; for they kindled a
fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and
because of the cold."




  _The internal State of America; being a true Description of the
  Interest and Policy of that vast Continent._


There is a tradition, that, in the planting of New-England, the
first settlers met with many difficulties and hardships; as is
generally the case when a civilized people attempt establishing
themselves in a wilderness country. Being piously disposed, they
sought relief from Heaven, by laying their wants and distresses
before the Lord, in frequent set days of fasting and prayer. Constant
meditation and discourse on these subjects kept their minds gloomy
and discontented; and, like the children of Israel, there were many
disposed to return to that Egypt, which persecution had induced
them to abandon. At length, when it was proposed in the assembly to
proclaim another fast, a farmer of plain sense rose, and remarked,
that the inconveniences they suffered, and concerning which they had
so often wearied heaven with their complaints, were not so great
as they might have expected, and were diminishing every day as the
colony strengthened; that the earth began to reward their labour, and
to furnish liberally for their subsistence; that the seas and rivers
were found full of fish, the air sweet, the climate healthy; and,
above all, that they were there in the full enjoyment of liberty,
civil and religious: he therefore thought, that reflecting and
conversing on these subjects would be more comfortable, as tending
more to make them contented with their situation; and that it would
be more becoming the gratitude they owed to the Divine Being, if,
instead of a fast, they should proclaim a thanksgiving. His advice
was taken; and from that day to this they have, in every year,
observed circumstances of public felicity sufficient to furnish
employment for a thanksgiving day; which is therefore constantly
ordered and religiously observed.

I see in the public newspapers of different states frequent
complaints of _hard times, deadness of trade, scarcity of money,
&c. &c._ It is not my intention to assert or maintain, that these
complaints are entirely without foundation. There can be no country
or nation existing, in which there will not be some people so
circumstanced, as to find it hard to gain a livelihood; people who
are not in the way of any profitable trade, and with whom money is
scarce, because they have nothing to give in exchange for it; and
it is always in the power of a small number to make a great clamour.
But let us take a cool view of the general state of our affairs, and
perhaps the prospect will appear less gloomy than has been imagined.

The great business of the continent is agriculture. For one artisan,
or merchant, I suppose, we have at least one hundred farmers, by
far the greatest part cultivators of their own fertile lands,
from whence many of them draw not only food necessary for their
subsistence, but the materials of their clothing, so as to need very
few foreign supplies; while they have a surplus of productions to
dispose of, whereby wealth is gradually accumulated. Such has been
the goodness of Divine Providence to these regions, and so favourable
the climate, that, since the three or four years of hardship in the
first settlement of our fathers here, a famine or scarcity has never
been heard of amongst us; on the contrary, though some years may have
been more, and others less plentiful, there has always been provision
enough for ourselves, and a quantity to spare for exportation. And
although the crops of last year were generally good, never was
the farmer better paid for the part he can spare commerce, as the
published price currents abundantly testify. The lands he possesses
are also continually rising in value with the increase of population;
and, on the whole, he is enabled to give such good wages to those who
work for him, that all who are acquainted with the old world must
agree, that in no part of it are the labouring poor so generally
well fed, well clothed, well lodged, and well paid, as in the United
States of America.

If we enter the cities, we find, that, since the revolution, the
owners of houses and lots of ground have had their interest vastly
augmented in value; rents have risen to an astonishing height, and
thence encouragement to increase building, which gives employment
to an abundance of workmen, as does also the increased luxury and
splendour of living of the inhabitants, thus made richer. These
workmen all demand and obtain much higher wages than any other part
of the world would afford them, and are paid in ready money. This
rank of people therefore do not, or ought not, to complain of hard
times; and they make a very considerable part of the city inhabitants.

At the distance I live from our American fisheries, I cannot speak
of them with any degree of certainty; but I have not heard, that the
labour of the valuable race of men employed in them is worse paid,
or that they meet with less success, than before the revolution. The
whale-men indeed have been deprived of one market for their oil;
but another, I hear, is opening for them, which it is hoped may be
equally advantageous; and the demand is constantly increasing for
their spermaceti candles, which therefore bear a much higher price
than formerly.

There remain the merchants and shopkeepers. Of these, though
they make but a small part of the whole nation, the number is
considerable, too great indeed for the business they are employed
in; for the consumption of goods in every country has its limits;
the faculties of the people, that is, their ability to buy and pay,
being equal only to a certain quantity of merchandize. If merchants
calculate amiss on this proportion, and import too much, they will
of course find the sale dull for the overplus, and some of them will
say, that trade languishes. They should, and doubtless will, grow
wiser by experience, and import less. If too many artificers in
town, and farmers from the country, flattering themselves with the
idea of leading easier lives, turn shopkeepers, the whole natural
quantity of that business divided among them all may afford too small
a share for each, and occasion complaints, that trading is dead;
these may also suppose, that it is owing to scarcity of money, while,
in fact, it is not so much from the fewness of buyers, as from the
excessive number of sellers, that the mischief arises; and, if every
shopkeeping farmer and mechanic would return to the use of his plough
and working tools, there would remain of widows, and other women,
shopkeepers sufficient for the business, which might then afford them
a comfortable maintenance.

Whoever has travelled through the various parts of Europe, and
observed how small is the proportion of people in affluence or easy
circumstances there, compared with those in poverty and misery;
the few rich and haughty landlords, the multitude of poor, abject,
rack-rented, tythe-paying tenants, and half-paid and half-starved
ragged labourers; and views here the happy mediocrity, that so
generally prevails throughout these states, where the cultivator
works for himself, and supports his family in decent plenty, will,
methinks, see abundant reason to bless Divine Providence for the
evident and great difference in our favour, and be convinced, that no
nation known to us enjoys a greater share of human felicity.

It is true, that in some of the states there are parties and
discords; but let us look back, and ask if we were ever without them?
Such will exist wherever there is liberty; and perhaps they help
to preserve it. By the collision of different sentiments, sparks of
truth are struck out, and political light is obtained. The different
factions, which at present divide us, aim all at the public good: the
differences are only about the various modes of promoting it. Things,
actions, measures, and objects of all kinds, present themselves to
the minds of men in such a variety of lights, that it is not possible
we should all think alike at the same time on every subject, when
hardly the same man retains at all times the same ideas of it.
Parties are therefore the common lot of humanity; and ours are by
no means more mischievous or less beneficial than those of other
countries, nations, and ages, enjoying in the same degree the great
blessing of political liberty.

Some indeed among us are not so much grieved for the present state
of our affairs, as apprehensive for the future. The growth of luxury
alarms them, and they think we are from that alone in the high road
to ruin. They observe, that no revenue is sufficient without economy,
and that the most plentiful income of a whole people from the natural
productions of their country may be dissipated in vain and needless
expences, and poverty be introduced in the place of affluence. This
may be possible. It however rarely happens: for there seems to be in
every nation a greater proportion of industry and frugality, which
tend to enrich, than of idleness and prodigality, which occasion
poverty; so that upon the whole there is a continual accumulation.
Reflect what Spain, Gaul, Germany, and Britain were in the time of
the Romans, inhabited by people little richer than our savages, and
consider the wealth they at present possess, in numerous well-built
cities, improved farms, rich moveables, magazines stocked with
valuable manufactures, to say nothing of plate jewels, and coined
money; and all this, notwithstanding their bad, wasteful, plundering
governments, and their mad destructive wars; and yet luxury and
extravagant living has never suffered much restraint in those
countries. Then consider the great proportion of industrious frugal
farmers inhabiting the interior parts of these American states,
and of whom the body of our nation consists, and judge whether it
is possible, that the luxury of our sea-ports can be sufficient to
ruin such a country.--If the importation of foreign luxuries could
ruin a people, we should probably have been ruined long ago; for the
British nation claimed a right, and practised it, of importing among
us not only the superfluities of their own production, but those of
every nation under heaven; we bought and consumed them, and yet we
flourished and grew rich. At present our independent governments may
do what we could not then do, discourage by heavy duties, or prevent
by heavy prohibitions, such importations, and thereby grow richer;
if, indeed, which may admit of dispute, the desire of adorning
ourselves with fine clothes, possessing fine furniture, with elegant
houses, &c. is not, by strongly inciting to labour and industry,
the occasion of producing a greater value, than is consumed in the
gratification of that desire.

The agriculture and fisheries of the United States are the great
sources of our increasing wealth. He that puts a seed into the earth
is recompensed, perhaps, by receiving forty out of it; and he who
draws a fish out of our water, draws up a piece of silver.

Let us (and there is no doubt but we shall) be attentive to these,
and then the power of rivals, with all their restraining and
prohibiting acts, cannot much hurt us. We are sons of the earth
and seas, and, like Antæus in the fable, if, in wrestling with a
Hercules, we now and then receive a fall, the touch of our parents
will communicate to us fresh strength and vigour to renew the contest.




  _Information to those who would remove to America._


Many persons in Europe having directly or by letters, expressed to
the writer of this, who is well acquainted with North-America, their
desire of transporting and establishing themselves in that country;
but who appear to him to have formed, through ignorance, mistaken
ideas and expectations of what is to be obtained there; he thinks it
may be useful, and prevent inconvenient, expensive, and fruitless
removals and voyages of improper persons, if he gives some clearer
and truer notions of that part of the world, than appear to have
hitherto prevailed.

He finds it is imagined by numbers, that the inhabitants of North
America are rich, capable of rewarding, and disposed to reward, all
sorts of ingenuity; that they are at the same time ignorant of all
the sciences, and consequently, that strangers, possessing talents in
the belles-lettres, fine arts, &c. must be highly esteemed, and so
well paid, as to become easily rich themselves; that there are also
abundance of profitable offices to be disposed of, which the natives
are not qualified to fill; and that, having few persons of family
among them, strangers of birth must be greatly respected, and of
course easily obtain the best of those offices, which will make all
their fortunes: that the governments too, to encourage emigrations
from Europe, not only pay the expence of personal transportation,
but give lands gratis to strangers, with negroes to work for them,
utensils of husbandry, and stocks of cattle. These are all wild
imaginations; and those who go to America with expectations founded
upon them will surely find themselves disappointed.

The truth is, that though there are in that country few people so
miserable as the poor of Europe, there are also very few that in
Europe would be called rich; it is rather a general happy mediocrity
that prevails. There are few great proprietors of the soil, and
few tenants; most people cultivate their own lands, or follow some
handicraft or merchandise; very few rich enough to live idly upon
their rents or incomes, or to pay the high prices given in Europe
for painting, statues, architecture, and the other works of art,
that are more curious than useful. Hence the natural geniuses, that
have arisen in America with such talents, have uniformly quitted
that country for Europe, where they can be more suitably rewarded.
It is true, that letters and mathematical knowledge are in esteem
there, but they are at the same time more common than is apprehended;
there being already existing nine colleges or universities, viz.
four in New England, and one in each of the provinces of New York,
New Jersey, Pensylvania, Maryland, and Virginia, all furnished with
learned professors; besides a number of smaller academies: these
educate many of their youth in the languages, and those sciences
that qualify men for the professions of divinity, law, or physic.
Strangers indeed are by no means excluded from exercising those
professions; and the quick increase of inhabitants every where gives
them a chance of employ, which they have in common with the natives.
Of civil offices, or employments, there are few; no superfluous ones,
as in Europe; and it is a rule established in some of the states,
that no office should be so profitable as to make it desirable.
The thirty-sixth article of the constitution of Pensylvania runs
expressly in these words: "As every freeman, to preserve his
independence (if he has not a sufficient estate) ought to have some
profession, calling, trade, or farm, whereby he may honestly subsist,
there can be no necessity for, nor use in, establishing offices of
profit; the usual effects of which are dependence and servility,
unbecoming freemen, in the possessors and expectants; faction,
contention, corruption, and disorder among the people. Wherefore,
whenever an office, through increase of fees or otherwise, becomes so
profitable, as to occasion many to apply for it, the profits ought to
be lessened by the legislature."

These ideas prevailing more or less in all the United States, it
cannot be worth any man's while, who has a means of living at home,
to expatriate himself, in hopes of obtaining a profitable civil
office in America; and as to military offices, they are at an end
with the war, the armies being disbanded. Much less is it adviseable
for a person to go thither, who has no other quality to recommend
him but his birth. In Europe it has indeed its value; but it is a
commodity that cannot be carried to a worse market than to that of
America, where people do not enquire concerning a stranger, _What is
he?_ but _What can he do?_ If he has any useful art, he is welcome;
and if he exercises it, and behaves well, he will be respected by all
that know him; but a mere man of quality, who on that account wants
to live upon the public by some office or salary, will be despised
and disregarded. The husbandman is in honour there, and even the
mechanic, because their employments are useful. The people have a
saying, that God Almighty is himself a mechanic, the greatest in
the universe; and he is respected and admired more for the variety,
ingenuity, and utility of his handiworks, than for the antiquity of
his family. They are pleased with the observation of a negro, and
frequently mention it, that Boccarora (meaning the white man) make de
black man workee, make de horse workee, make de ox workee, make ebery
ting workee; only de hog. He de hog, no workee; he eat, he drink, he
walk about, he go to sleep when he please, he libb like a gentleman.
According to these opinions of the Americans, one of them would think
himself more obliged to a genealogist, who could prove for him that
his ancestors and relations for ten generations had been ploughmen,
smiths, carpenters, turners, weavers, tanners, or even shoemakers,
and consequently that they were useful members of society; than if he
could only prove that they were gentlemen, doing nothing of value,
but living idly on the labour of others, mere _fruges consumere
nati_[160], and otherwise _good for nothing_, till by their death
their estates, like the carcase of the negro's gentleman-hog, come to
be _cut up_.

With regard to encouragements for strangers from government, they are
really only what are derived from good laws and liberty. Strangers
are welcome, because there is room enough for them all, and therefore
the old inhabitants are not jealous of them; the laws protect them
sufficiently, so that they have no need of the patronage of great
men; and every one will enjoy securely the profits of his industry.
But if he does not bring a fortune with him, he must work and be
industrious to live. One or two years residence give him all the
rights of a citizen; but the government does not at present, whatever
it may have done in former times, hire people to become settlers, by
paying their passages, giving land, negroes, utensils, stock, or any
other kind of emolument whatsoever. In short, America is the land of
labour, and by no means what the English call Lubberland, and the
French Pays de Cocagne, where the streets are said to be paved with
half-peck loaves, the houses tiled with pancakes, and where the fowls
fly about ready roasted, crying, _Come eat me!_

Who then are the kind of persons to whom an emigration to America
may be advantageous? And what are the advantages they may reasonably
expect?

Land being cheap in that country, from the vast forests still void
of inhabitants, and not likely to be occupied in an age to come,
insomuch that the propriety of an hundred acres of fertile soil full
of wood may be obtained near the frontiers, in many places, for
eight or ten guineas, hearty young labouring men, who understand
the husbandry of corn and cattle, which is nearly the same in that
country as in Europe, may easily establish themselves there. A little
money saved of the good wages they receive there, while they work
for others, enables them to buy the land and begin their plantation,
in which they are assisted by the good-will of their neighbours,
and some credit. Multitudes of poor people from England, Ireland,
Scotland, and Germany, have by this means in a few years become
wealthy farmers, who, in their own countries, where all the lands are
fully occupied, and the wages of labour low, could never have emerged
from the mean condition wherein they were born.

From the salubrity of the air, the healthiness of the climate, the
plenty of good provisions, and the encouragement to early marriages,
by the certainty of subsistence in cultivating the earth, the
increase of inhabitants by natural generation is very rapid in
America, and becomes still more so by the accession of strangers;
hence there is a continual demand for more artisans of all the
necessary and useful kinds, to supply those cultivators of the
earth with houses, and with furniture and utensils of the grosser
sorts, which cannot so well be brought from Europe. Tolerably good
workmen in any of those mechanic arts are sure to find employ, and
to be well paid for their work, there being no restraints preventing
strangers from exercising any art they understand, nor any permission
necessary. If they are poor, they begin first as servants or
journeymen; and if they are sober, industrious, and frugal, they
soon become masters, establish themselves in business, marry, raise
families, and become respectable citizens.

Also, persons of moderate fortunes and capitals, who, having a
number of children to provide for, are desirous of bringing them
up to industry, and to secure estates for their posterity, have
opportunities of doing it in America, which Europe does not afford.
There they may be taught and practise profitable mechanic arts,
without incurring disgrace on that account, but on the contrary
acquiring respect by such abilities. There small capitals laid
out in lands, which daily become more valuable by the increase of
people, afford a solid prospect of ample fortunes thereafter for
those children. The writer of this has known several instances of
large tracts of land, bought, on what was then the frontier of
Pennsylvania, for ten pounds per hundred acres, which, when the
settlements had been extended far beyond them, sold readily, without
any improvement made upon them, for three pounds per acre. The acre
in America is the same with the English acre, or the acre of Normandy.

Those, who desire to understand the state of government in America,
would do well to read the constitutions of the several states,
and the articles of confederation that bind the whole together
for general purposes, under the direction of one assembly, called
the congress. These constitutions have been printed, by order of
congress, in America; two editions of them have also been printed in
London; and a good translation of them into French has lately been
published at Paris.

Several of the princes of Europe of late, from an opinion of
advantage to arise by producing all commodities and manufactures
within their own dominions, so as to diminish or render useless
their importations, have endeavoured to entice workmen from other
countries, by high salaries, privileges, &c. Many persons, pretending
to be skilled in various great manufactures, imagining, that America
must be in want of them, and that the congress would probably be
disposed to imitate the princes above mentioned, have proposed to
go over, on condition of having their passages paid, lands given,
salaries appointed, exclusive privileges for terms of years, &c.
Such persons, on reading the articles of confederation, will find,
that the congress have no power committed to them, or money put into
their hands, for such purposes; and that if any such encouragement
is given, it must be by the government of some separate state. This,
however, has rarely been done in America; and when it has been done,
it has rarely succeeded, so as to establish a manufacture, which the
country was not yet so ripe for as to encourage private persons to
set it up; labour being generally too dear there, and hands difficult
to be kept together, every one desiring to be a master, and the
cheapness of land inclining many to leave trades for agriculture.
Some indeed have met with success, and are carried on to advantage;
but they are generally such as require only a few hands, or wherein
great part of the work is performed by machines. Goods that are
bulky, and of so small value as not well to bear the expence of
freight, may often be made cheaper in the country than they can
be imported; and the manufacture of such goods will be profitable
wherever there is a sufficient demand. The farmers in America produce
indeed a good deal of wool and flax; and none is exported, it is
all worked up; but it is in the way of domestic manufacture, for
the use of the family. The buying up quantities of wool and flax,
with the design to employ spinners, weavers, &c. and form great
establishments, producing quantities of linen and woollen goods for
sale, has been several times attempted in different provinces; but
those projects have generally failed, goods of equal value being
imported cheaper. And when the governments have been solicited to
support such schemes by encouragements, in money, or by imposing
duties on importation of such goods, it has been generally refused,
on this principle, that if the country is ripe for the manufacture,
it may be carried on by private persons to advantage; and if not,
it is a folly to think of forcing nature. Great establishments of
manufacture require great numbers of poor to do the work for small
wages; those poor are to be found in Europe, but will not be found
in America, till the lands are all taken up and cultivated, and
the excess of people, who cannot get land, want employment. The
manufacture of silk, they say, is natural in France, as that of
cloth in England, because each country produces in plenty the first
material: but if England will have a manufacture of silk as well as
that of cloth, and France of cloth as well as that of silk, these
unnatural operations must be supported by mutual prohibitions, or
high duties on the importation of each other's goods; by which means
the workmen are enabled to tax the home consumer by greater prices,
while the higher wages they receive makes them neither happier nor
richer, since they only drink more and work less. Therefore the
governments in America do nothing to encourage such projects. The
people, by this means, are not imposed on either by the merchant or
mechanic: if the merchant demands too much profit on imported shoes,
they buy of the shoe-maker; and if he asks too high a price, they
take them of the merchant: thus the two professions are checks on
each other. The shoemaker, however, has, on the whole, a considerable
profit upon his labour in America, beyond what he had in Europe, as
he can add to his price a sum nearly equal to all the expences of
freight and commission, risque or insurance, &c. necessarily charged
by the merchant. And the case is the same with the workmen in every
other mechanic art. Hence it is, that artisans generally live
better and more easily in America than in Europe; and such as are
good economists make a comfortable provision for age, and for their
children. Such may, therefore, remove with advantage to America.

In the old long-settled countries of Europe, all arts, trades,
professions, farms, &c. are so full, that it is difficult for a poor
man who has children to place them where they may gain, or learn to
gain, a decent livelihood. The artisans, who fear creating future
rivals in business, refuse to take apprentices, but upon conditions
of money, maintenance, or the like, which the parents are unable to
comply with. Hence the youth are dragged up in ignorance of every
gainful art, and obliged to become soldiers, or servants, or thieves,
for a subsistence. In America, the rapid increase of inhabitants
takes away that fear of rivalship, and artisans willingly receive
apprentices from the hope of profit by their labour, during the
remainder of the time stipulated, after they shall be instructed.
Hence it is easy for poor families to get their children instructed;
for the artisans are so desirous of apprentices, that many of them
will even give money to the parents, to have boys from ten to fifteen
years of age bound apprentices to them, till the age of twenty-one;
and many poor parents have, by that means, on their arrival in the
country, raised money enough to buy land sufficient to establish
themselves, and to subsist the rest of their family by agriculture.
These contracts for apprentices are made before a magistrate, who
regulates the agreement according to reason and justice, and, having
in view the formation of a future useful citizen, obliges the master
to engage by a written indenture, not only that, during the time
of service stipulated, the apprentice shall be duly provided with
meat, drink, apparel, washing, and lodging, and at its expiration
with a complete new suit of clothes, but also, that he shall be
taught to read, write, and cast accounts; and that he shall be well
instructed in the art or profession of his master, or some other, by
which he may afterwards gain a livelihood, and be able in his turn to
raise a family. A copy of this indenture is given to the apprentice
or his friends, and the magistrate keeps a record of it, to which
recourse may be had, in case of failure by the master in any point
of performance. This desire among the masters, to have more hands
employed in working for them, induces them to pay the passages of
young persons, of both sexes, who, on their arrival, agree to serve
them one, two, three, or four years; those who have already learned a
trade, agreeing for a shorter term, in proportion to their skill, and
the consequent immediate value of their service; and those who have
none, agreeing for a longer term, in consideration of being taught
an art their poverty would not permit them to acquire in their own
country.

The almost general mediocrity of fortune that prevails in America,
obliging its people to follow some business for subsistence, those
vices, that arise usually from idleness, are in a great measure
prevented. Industry and constant employment are great preservatives
of the morals and virtue of a nation. Hence bad examples to youth
are more rare in America, which must be a comfortable consideration
to parents. To this may be truly added, that serious religion, under
its various denominations, is not only tolerated, but respected and
practised. Atheism is unknown there; infidelity rare and secret; so
that persons may live to a great age in that country, without having
their piety shocked by meeting with either an atheist or an infidel.
And the Divine Being seems to have manifested his approbation of
the mutual forbearance and kindness with which the different sects
treat each other, by the remarkable prosperity with which he has been
pleased to favour the whole country.

FOOTNOTE:

[160]

                  ... born
    Merely to eat up the corn. WATTS.




TO THE EARL OF BUCHAN[161].

  _Concerning new Settlements in America._


  _Passy, March 17, 1783._

  MY LORD,

I received the letter your lordship did me the honour of writing to
me the 18th past, and am much obliged by your kind congratulations on
the return of peace, which I hope will be lasting.

With regard to the terms on which lands may be acquired in America,
and the manner of beginning new settlements on them, I cannot give
better information than may be found in a book lately printed at
London, under some such title as--_Letters from a Pensylvanian
Farmer_, by Hector St. John. The only encouragement we hold out to
strangers are, _a good climate, fertile soil, wholesome air and
water, plenty of provisions and food, good pay for labour, kind
neighbours, good laws, and a hearty welcome_. The rest depends on a
man's own industry and virtue. Lands are cheap, but they must be
bought. All settlements are undertaken at private expence; the public
contributes nothing but defence and justice. I have long observed of
your people, that their sobriety, frugality, industry and honesty,
seldom fail of success in America, and of procuring them a good
establishment among us.

I do not recollect the circumstance you are pleased to mention, of
my having saved a citizen at St. Andrew's by giving a turn to his
disorder; and I am curious to know, what the disorder was, and what
the advice I gave, that proved so salutary[162]. With great regard
I have the honour to be, my lord, your lordship's most obedient and
most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[161] From the Gentleman's Magazine, for July, 1794, to which it was
communicated by the nobleman to whom it is addressed. _Editor._

[162] It was a fever in which the Earl of Buchan, then lord Cadross,
lay sick at St. Andrew's; and the advice was, not to blister,
according to the old practice and the opinion of the learned Dr.
Simson, brother of the celebrated geometrician at Glasgow. B.




  _A Comparison of the Conduct of the Ancient Jews, and of the
  Antifederalists in the United States of America[163]._


A zealous advocate for the proposed federal constitution in a certain
public assembly said, that "the repugnance of a great part of mankind
to good government was such, that he believed, that if an angel from
heaven was to bring down a constitution, formed there for our use, it
would nevertheless meet with violent opposition." He was reproved for
the supposed extravagance of the sentiment, and he did not justify
it. Probably it might not have immediately occurred to him, that the
experiment had been tried, and that the event was recorded in the
most faithful of all histories, the Holy Bible; otherwise he might,
as it seems to me, have supported his opinion by that unexceptionable
authority.

The Supreme Being had been pleased to nourish up a single family,
by continued acts of his attentive providence, till it became a
great people: and having rescued them from bondage by many miracles,
performed by his servant Moses, he personally delivered to that
chosen servant, in presence of the whole nation, a constitution and
code of laws for their observance, accompanied and sanctioned with
promises of great rewards, and threats of severe punishments, as the
consequence of their obedience or disobedience.

This constitution, though the Deity himself was to be at its head
(and it is therefore called by political writers a theocracy) could
not be carried into execution but by the means of his ministers;
Aaron and his sons were therefore commissioned to be, with Moses, the
first established ministry of the new government.

One would have thought, that the appointment of men, who had
distinguished themselves in procuring the liberty of their nation,
and had hazarded their lives in openly opposing the will of a
powerful monarch, who would have retained that nation in slavery,
might have been an appointment acceptable to a grateful people; and
that a constitution, framed for them by the Deity himself, might on
that account have been secure of an universal welcome reception. Yet
there were, in every one of the thirteen tribes, some discontented,
restless spirits, who were continually exciting them to reject the
proposed new government, and this from various motives.

Many still retained an affection for Egypt, the land of their
nativity, and these, whenever they felt any inconvenience or
hardship, though the natural and unavoidable effect of their change
of situation, exclaimed against their leaders as the authors of
their trouble: and were not only for returning into Egypt, but for
stoning their deliverers[164]. Those inclined to idolatry were
displeased that their golden calf was destroyed. Many of the chiefs
thought the new constitution might be injurious to their particular
interests, that the profitable places would be _engrossed by the
families and friends of Moses and Aaron_, and others, equally well
born, excluded.[165]--In Josephus, and the Talmud, we learn some
particulars, not so fully narrated in the scripture. We are there
told, that Corah was ambitious of the priesthood, and offended that
it was conferred on Aaron; and this, as he said, by the authority of
Moses only, _without the consent of the people_. He accused Moses of
having, by various artifices, fraudulently obtained the government,
and deprived the people of their liberties, and of conspiring with
Aaron to perpetuate the tyranny in their family. Thus, though
Corah's real motive was the supplanting of Aaron, he persuaded the
people, that he meant only the public good; and they, moved by his
insinuations, began to cry out, "Let us maintain the common liberty
of our _respective tribes_; we have freed ourselves from the slavery
imposed upon us by the Egyptians, and shall we suffer ourselves to
be made slaves by Moses? If we must have a master, it were better to
return to Pharaoh, who at least fed us with bread and onions, than
to serve this new tyrant, who, by his operations, has brought us
into danger of famine." Then they called in question the _reality
of his conference_ with God, and objected to the privacy of the
meetings, and the preventing any of the people from being present at
the colloquies, or even approaching the place, as grounds of great
suspicion. They accused Moses also of _peculation_, as embezzling
part of the golden spoons and the silver chargers, that the princes
had offered at the dedication of the altar[166], and the offerings
of gold by the common people[167], as well as most of the poll
tax[168]; and Aaron they accused of pocketing much of the gold of
which he pretended to have made a molten calf. Besides peculation,
they charged Moses with _ambition_; to gratify which passion, he had,
they said, deceived the people, by promising to bring them to a land
flowing with milk and honey; instead of doing which, he had brought
them _from_ such a land; and that he thought light of all this
mischief, provided he could make himself an _absolute prince_[169].
That, to support the new dignity with splendour in his family, the
partial poll tax, already levied and given to Aaron[170], was to be
followed by a general one[171], which would probably be augmented
from time to time, if he were suffered to go on promulgating new
laws, on pretence of new occasional revelations of the divine will,
till their whole fortunes were devoured by that aristocracy.

Moses denied the charge of peculation, and his accusers were
destitute of proofs to support it; though _facts_, if real, are in
their nature capable of proof. "I have not," said he (with holy
confidence in the presence of God), "I have not taken from this
people the value of an ass, nor done them any other injury." But
his enemies had made the charge, and with some success among the
populace; for no kind of accusation is so readily made, or easily
believed, by knaves, as the accusation of knavery.

In fine, no less than two hundred and fifty of the principal men
"famous in the congregation, men of renown[172]," heading and
exciting the mob, worked them up to such a pitch of phrenzy, that
they called out, stone 'em, stone 'em, and thereby secure our
liberties; and let us choose other captains, that may lead us back
into Egypt, in case we do not succeed in reducing the Canaanites.

On the whole, it appears, that the Israelites were a people jealous
of their newly acquired liberty, which jealousy was in itself
no fault; but that, when they suffered it to be worked upon by
artful men, pretending public good, with nothing really in view
but private interest, they were led to oppose the establishment of
the new constitution, whereby they brought upon themselves much
inconvenience and misfortune. It farther appears, from the same
inestimable history, that when, after many ages, the constitution
had become old and much abused, and an amendment of it was proposed,
the populace, as they had accused Moses of the ambition of making
himself a prince, and cried out, stone him, stone him; so, excited by
their high-priests and scribes, they exclaimed against the Messiah,
that he aimed at becoming king of the Jews, and cried, crucify him,
crucify him. From all which we may gather, that popular opposition
to a public measure is no proof of its impropriety, even though the
opposition be excited and headed by men of distinction.

To conclude, I beg I may not be understood to infer, that our general
convention was divinely inspired when it formed the new federal
constitution, merely because that constitution has been unreasonably
and vehemently opposed: yet, I must own, I have so much faith in the
general government of the world by Providence, that I can hardly
conceive a transaction of such momentous importance to the welfare
of millions now existing, and to exist in the posterity of a great
nation, should be suffered to pass without being in some degree
influenced, guided and governed by that omnipotent, omnipresent and
beneficent ruler, in whom all inferior spirits live, and move, and
have their being.

FOOTNOTES:

[163] From the Repository, vol. II. p. 313. _Editor._

[164] Numbers, chap. xiv.

[165] Numbers, chap. xvi. ver. 3. "And they gathered themselves
together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregations are holy,
every one of them,--wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the
congregation."

[166] Numbers, chap. vii.

[167] Exodus, chapter xxxv. ver. 22.

[168] Numbers, chap. iii. and Exodus, chap. xxx.

[169] Numbers, chap. xvi. ver. 13. "Is it a small thing that thou
hast brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill
us in this wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince
over us?"

[170] Numbers, chap. iii.

[171] Exodus, chap. xxx.

[172] Numbers, chap. xvi.




  _Final Speech of Dr. Franklin in the late Federal Convention[173]._


  MR. PRESIDENT,

I confess that I do not entirely approve of this constitution at
present: but, Sir, I am not sure I shall never approve it; for having
lived long, I have experienced many instances of being obliged, by
better information, or fuller consideration, to change opinions, even
on important subjects, which I once thought right, but found to be
otherwise. It is, therefore, that, the older I grow, the more apt I
am to doubt my own judgment, and to pay more respect to the judgment
of others. Most men, indeed, as well as most sects in religion, think
themselves in possession of all truth, and that whenever others
differ from them, it is so far error. Steel, a protestant, in a
dedication, tells the pope, that "the only difference between our two
churches, in their opinions of the certainty of their doctrines is,
the Romish church is infallible, and the church of England never in
the wrong." But, though many private persons think almost as highly
of their own infallibility as of that of their sect, few express
it so naturally as a certain French lady, who, in a little dispute
with her sister, said, I don't know how it happens, sister, but I
meet with nobody but myself that is always in the right. _Il n'y a
que moi qui a toujours raison._ In these sentiments, Sir, I agree to
this constitution, with all its faults, if they are such, because I
think a general government necessary for us, and there is no form of
government but what may be a blessing, if well administered; and
I believe farther, that this is likely to be well administered for
a course of years, and can only end in despotism, as other forms
have done before it, when the people shall become so corrupted
as to need despotic government, being incapable of any other. I
doubt too, whether any other convention we can obtain, may be able
to make a better constitution. For when you assemble a number of
men, to have the advantage of their joint wisdom, you inevitably
assemble with those men, all their prejudices, their passions,
their errors of opinion, their local interests, and their selfish
views. From such an assembly can a perfect production be expected?
It therefore astonishes me, sir, to find this system approaching
so near to perfection as it does; and I think it will astonish our
enemies, who are waiting with confidence to hear, that our councils
are confounded, like those of the builders of Babylon, and that our
states are on the point of separation, only to meet hereafter for the
purpose of cutting each other's throats.

Thus I consent, sir, to this constitution, because I expect no
better, and because I am not sure, that this is not the best. The
opinions I have had of its errors, I sacrifice to the public good.
I have never whispered a syllable of them abroad. Within these
walls they were born, and here they shall die. If every one of us,
in returning to our constituents, were to report the objections he
has had to it, and endeavour to gain partisans in support of them,
we might prevent its being generally received, and thereby lose all
the salutary effects and great advantages resulting naturally in our
favour among foreign nations, as well as among ourselves, from our
real or apparent unanimity. Much of the strength and efficiency of
any government, in procuring and securing happiness to the people,
depends on opinion, on the general opinion of the goodness of that
government, as well as of the wisdom and integrity of its governors.

I hope therefore, that for our own sakes, as part of the people, and
for the sake of our posterity, we shall act heartily and unanimously
in recommending this constitution, wherever our influence may extend,
and turn our future thoughts and endeavours to the means of having it
well administered.

On the whole, sir, I cannot help expressing a wish, that every member
of the convention, who may still have objections, would with me, on
this occasion, doubt a little of his own infallibility, and, to make
manifest our unanimity, put his name to this instrument.

[The motion was then made for adding the last formula, viz.

Done in Convention, by the unanimous consent, &c. which was agreed
to, and added accordingly.]

FOOTNOTE:

[173] From the American Museum, vol. II. p. 558. _Editor._




PAPERS

ON

MORAL SUBJECTS

AND

_THE ECONOMY OF LIFE_.




PAPERS

ON

MORAL SUBJECTS

AND

_THE ECONOMY OF LIFE_.




  _The Busy-Body._--No. I[174].

  FROM THE AMERICAN WEEKLY MERCURY, FROM TUESDAY, JANUARY 28, TO
  TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1728,--9.


  MR. ANDREW BRADFORD,

I design this to acquaint you, that I, who have long been one of your
courteous readers, have lately entertained some thought of setting up
for an author myself; not out of the least vanity, I assure you, or
desire of showing my parts, but purely for the good of my country.

I have often observed with concern, that your Mercury is not always
equally entertaining. The delay of ships expected in, and want of
fresh advices from Europe, make it frequently very dull; and I find
the freezing of our river has the same effect on news as trade.--With
more concern have I continually observed the growing vices and
follies of my country folk: and though reformation is properly the
concern of every man, that is, every one ought to mend one; yet it
is too true in this case, that what is every body's business is no
body's business, and the business is done accordingly. I therefore,
upon mature deliberation, think fit to take no body's business wholly
into my own hands; and, out of zeal for the public good, design
to erect myself into a kind of censor morum; purposing, with your
allowance, to make use of the Weekly Mercury as a vehicle, in which
my remonstrances shall be conveyed to the world.

I am sensible I have, in this particular, undertaken a very
unthankful office, and expect little besides my labour for my pains.
Nay, it is probable, I may displease a great number of your readers,
who will not very well like to pay ten shillings a year for being
told of their faults. But as most people delight in censure, when
they themselves are not the objects of it, if any are offended at my
publicly exposing their private vices, I promise they shall have the
satisfaction, in a very little time, of seeing their good friends and
neighbours in the same circumstances.

However, let the fair sex be assured, that I shall always treat them
and their affairs with the utmost decency and respect. I intend now
and then to dedicate a chapter wholly to their service; and if my
lectures any way contribute to the embellishment of their minds, and
brightening of their understandings, without offending their modesty,
I doubt not of having their favour and encouragement.

It is certain, that no country in the world produces naturally finer
spirits than ours, men of genius for every kind of science, and
capable of acquiring to perfection every qualification, that is in
esteem among mankind. But as few here have the advantage of good
books, for want of which, good conversation is still more scarce,
it would, doubtless, have been very acceptable to your readers,
if, instead of an old out-of-date article from Muscovy or Hungary,
you had entertained them with some well chosen extract from a good
author. This I shall sometimes do, when I happen to have nothing
of my own to say that I think of more consequence. Sometimes, I
purpose to deliver lectures of morality of philosophy, and (because
I am naturally inclined to be meddling with things that do not
concern me) perhaps I may sometimes talk politics. And if I can by
any means furnish out a weekly entertainment for the public, that
will give a rational diversion, and at the same time be instructive
to the readers, I shall think my leisure hours well employed: and
if you publish this, I hereby invite all ingenious gentlemen and
others (that approve of such an undertaking) to my assistance and
correspondence.

It is like, by this time, you have a curiosity to be acquainted with
my name and character. As I do not aim at public praise, I design
to remain concealed: and there are such numbers of our family and
relations at this time in the country, that, though I have signed my
name at full length, I am not under the least apprehension of being
distinguished and discovered by it. My character indeed, I would
favour you with, but that I am cautious of praising myself, lest I
should be told my trumpeter's dead: and I cannot find in my heart, at
present, to say any thing to my own disadvantage.

It is very common with authors in their first performances, to talk
to their readers thus, If this meets with a suitable reception,
or, if this should meet with due encouragement, I shall hereafter
publish, &c.--This only manifests the value they put on their
own writings, since they think to frighten the public into their
applause, by threatening, that unless you approve what they have
already wrote, they intend never to write again; when perhaps it
may not be a pin matter, whether they ever do or no. As I have not
observ'd the critics to be more favourable on this account, I shall
always avoid saying any thing of the kind; and conclude with telling
you, that if you send me a bottle of ink and a quire of paper by the
bearer, you may depend on hearing further from,

  Sir,

  Your most humble servant,

  THE BUSY-BODY.


_The Busy-Body._--No. II.

FROM TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 4, TO TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, 1728,--9.

    All fools have still an itching to deride,
    And fain would be upon the laughing side.--POPE.

Monsieur Rochefocault tells us somewhere in his Memoirs, that the
Prince of Condé delighted much in ridicule, and used frequently
to shut himself up for half a day together, in his chamber, with
a gentleman, that was his favourite, purposely to divert himself
with examining what was the foible, or ridiculous side, of every
noted person in the court. That gentleman said afterwards in some
company, that he thought nothing was more ridiculous in any body,
than this same humour in the prince; and I am somewhat inclined to
be of this opinion. The general tendency there is among us to this
embellishment (which I fear has too often grossly imposed upon my
loving countrymen instead of wit) and the applause it meets with
from a rising generation, fill me with fearful apprehensions for the
future reputation of my country: a young man of modesty (which is the
most certain indication of large capacities) is hereby discouraged
from attempting to make any figure in life: his apprehensions of
being outlaughed, will force him to continue in a restless obscurity,
without having an opportunity of knowing his own merit himself, or
discovering it to the world, rather than venture to expose himself in
a place, where a pun or a sneer shall pass for wit, noise for reason,
and the strength of the argument be judged by that of the lungs.
Among these witty gentlemen let us take a view of Ridentius: what a
contemptible figure does he make with his train of paltry admirers?
This wight shall give himself an hour's diversion with the cock of
a man's hat, the heels of his shoes, an unguarded expression in his
discourse, or even some personal defect; and the height of his low
ambition is to put some one of the company to the blush, who perhaps
must pay an equal share of the reckoning with himself. If such a
fellow makes laughing the sole end and purpose of his life, if it is
necessary to his constitution, or if he has a great desire of growing
suddenly fat, let him eat; let him give public notice where any dull
stupid rogues may get a quart of four-penny for being laugh'd at; but
it is barbarously unhandsome, when friends meet for the benefit of
conversation, and a proper relaxation from business, that one should
be the butt of the company, and four men made merry at the cost of
the fifth.

How different from this character is that of the good-natured, gay
Eugenius? who never spoke yet but with a design to divert and please;
and who was never yet baulked in his intention. Eugenius takes more
delight in applying the wit of his friends, than in being admired
himself: and if any one of the company is so unfortunate as to be
touched a little too nearly, he will make use of some ingenious
artifice to turn the edge of ridicule another way, chusing rather to
make himself a public jest, than be at the pain of seeing his friend
in confusion.

Among the tribe of laughers I reckon the pretty gentlemen, that
write satyrs, and carry them about in their pockets, reading them
themselves in all company they happen into; taking an advantage of
the ill taste of the town, to make themselves famous for a pack of
paltry, low nonsense, for which they deserve to be kicked, rather
than admired, by all who have the least tincture of politeness. These
I take to be the most incorrigible of all my readers; nay, I expect
they will be squibbing at the Busy-Body himself. However, the only
favour he begs of them is this, that if they cannot controul their
overbearing itch of scribbling, let him be attacked in downright
biting lyricks; for there is no satyr he dreads half so much, as an
attempt towards a panegyrick.


_The Busy-Body._--No. III.

FROM TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 11, TO TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 18, 1728,--9.

    Non vultus instantis Tyranni
    Mente quatit solida, nec auster,
    Dux inquieti turbidus Adriæ,
    Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus.--HOR.

It is said, that the Persians, in their ancient constitution, had
public schools, in which virtue was taught as a liberal art or
science: and it is certainly of more consequence to a man, that he
has learnt to govern his passions; in spite of temptation, to be just
in his dealings, to be temperate in his pleasures, to support himself
with fortitude under his misfortunes, to behave with prudence in all
his affairs, and in every circumstance of life; I say, it is of much
more real advantage to him to be thus qualified, than to be a master
of all the arts and sciences in the world beside.

Virtue alone is sufficient to make a man great, glorious, and
happy.--He that is acquainted with Cato, as I am, cannot help
thinking as I do now, and will acknowledge he deserves the name,
without being honoured by it. Cato is a man whom fortune has placed
in the most obscure part of the country. His circumstances are
such, as only put him above necessity, without affording him many
superfluities: yet who is greater than Cato? I happened but the
other day to be at a house in town, where, among others, were met,
men of the most note in this place; Cato had business with some of
them, and knocked at the door. The most trifling actions of a man,
in my opinion, as well as the smallest features and lineaments of
the face, give a nice observer some notion of his mind. Methought
he rapped in such a peculiar manner, as seemed of itself to express
there was one who deserved as well as desired admission. He appeared
in the plainest country garb; his great coat was coarse, and looked
old and thread bare; his linen was homespun; his beard, perhaps, of
seven days growth; his shoes thick and heavy; and every part of his
dress corresponding. Why was this man received with such concurring
respect from every person in the room, even from those, who had never
known him or seen him before? It was not an exquisite form of person
or grandeur of dress, that struck us with admiration. I believe long
habits of virtue have a sensible effect on the countenance: there was
something in the air of his face, that manifested the true greatness
of his mind; which likewise appeared in all he said, and in every
part of his behaviour, obliging us to regard him with a kind of
veneration. His aspect is sweetened with humanity and benevolence,
and at the same time emboldened with resolution, equally free from
diffident bashfulness and an unbecoming assurance. The consciousness
of his own innate worth and unshaken integrity renders him calm
and undaunted in the presence of the most great and powerful, and
upon the most extraordinary occasions. His strict justice and known
impartiality make him the arbitrator and decider of all differences,
that arise for many miles around him, without putting his neighbours
to the charge, perplexity, and uncertainty of law-suits. He always
speaks the thing he means, which he is never afraid or ashamed to
do, because he knows he always means well; and therefore is never
obliged to blush, and feel the confusion of finding himself detected
in the meanness of a falshood. He never contrives ill against his
neighbour, and therefore is never seen with a lowring, suspicious
aspect. A mixture of innocence and wisdom makes him ever seriously
chearful. His generous hospitality to strangers, according to his
ability, his goodness, his charity, his courage in the cause of the
oppressed, his fidelity in friendship, his humility, his honesty and
sincerity, his moderation and his loyalty to the government, his
piety, his temperance, his love to mankind, his magnanimity, his
public spiritedness, and, in fine, his consummate virtue, make him
justly deserve to be esteemed the glory of his country.

    The brave do never shun the light,
    Just are their thoughts, and open are their tempers;
    Freely without disguise they love and hate;
    Still are they found in the fair face of day,
    And heaven and men are judges of their actions.--ROWE.

Who would not rather choose, if it were in his choice, to merit the
above character, than be the richest, the most learned, or the most
powerful man in the province without it?

Almost every man has a strong natural desire of being valued and
esteemed by the rest of his species; but I am concerned and grieved
to see how few fall into the right and only infallible method of
becoming so. That laudable ambition is too commonly misapply'd and
often ill employed. Some, to make themselves considerable, pursue
learning; others grasp at wealth; some aim at being thought witty;
and others are only careful to make the most of an handsome person:
but what is wit, or wealth, or form, or learning, when compared with
virtue? It is true, we love the handsome, we applaud the learned,
and we fear the rich and powerful; but we even worship and adore
the virtuous. Nor is it strange; since men of virtue are so rare,
so very rare to be found. If we were as industrious to become good,
as to make ourselves great, we should become really great by being
good, and the number of valuable men would be much increased; but it
is a grand mistake to think of being great without goodness; and I
pronounce it as certain, that there was never yet a truly great man,
that was not at the same time truly virtuous.

O Cretico! thou sour philosopher! thou cunning statesman! thou
art crafty, but far from being wise. When wilt thou be esteemed,
regarded, and beloved like Cato? When wilt thou, among thy creatures,
meet with that unfeigned respect and warm good-will that all men
have for him? Wilt thou never understand, that the cringing, mean,
submissive deportment of thy dependants, is (like the worship paid
by Indians to the devil) rather through fear of the harm thou mayst
do them, than out of gratitude for the favours they have received of
thee? Thou art not wholly void of virtue; there are many good things
in thee, and many good actions reported of thee. Be advised by thy
friend: neglect those musty authors; let them be covered with dust,
and moulder on their proper shelves; and do thou apply thyself to a
study much more profitable, the knowledge of mankind and of thyself.

This is to give notice, that the Busy-Body strictly forbids all
persons, from this time forward, of what age, sex, rank, quality,
degree, or denomination soever, on any pretence, to inquire who is
the author of this paper, on pain of his displeasure (his own near
and dear relations only excepted).

It is to be observed, that if any bad characters happen to be drawn
in the course of these papers, they mean no particular person, if
they are not particularly applied.

Likewise, that the author is no party-man, but a general meddler.

N. B. Cretico lives in a neighbouring province.


_The Busy-Body._--No. IV.

FROM TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 18, TO TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 25, 1728,--9.

  Nequid nimis.

In my first paper, I invited the learned and the ingenious to join
with me in this undertaking; and I now repeat that invitation. I
would have such gentlemen take this opportunity (by trying their
talent in writing) of diverting themselves and friends, and improving
the taste of the town. And because I would encourage all wit of our
own growth and produce, I hereby promise, that whoever shall send
me a little essay on some moral or other subject, that is fit for
public view in this manner, (and not basely borrowed from any other
author) I shall receive it with candour, and take care to place it to
the best advantage. It will be hard, if we cannot muster up in the
whole country a sufficient stock of sense to supply the Busy-Body at
least for a twelve-month. For my own part, I have already professed,
that I have the good of my country wholly at heart in this design,
without the least sinister view; my chief purpose being to inculcate
the noble principles of virtue, and depreciate vice of every kind.
But as I know the mob hate instruction, and the generality would
never read beyond the first line of my lectures, if they were
actually filled with nothing but wholesome precepts and advice, I
must therefore sometimes humour them in their own way. There are a
set of great names in the province, who are the common objects of
popular dislike. If I can now and then overcome my reluctance, and
prevail with myself to satirize a little, one of these gentlemen,
the expectation of meeting with such a gratification will induce
many to read me through, who would otherwise proceed immediately
to the foreign news. As I am very well assured the greatest men
among us have a sincere love for their country, notwithstanding its
ingratitude, and the insinuations of the envious and malicious to the
contrary, so I doubt not but they will cheerfully tolerate me in the
liberty I design to take for the end abovementioned.

As yet I have but few correspondents, though they begin now to
increase. The following letter, left for me at the printer's, is one
of the first I have received, which I regard the more for that it
comes from one of the fair sex, and because I have myself oftentimes
suffered under the grievance therein complained of.


_To the Busy-Body._

  SIR,

You having set yourself up for a censuror morum (as I think you call
it) which is said to mean a reformer of manners, I know no person
more proper to be applied to for redress in all the grievances we
suffer from want of manners in some people. You must know, I am a
single woman, and keep a shop in this town for a livelihood. There
is a certain neighbour of mine, who is really agreeable company
enough, and with whom I have had an intimacy of some time standing;
but of late she makes her visits so exceedingly often, and stays so
very long every visit, that I am tired out of all patience. I have
no manner of time at all to myself; and you, who seem to be a wise
man, must needs be sensible, that every person has little secrets
and privacies, that are not proper to be exposed even to the nearest
friend. Now I cannot do the least thing in the world, but she must
know about it; and it is a wonder I have found an opportunity to
write you this letter. My misfortune is, that I respect her very
well, and know not how to disoblige her so much as to tell her, I
should be glad to have less of her company; for if I should once
hint such a thing, I am afraid she would resent it so as never to
darken my door again.--But alas, Sir, I have not yet told you half
my affliction. She has two children that are just big enough to
run about and do pretty mischief: these are continually along with
mamma, either in my room or shop, if I have ever so many customers
or people with me about business. Sometimes they pull the goods off
my low shelves down to the ground, and perhaps where one of them has
just been making water. My friend takes up the stuff, and cries,
"Oh! thou little wicked mischievous rogue!" But however, it has done
no great damage; it is only wet a little, and so puts it up upon
the shelf again. Sometimes they get to my cask of nails behind the
counter, and divert themselves, to my great vexation, with mixing my
ten-penny and eight-penny and four-penny together. I endeavour to
conceal my uneasiness as much as possible, and with a grave look
go to sorting them out. She cries, "Don't thee trouble thyself,
neighbour. Let them play a little; I'll put all to rights before I
go." But things are never so put to rights but that I find a great
deal of work to do after they are gone. Thus, Sir, I have all the
trouble and pesterment of children, without the pleasure of calling
them my own; and they are now so used to being here that they will
be content no where else. If she would have been so kind as to have
moderated her visits to ten times a day, and staid but half an hour
at a time, I should have been contented, and I believe never have
given you this trouble. But this very morning they have so tormented
me that I could bear no longer; for while the mother was asking me
twenty impertinent questions, the youngest got to my nails, and with
great delight rattled them by handfuls all over the floor; and the
other at the same time made such a terrible din upon my counter with
a hammer, that I grew half distracted. I was just then about to make
myself a new suit of pinners, but in the fret and confusion I cut it
quite out of all manner of shape, and utterly spoiled a piece of the
first muslin. Pray, sir, tell me what I shall do. And talk a little
against such unreasonable visiting in your next paper: though I would
not have her affronted with me for a great deal, for sincerely I love
her and her children, as well, I think, as a neighbour can, and she
buys a great many things in a year at my shop. But I would beg her
to consider, that she uses me unmercifully, though I believe it is
only for want of thought. But I have twenty things more to tell you
besides all this: there is a handsome gentleman that has a mind (I
don't question) to make love to me; but he can't get the opportunity
to----O dear, here she comes again; I must conclude

  "Your's, &c.

  "PATIENCE."

Indeed, it is well enough, as it happens, that she is come to shorten
this complaint, which I think is full long enough already, and
probably would otherwise have been as long again. However, I must
confess, I cannot help pitying my correspondent's case, and in her
behalf, exhort the visitor to remember and consider the words of the
wise man, withdraw thy foot from the house of thy neighbour, lest
he grow weary of thee and so hate thee. It is, I believe, a nice
thing and very difficult, to regulate our visits in such a manner,
as never to give offence by coming too seldom, or too often, or
departing too abruptly, or staying too long. However, in my opinion,
it is safest for most people, in a general way, who are unwilling to
disoblige, to visit seldom, and tarry but a little while in a place;
notwithstanding pressing invitations, which are many times insincere.
And though more of your company should be really desired; yet in this
case, too much reservedness is a fault more easily excused than the
contrary.

Men are subject to various inconveniencies merely through lack of
a small share of courage, which is a quality very necessary in
the common occurrences of life, as well as in a battle. How many
impertinencies do we daily suffer with great uneasiness, because we
have not courage enough to discover our dislike? And why may not
a man use the boldness and freedom of telling his friends, that
their long visits sometimes incommode him? On this occasion, it may
be entertaining to some of my readers, if I acquaint them with the
Turkish manner of entertaining visitors, which I have from an author
of unquestionable veracity; who assures us, that even the Turks are
not so ignorant of civility and the arts of endearment, but that
they can practise them with as much exactness as any other nation,
whenever they have a mind to show themselves obliging.

"When you visit a person of quality (says he) and have talked over
your business, or the compliments, or whatever concern brought
you thither, he makes a sign to have things served in for the
entertainment, which is generally a little sweetmeat, a dish of
sherbet, and another of coffee; all which are immediately brought in
by the servants, and tendered to all the guests in order, with the
greatest care and awfulness imaginable. At last comes the finishing
part of your entertainment, which is, perfuming the beards of the
company; a ceremony which is performed in this manner. They have for
the purpose a small silver chaffing dish, covered with a lid full of
holes, and fixed upon a handsome plate. In this they put some fresh
coals, and upon them a piece of lignum aloes, and shutting it up, the
smoke immediately ascends with a grateful odour through the holes of
the cover. This smoke is held under every one's chin, and offered as
it were a sacrifice to his beard. The bristly idol soon receives the
reverence done to it, and so greedily takes in and incorporates the
gummy steam, that it retains the savour of it, and may serve for a
nosegay a good while after.

"This ceremony may perhaps seem ridiculous at first hearing; but it
passes among the Turks for an high gratification. And I will say this
in its vindication, that its design is very wise and useful. For it
is understood to give a civil dismission to the visitants, intimating
to them, that the master of the house has business to do, or some
other avocation, that permits them to go away as soon as they please;
and the sooner after this ceremony the better. By this means you may,
at any time, without offence, deliver yourself from being detained
from your affairs by tedious and unseasonable visits; and from being
constrained to use that piece of hypocrisy, so common in the world,
of pressing those to stay longer with you, whom perhaps in your heart
you wish a great way off for having troubled you so long already."

Thus far my author. For my own part, I have taken such a fancy to
this Turkish custom, that for the future I shall put something like
it in practice. I have provided a bottle of right French brandy for
the men, and citron water for the ladies. After I have treated with
a dram, and presented a pinch of my best snuff, I expect all company
will retire, and leave me to pursue my studies for the good of the
public.


_Advertisement._

I give notice, that I am now actually compiling, and design to
publish in a short time, the true history of the rise, growth, and
progress of the renowned Tiff Club. All persons who are acquainted
with any facts, circumstances, characters, transactions, &c. which
will be requisite to the perfecting and embellishment of the said
work, are desired to communicate the same to the author, and direct
their letters to be left with the printer hereof.

The letter signed Would-be-something is come to hand.


_The Busy-Body._--No. V.

FROM TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 25, TO TUESDAY, MARCH 4, 1728,--9.

    Vos, o patricius sanguis, quos vivere fas est,
    Occipiti cæco, posticæ occurrite sannæ. PERSIUS.

This paper being design'd for a terror to evil doers, as well as a
praise to them that do well, I am lifted up with secret joy to find,
that my undertaking is approved, and encourag'd by the just and good,
and that few are against me but those who have reason to fear me.

There are little follies in the behaviour of most men, which their
best friends are too tender to acquaint them with; there are little
vices and small crimes which the law has no regard to or remedy for:
there are likewise great pieces of villany sometimes so craftily
accomplished, and so circumspectly guarded, that the law can take
no hold of the actors. All these things, and all things of this
nature, come within my province as Censor, and I am determined not to
be negligent of the trust I have reposed in myself, but resolve to
execute my office diligently and faithfully.

And that all the world may judge with how much humanity, as well as
justice, I shall behave in this office; and that even my enemies
may be convinced I take no delight to rake into the dunghill lives
of vicious men; and to the end that certain persons may be a little
eased of their fears, and relieved from the terrible palpitations
they have lately felt and suffered, and do still suffer; I hereby
graciously pass an act of general oblivion, for all offences, crimes,
and misdemeanors of what kind soever, committed from the beginning
of the year 1681, until the day of the date of my first paper, and
promise only to concern myself with such as have been since and shall
hereafter be committed. I shall take no notice who has (heretofore)
raised a fortune by fraud and oppression, nor who by deceit and
hypocrisy; what woman has been false to her good husband's bed, nor
what man has, by barbarous usage or neglect, broke the heart of a
faithful wife, and wasted his health and substance in debauchery;
what base wretch has betrayed his friend, and sold his honesty for
gold, nor what baser wretch first corrupted him, and then bought the
bargain: all this, and much more of the same kind, I shall forget,
and pass over in silence; but then it is to be observed, that I
expect and require a sudden and general amendment.

These threatenings of mine, I hope will have a good effect, and, if
regarded, may prevent abundance of folly and wickedness in others,
and, at the same time, save me abundance of trouble: and that people
may not flatter themselves with the hopes of concealing their loose
misdemeanors from my knowledge, and in that view persist in evil
doing, I must acquaint them, that I have lately entered into an
intimacy with the extraordinary person, who some time since wrote
me the following letter; and who, having a wonderful faculty, that
enables him to discover the most secret iniquity, is capable of
giving me great assistance in my designed work of reformation.

  "MR. BUSY-BODY,

"I rejoice, sir, at the opportunity you have given me to be
serviceable to you, and, by your means, to this province. You must
know, that such have been the circumstances of my life, and such
were the marvellous concurrences of my birth, that I have not only
a faculty of discovering the actions of persons, that are absent
or asleep, but even of the devil himself, in many of his secret
workings, in the various shapes, habits, and names of men and women:
and having travelled and conversed much, and met but with a very few
of the same perceptions and qualifications, I can recommend myself
to you as the most useful man you can correspond with. My father's
father's father (for we had no grandfathers in our family) was
the same John Bunyan that writ that memorable book, The Pilgrim's
Progress, who had, in some degree, a natural faculty of second sight.
This faculty (how derived to him our family memoirs are not very
clear) was enjoyed by all his descendants, but not by equal talents.
It was very dim in several of my first cousins, and probably had
been nearly extinct in our particular branch, had not my father
been a traveller. He lived, in his youthful days, in New England.
There he married, and there was born my elder brother, who had so
much of this faculty, as to discover witches in some of their occult
performances. My parents transporting themselves to Great Britain,
my second brother's birth was in that kingdom. He shared but a small
portion of this virtue, being only able to discern transactions about
the time of, and for the most part after, their happening. My good
father, who delighted in the Pilgrim's Progress, and mountainous
places, took shipping, with his wife, for Scotland, and inhabited in
the Highlands, where myself was born; and whether the soil, climate,
or astral influences, of which are preserved divers prognosticks,
restored our ancestor's natural faculty of second sight, in a greater
lustre to me, than it had shined in through several generations, I
will not here discuss. But so it is, that I am possessed largely
of it, and design, if you encourage the proposal, to take this
opportunity of doing good with it, which I question not will be
accepted of in a grateful way by many of your honest readers, though
the discovery of my extraction bodes me no deference from your great
scholars and modern philosophers. This my father was long ago aware
of, and lest the name alone should hurt the fortunes of his children,
he, in his shiftings from one country to another, wisely changed it.

"Sir, I have only this further to say, how I may be useful to you,
and as a reason for my not making myself more known in the world:
by virtue of this great gift of nature, second-sightedness, I do
continually see numbers of men, women, and children, of all ranks,
and what they are doing, while I am sitting in my closet; which is
too great a burthen for the mind, and makes me also conceit, even
against reason, that all this host of people can see and observe me,
which strongly inclines me to solitude, and an obscure living; and,
on the other hand, it will be an ease to me to disburthen my thoughts
and observations in the way proposed to you, by sir, your friend and
humble servant."

I conceal this correspondent's name, in my care for his life
and safety, and cannot but approve his prudence, in chusing to
live obscurely. I remember the fate of my poor monkey: he had an
illnatured trick of grinning and chattering at every thing he saw
in peticoats: my ignorant country neighbours got a notion, that pug
snarled by instinct at every female who had lost her virginity. This
was no sooner generally believed, than he was condemned to death:
by whom I could never learn, but he was assassinated in the night,
barbarously stabbed and mangled in a thousand places, and left
hanging dead on one of my gate posts, where I found him the next
morning.

The Censor observing, that the itch of scribbling begins to spread
exceedingly, and being carefully tender of the reputation of his
country, in point of wit and good sense, has determined to take all
manner of writings in verse or prose, that pretend to either, under
his immediate cognizance; and accordingly, hereby prohibits the
publishing any such for the future, till they have first passed his
examination, and received his imprimatur: for which he demands as a
fee only sixpence per sheet.

N. B. He nevertheless permits to be published, all satirical remarks
on the Busy-Body, the above prohibition notwithstanding, and without
examination, or requiring the said fees; which indulgence the small
wits, in and about this city, are advised gratefully to accept and
acknowledge.

The gentleman, who calls himself Sirronio, is directed, on receipt of
this, to burn his great book of Crudities.

P. S. In compassion to that young man, on account of the great pains
he has taken, in consideration of the character I have just received
of him, that he is really good natured, and on condition he shows it
to no foreigner, or stranger of sense, I have thought fit to reprieve
his said great book of Crudities from the flames, till further order.


  Noli me tangere

I had resolved, when I first commenced this design, on no account to
enter into a public dispute with any man; for I judged it would be
equally unpleasant to me and my readers, to see this paper filled
with contentious wrangling, answers, replies, &c. which is a way
of writing that is endless, and, at the same time, seldom contains
any thing that is either edifying or entertaining. Yet, when such a
considerable man as Mr. ---- finds himself concerned so warmly to
accuse and condemn me, as he has done in Keimer's last Instructor,
I cannot forbear endeavouring to say something in my own defence,
from one of the worst of characters that could be given me by a man
of worth. But as I have many things of more consequence to offer the
public, I declare, that I will never, after this time, take notice
of any accusations, not better supported with truth and reason; much
less may every little scribbler, that shall attack me, expect an
answer from the Busy-Body.

The sum of the charge delivered against me, either directly or
indirectly, in the said paper, is this: not to mention the first
weighty sentence concerning vanity and ill-nature, and the shrewd
intimation, that I am without charity, and therefore can have no
pretence to religion, I am represented as guilty of defamation and
scandal, the odiousness of which is apparent to every good man,
and the practice of it opposite to christianity, morality, and
common justice, and, in some cases, so far below all these, as to be
inhuman; as a blaster of reputations; as attempting, by a pretence,
to screen myself from the imputation of malice and prejudice; as
using a weapon, which the wiser and better part of mankind hold in
abhorrence; and as giving treatment which the wiser and better part
of mankind dislike on the same principles, and for the same reason,
as they do assassination, &c.; and all this is inferred and concluded
from a character I have wrote in my Number III.

In order to examine the justice and truth of this heavy charge, let
us recur to that character. And here we may be surprized to find
what a trifle has raised this mighty clamour and complaint, this
grievous accusation!--The worst thing said of the person, in what is
called my gross description (be he who he will to whom my accuser has
applied the character of Cretico) is, that he is a sour philosopher,
crafty, but not wise. Few humane characters can be drawn that will
not fit some body, in so large a country as this; but one would
think, supposing I meant Cretico a real person, I had sufficiently
manifested my impartiality, when I said, in that very paragraph,
that Cretico is not without virtue; that there are many good things
in him, and many good actions reported of him; which must be allowed
in all reason, very much to overbalance in his favour those worst
words, sour tempered, and cunning. Nay, my very enemy and accuser
must have been sensible of this, when he freely acknowledges, that he
has been seriously considering, and cannot yet determine, which he
would choose to be, the Cato or Cretico of that paper; since my Cato
is one of the best of characters. Thus much in my own vindication. As
to the only reasons there given, why I ought not to continue drawing
characters, viz. Why should any man's picture be published which he
never sat for; or his good name taken from him any more than his
money or possessions, at the arbitrary will of another, &c. I have
but this to answer: the money or possessions, I presume, are nothing
to the purpose; since no man can claim a right either to those or a
good name, if he has acted so as to forfeit them. And are not the
public the only judges what share of reputation they think proper
to allow any man? Supposing I was capable, and had an inclination,
to draw all the good and bad characters in America, why should a
good man be offended with me for drawing good characters? And if I
draw ill ones, can they fit any but those that deserve them? And
ought any but such to be concerned that they have their deserts? I
have as great an aversion and abhorrence for defamation and scandal
as any man, and would, with the utmost care, avoid being guilty of
such base things: besides I am very sensible and certain, that if I
should make use of this paper to defame any person, my reputation
would be sooner hurt by it than his; and the Busy-Body would quickly
become detestable; because, in such a case, as is justly observed,
the pleasure arising from a tale of wit and novelty soon dies away
in generous and honest minds, and is followed with a secret grief,
to see their neighbours calumniated. But if I myself was actually
the worst man in the province, and any one should draw my true
character, would it not be ridiculous in me to say, he had defamed
and scandalized me, unless he had added in a matter of truth? If any
thing is meant by asking, why any man's picture should be published
which he never sat for? it must be, that we should give no character
without the owner's consent. If I discern the wolf disguised in
harmless wool, and contriving the destruction of my neighbour's
sheep, must I have his permission, before I am allowed to discover
and prevent him? If I know a man to be a designing knave, must I
ask his consent, to bid my friends beware of him? If so, then, by
the same rule, supposing the Busy-Body had really merited all his
enemy had charged him with, his consent likewise ought to have been
obtained, before so terrible an accusation was published against him.

I shall conclude with observing, that in the last paragraph save one
of the piece now examined, much ill nature and some good sense are
co-inhabitants (as he expresses it). The ill nature appears, in his
endeavouring to discover satire, where I intended no such thing, but
quite the reverse: the good sense is this, that drawing too good a
character of any one is a refined manner of satire, that may be as
injurious to him as the contrary, by bringing on an examination that
undresses the person, and in the haste of doing it, he may happen
to be stript of what he really owns and deserves. As I am Censor, I
might punish the first, but I forgive it. Yet I will not leave the
latter unrewarded; but assure my adversary, that in consideration of
the merit of those four lines, I am resolved to forbear injuring him
on any account in that refined manner.

I thank my neighbour P---- W----l for his kind letter.

The lions complained of shall be muzzled.


_The Busy-Body._--No. VIII.

FROM TUESDAY, MARCH 20, TO THURSDAY, MARCH 27, 1729.

        Quid non mortalia pectora cogis,
    Auri sacra fames?----VIRGIL.

One of the greatest pleasures an author can have, is, certainly, the
hearing his works applauded. The hiding from the world our names,
while we publish our thoughts, is so absolutely necessary to this
self-gratification, that I hope my well-wishers will congratulate
me on my escape from the many diligent, but fruitless enquiries,
that have of late been made after me. Every man will own, that an
author, as such, ought to be hid by the merit of his productions
only; but pride, party, and prejudice, at this time, run so very
high, that experience shows we form our notions of a piece by the
character of the author. Nay, there are some very humble politicians
in and about this city, who will ask, on which side the writer is,
before they presume to give their opinion of the thing wrote. This
ungenerous way of proceeding I was well aware of before I published
my first speculation; and therefore concealed my name. And I appeal
to the more generous part of the world, if I have, since I appeared
in the character of the Busy-Body, given an instance of my siding
with any party more than another, in the unhappy divisions of my
country; and I have, above all, this satisfaction in myself, that
neither affection, aversion, or interest, have biassed me to use any
partiality towards any man, or set of men; but whatsoever I find
nonsensical, ridiculous, or immorally dishonest, I have, and shall
continue openly to attack, with the freedom of an honest man, and a
lover of my country.

I profess I can hardly contain myself, or preserve the gravity and
dignity that should attend the censorial office, when I hear the odd
and unaccountable expositions, that are put upon some of my works,
through the malicious ignorance of some, and the vain pride of more
than ordinary penetration in others; one instance of which many of
my readers are acquainted with. A certain gentleman has taken a
great deal of pains to write a key to the letter in my Number IV,
wherein he has ingeniously converted a gentle satyr upon tedious
and impertinent visitants, into a libel on some of the government.
This I mention only as a specimen of the taste of the gentleman; I
am, forsooth, bound to please in my speculations, not that I suppose
my impartiality will ever be called in question on that account.
Injustices of this nature I could complain of in many instances; but
I am at present diverted by the reception of a letter, which, though
it regards me only in my private capacity, as an adept, yet I venture
to publish it for the entertainment of my readers.


  "_To Censor Morum, Esq. Busy-Body General of the Province of
  Pennsylvania, and the Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex upon
  Delaware._

  "HONOURABLE SIR,

"I judge by your lucubrations, that you are not only a lover of truth
and equity, but a man of parts and learning, and a master of science;
as such I honour you. Know then, most profound sir, that I have,
from my youth up, been a very indefatigable student in, and admirer
of, that divine science, astrology. I have read over Scot, Albertus
Magnus, and Cornelius Agrippa, above three hundred times; and was
in hopes, by my knowledge and industry, to gain enough to have
recompensed me for my money expended, and time lost in the pursuit
of this learning. You cannot be ignorant, sir, (for your intimate
second-sighted correspondent knows all things) that there are large
sums of money hidden under ground in divers places about this town,
and in many parts of the country: but alas, sir, notwithstanding I
have used all the means laid down in the immortal authors before
mentioned, and when they failed the ingenious Mr. P--d--l, with his
mercurial wand and magnet, I have still failed in my purpose. This,
therefore, I send, to propose and desire an acquaintance with you,
and I do not doubt, notwithstanding my repeated ill fortune, but we
may be exceedingly serviceable to each other in our discoveries; and
that if we use our united endeavours, the time will come, when the
Busy-Body, his second-sighted correspondent, and your very humble
servant, will be three of the richest men in the province: and then,
sir, what may we not do? A word to the wise is sufficient.

  "I conclude with all demonstrable respect,

  "Yours and Urania's Votary,

  "TITAN PLEIADES."


In the evening after I had received this letter, I made a visit to
my second-sighted friend, and communicated to him the proposal.
When he had read it, he assured me, that to his certain knowledge,
there is not at this time so much as one ounce of silver or gold
hid under ground in any part of this province; for that the late
and present scarcity of money had obliged those, who were living,
and knew where they had formerly hid any, to take it up, and use it
in their own necessary affairs: and as to all the rest, which was
buried by pirates and others in old times, who were never like to
come for it, he himself had long since dug it all up, and applied it
to charitable uses; and this he desired me to publish for the general
good. For, as he acquainted me, there are among us great numbers of
honest artificers and labouring people, who, fed with a vain hope
of growing suddenly rich, neglect their business, almost to the
ruining of themselves and families, and voluntarily endure abundance
of fatigue in a fruitless search after imaginary hidden treasure.
They wander through the woods and bushes by day, to discover the
marks and signs; at midnight they repair to the hopeful spots with
spades and pickaxes; full of expectation, they labour violently,
trembling at the same time in every joint, through fear of certain
malicious demons, who are said to haunt and guard such places. At
length a mighty hole is dug, and perhaps several cartloads of earth
thrown out; but, alas, no cag or iron pot is found! no seaman's chest
crammed with Spanish pistoles, or weighty pieces of eight! Then they
conclude, that through some mistake in the procedure, some rash word
spoke, or some rule of art neglected, the guardian spirit had power
to sink it deeper into the earth, and convey it out of their reach.
Yet, when a man is once thus infatuated, he is so far from being
discouraged by ill success, that he is rather animated to double his
industry, and will try again and again in a hundred different places,
in hopes at last of meeting with some lucky hit, that shall at once
sufficiently reward him for all his expense of time and labour.

This odd humour of digging for money through a belief, that much
has been hid by pirates formerly frequenting the river, has for
several years been mighty prevalent among us; insomuch that you
can hardly walk half a mile out of the town on any side, without
observing several pits dug with that design, and perhaps some lately
opened. Men, otherwise of very good sense, have been drawn into this
practice, through an overweening desire of sudden wealth, and an easy
credulity of what they so earnestly wished might be true. While the
rational and almost certain methods of acquiring riches by industry
and frugality are neglected or forgotten. There seems to be some
peculiar charm in the conceit of finding money; and if the sands of
Schuylkil were so much mixed with small grains of gold, that a man
might in a day's time, with care and application, get together to the
value of half a crown, I make no question but we should find several
people employed there, that can with ease earn five shillings a day
at their proper trades.

Many are the idle stories told of the private success of some people,
by which others are encouraged to proceed; and the astrologers,
with whom the country swarms at this time, are either in the belief
of these things themselves, or find their advantage in persuading
others to believe them; for they are often consulted about the
critical times for digging, the methods of laying the spirit, and the
like whimsies, which renders them very necessary to, and very much
caressed by, the poor deluded money-hunters.

There is certainly something very bewitching in the pursuit after
mines of gold and silver and other valuable metals, and many have
been ruined by it. A sea-captain of my acquaintance used to blame
the English for envying Spain their mines of silver, and too much
despising or overlooking the advantages of their own industry
and manufactures. For my part, says he, I esteem the banks of
Newfoundland to be a more valuable possession than the mountains
of Potosi; and when I have been there on the fishing account, have
looked upon every cod pulled up into the vessel as a certain quantity
of silver ore, which required only carrying to the next Spanish port
to be coined into pieces of eight; not to mention the national profit
of fitting out and employing such a number of ships and seamen. Let
honest Peter Buckram, who has long, without success, been a searcher
after hidden money, reflect on this, and be reclaimed from that
unaccountable folly. Let him consider, that every stitch he takes
when he is on his shop board is picking up part of a grain of gold,
that will in a few days time amount to a pistole; and let Faber think
the same of every nail he drives, or every stroke with his plane.
Such thoughts may make them industrious, and of consequence in time
they may be wealthy. But how absurd is it to neglect a certain profit
for such a ridiculous whimsey: to spend whole days at the George, in
company with an idle pretender to astrology, contriving schemes to
discover what was never hidden, and forgetful how carelessly business
is managed at home in their absence: to leave their wives and a
warm bed at midnight (no matter if it rain, hail, snow, or blow a
hurricane, provided that be the critical hour) and fatigue themselves
with the violent exercise of digging for what they shall never find,
and perhaps getting a cold that may cost their lives, or at least
disordering themselves so as to be fit for no business beside for
some days after. Surely this is nothing less than the most egregious
folly and madness.

I shall conclude with the words of my discreet friend, Agricola, of
Chester County, when he gave his son a good plantation:--"My son,"
says he, "I give thee now a valuable parcel of land; I assure thee
I have found a considerable quantity of gold by digging there; thee
mayst do the same; but thee must carefully observe this, Never to dig
more than plow-deep."

FOOTNOTE:

[174] These are the "humorous pieces" mentioned by Dr. Franklin
in his Memoirs, page 86. We are indebted for them to an American
correspondent, who obtained a copy with great difficulty, some
depredating hand having torn from the file of the Mercury, in the
Philadelphia Library, several of the numbers containing the pieces in
question. _Editor._




  _The Way to Wealth, as clearly shown in the Preface of an old
  Pensylvania Almanack, intitled, Poor Richard Improved[175]._


  COURTEOUS READER,

I have heard, that nothing gives an author so great pleasure, as to
find his works respectfully quoted by others. Judge, then, how much
I must have been gratified by an incident I am going to relate to
you. I stopped my horse lately, where a great number of people were
collected, at an auction of merchants goods. The hour of the sale not
being come, they were conversing on the badness of the times; and
one of the company called to a plain clean old man, with white locks,
'Pray, Father Abraham, what think you of the times? Will not these
heavy taxes quite ruin the country? How shall we ever be able to pay
them? What would you advise us to?'--Father Abraham stood up, and
replied, 'If you would have my advice, I will give it you in short,
"for a word to the wise is enough," as Poor Richard says.' They
joined in desiring him to speak his mind, and gathering round him, he
proceeded as follows:

'Friends, says he, the taxes are, indeed, very heavy, and, if
those laid on by the government were the only ones we had to pay,
we might more easily discharge them; but we have many others, and
much more grievous to some of us. We are taxed twice as much by our
idleness, three times as much by our pride, and four times as much
by our folly; and from these taxes the commissioners cannot ease or
deliver us, by allowing an abatement. However, let us hearken to good
advice, and something may be done for us; "God helps them that help
themselves," as poor Richard says.

'I. It would be thought a hard government that should tax its people
one tenth part of their time, to be employed in its service: but
idleness taxes many of us much more; sloth, by bringing on diseases,
absolutely shortens life. "Sloth, like rust, consumes faster than
labour wears, while the used key is always bright," as poor Richard
says. "But dost thou love life, then do not squander time, for
that is the stuff life is made of," as poor Richard says. How much
more than is necessary do we spend in sleep! forgetting, that "the
sleeping fox catches no poultry, and that there will be sleeping
enough in the grave," as poor Richard says.

'"If time be of all things the most precious, wasting time must
be," as poor Richard says, "the greatest prodigality;" since, as
he elsewhere tells us, "lost time is never found again; and what
we call time enough always proves little enough:" let us then up
and be doing, and doing to the purpose; so by diligence shall we do
more with less perplexity. "Sloth makes all things difficult, but
industry all easy; and he that riseth late, must trot all day, and
shall scarce overtake his business at night; while laziness travels
so slowly, that poverty soon overtakes him. Drive thy business, let
not that drive thee; and early to bed, and early to rise, makes a man
healthy, wealthy, and wise," as poor Richard says.

'So what signifies wishing and hoping for better times? We may make
these times better, if we bestir ourselves. "Industry need not wish,
and he that lives upon hope will die fasting. There are no gains
without pains; then help hands, for I have no lands," or, if I have,
they are smartly taxed. "He, that hath a trade, hath an estate; and
he, that hath a calling, hath an office of profit and honour," as
poor Richard says; but then the trade must be worked at, and the
calling well followed, or neither the estate nor the office will
enable us to pay our taxes. If we are industrious, we shall never
starve; for, "at the working man's house, hunger looks in, but
dares not enter." Nor will the bailiff or the constable enter, for
"industry pays debts, while despair increaseth them." What though you
have found no treasure, nor has any rich relation left you a legacy,
"diligence is the mother of good luck, and God gives all things to
industry. Then plow deep, while sluggards sleep, and you shall have
corn to sell and to keep." Work while it is called to-day, for you
know not how much you may be hindered to-morrow. "One to-day is worth
two to-morrows," as poor Richard says; and farther, "never leave that
till to-morrow, which you can do to-day." If you were a servant,
would you not be ashamed that a good master should catch you idle?
Are you then your own master? Be ashamed to catch yourself idle, when
there is so much to be done for yourself, your family, your country,
and your king. Handle your tools without mittens; remember, that
"the cat in gloves catches no mice," as poor Richard says. It is
true, there is much to be done, and perhaps you are weak-handed; but
stick to it steadily, and you will see great effects, for "constant
dropping wears away stones; and by diligence and patience the mouse
ate in two the cable; and little strokes fell great oaks."

'Methinks I hear some of you say, "must a man afford himself no
leisure?" I will tell thee, my friend, what poor Richard says;
"employ thy time well, if thou meanest to gain leisure; and since
thou art not sure of a minute, throw not away an hour." Leisure is
time for doing something useful; this leisure the diligent man will
obtain, but the lazy man never; for "a life of leisure and a life of
laziness are two things. Many, without labour, would live by their
wits only, but they break for want of stock;" whereas industry gives
comfort, and plenty, and respect. "Fly pleasures, and they will
follow you. The diligent spinner has a large shift; and now I have a
sheep and a cow, every body bids me good-morrow."

'II. But with our industry we must likewise be steady, settled, and
careful, and oversee our own affairs with our own eyes, and not trust
too much to others; for, as poor Richard says,

    "I never saw an oft-removed tree,
    Nor yet an oft-removed family,
    That throve so well as those that settled be."

And again, "three removes is as bad as a fire;" and again, "keep thy
shop, and thy shop will keep thee;" and again, "if you would have
your business done, go, if not, send." And again,

    "He that by the plough would thrive,
    Himself must either hold or drive."

And again, "the eye of a master will do more work than both his
hands;" and again, "want of care does us more damage than want of
knowledge;" and again, "not to oversee workmen, is to leave them your
purse open." Trusting too much to other's care is the ruin of many;
for, "in the affairs of this world, men are saved, not by faith, but
by the want of it;" but a man's own care is profitable; for, "if you
would have a faithful servant, and one that you like, serve yourself.
A little neglect may breed great mischief; for want of a nail the
shoe was lost, and for want of a shoe the horse was lost, and for
want of a horse the rider was lost," being overtaken and slain by the
enemy; all for want of a little care about a horse-shoe nail.

'III. So much for industry, my friends, and attention to ones own
business; but to these we must add frugality, if we would make our
industry more certainly successful. A man may, if he knows not how to
save as he gets, "keep his nose all his life to the grind-stone, and
die not worth a groat at last. A fat kitchen makes a lean will;" and

    "Many estates are spent in the getting,
    Since women for tea forsook spinning and knitting,
    And men for punch forsook hewing and splitting."

"If you would be wealthy, think of saving, as well as of getting. The
Indies have not made Spain rich, because her outgoes are greater than
her incomes."

'Away then, with your expensive follies, and you will not then have
so much cause to complain of hard times, heavy taxes, and chargeable
families; for

    "Women and wine, game and deceit,
    Make the wealth small, and the want great."

And farther, "what maintains one vice, would bring up two children."
You may think, perhaps, that a little tea, or a little punch now and
then, diet a little more costly, clothes a little finer, and a little
entertainment now and then, can be no great matter; but remember,
"many a little makes a mickle." Beware of little expences; "a small
leak will sink a great ship," as poor Richard says; and again, "who
dainties love, shall beggars prove;" and moreover, "fools make
feasts, and wise men eat them."

'Here you are all got together to this sale of fineries and
nick-nacks. You call them _goods_, but if you do not take care, they
will prove _evils_ to some of you. You expect they will be sold
cheap, and perhaps they may, for less than they cost; but, if you
have no occasion for them, they must be dear to you. Remember what
poor Richard says, "buy what thou hast no need of, and ere long thou
shalt sell thy necessaries." And again, "at a great penny-worth pause
a while." He means, that perhaps the cheapness is apparent only,
and not real; or the bargain, by straitening thee in thy business,
may do thee more harm than good. For in another place he says, "many
have been ruined by buying good pennyworths." Again, "it is foolish
to lay out money in a purchase of repentance;" and yet this folly is
practised every day at auctions, for want of minding the almanack.
Many a one, for the sake of finery on the back, have gone with a
hungry belly, and half starved their families; "silks and satins,
scarlet and velvets, put out the kitchen fire," as poor Richard says.
These are not the necessaries of life, they can scarcely be called
the conveniences; and yet, only because they look pretty, how many
want to have them? By these and other extravagancies, the genteel are
reduced to poverty, and forced to borrow of those whom they formerly
despised, but who, through industry and frugality, have maintained
their standing; in which case it appears plainly, that "a ploughman
on his legs is higher than a gentleman on his knees," as poor Richard
says. Perhaps they have had a small estate left them, which they knew
not the getting of; they think "it is day, and will never be night;"
that a little to be spent out of so much is not worth minding; but
"always taking out of the meal-tub, and never putting in soon comes
to the bottom," as poor Richard says; and then, "when the well is
dry, they know the worth of water." But this they might have known
before, if they had taken his advice: "if you would know the value of
money go and try to borrow some; for he that goes a borrowing goes a
sorrowing," as poor Richard says; and indeed so does he that lends
to such people, when he goes to get it in again. Poor Dick farther
advises, and says,

    "Fond pride of dress is sure a very curse,
    Ere fancy you consult, consult your purse."

And again, "pride is as loud a beggar as want, and a great deal more
saucy." When you have bought one fine thing, you must buy ten more,
that your appearance may be all of a piece; but poor Dick says, "it
is easier to suppress the first desire than to satisfy all that
follow it:" and it is as truly folly for the poor to ape the rich, as
for the frog to swell, in order to equal the ox.

    "Vessels large may venture more,
    But little boats should keep near shore."

It is, however, a folly soon punished; for, as poor Richard says,
"pride that dines on vanity, sups on contempt; pride breakfasted with
plenty, dined with poverty, and supped with infamy." And, after all,
of what use is this pride of appearance, for which so much is risked,
so much is suffered? It cannot promote health, nor ease pain; it
makes no increase of merit in the person; it creates envy, it hastens
misfortune.

'But what madness must it be to _run in debt_ for these
superfluities! We are offered, by the terms of this sale, six months
credit; and that, perhaps, has induced some of us to attend it,
because we cannot spare the ready money, and hope now to be fine
without it. But ah! think what you do when you run in debt; you give
to another power over your liberty. If you cannot pay at the time,
you will be ashamed to see your creditor, you will be in fear when
you speak to him, you will make poor pitiful sneaking excuses, and,
by degrees, come to lose your veracity, and sink into base, downright
lying; for, "the second vice is lying, the _first_ is running in
debt," as poor Richard says; and again, to the same purpose, "lying
rides upon debt's back;" whereas a free-born Englishman ought not to
be ashamed nor afraid to see or speak to any man living. But poverty
often deprives a man of all spirit and virtue. "It is hard for an
empty bag to stand upright." What would you think of that prince,
or of that government, who should issue an edict, forbidding you to
dress like a gentleman or gentlewoman, on pain of imprisonment or
servitude? Would you not say, that you were free, have a right to
dress as you please, and that such an edict would be a breach of your
privileges, and such a government tyrannical? And yet you are about
to put yourself under that tyranny, when you run in debt for such
dress! your creditor has authority, at his pleasure, to deprive you
of your liberty, by confining you in gaol for life, or by selling you
for a servant, if you should not be able to pay him. When you have
got your bargain, you may, perhaps, think little of payment; but,
as poor Richard says, "creditors have better memories than debtors;
creditors are a superstitious sect, great observers of set-days and
times." The day comes round before you are aware, and the demand is
made before you are prepared to satisfy it; or, if you bear your
debt in mind, the term, which at first seemed so long, will, as it
lessens, appear extremely short: time will seem to have added wings
to his heels as well as his shoulders. "Those have a short lent, who
owe money to be paid at Easter." At present, perhaps, you may think
yourselves in thriving circumstances, and that you can bear a little
extravagance without injury; but

    "For age and want save while you may,
    No morning sun lasts a whole day."

Gain may be temporary and uncertain, but ever, while you live,
expence is constant and certain; and, "it is easier to build two
chimneys than to keep one in fuel," as poor Richard says: so "rather
go to bed supperless than rise in debt."

    "Get what you can, and what you get hold,
    'Tis the stone that will turn all your lead into gold."

And when you have got the philosopher's stone, sure you will no
longer complain of bad times, or the difficulty of paying taxes.

'IV. This doctrine, my friends, is reason and wisdom: but, after
all, do not depend too much upon your own industry, and frugality,
and prudence, though excellent things; for they may all be blasted,
without the blessing of heaven; and therefore ask that blessing
humbly, and be not uncharitable to those that at present seem to
want it, but comfort and help them. Remember Job suffered, and was
afterwards prosperous.

'And now, to conclude, "experience keeps a dear school, but fools
will learn in no other," as poor Richard says, and scarce in that;
for, it is true, "we may give advice, but we cannot give conduct:"
however, remember this, "they that will not be counselled cannot be
helped;" and farther, that "if you will not hear reason she will
surely rap your knuckles," as poor Richard says.'

Thus the old gentleman ended his harangue. The people heard it and
approved the doctrine; and immediately practised the contrary, just
as if it had been a common sermon, for the auction opened and they
began to buy extravagantly.--I found the good man had thoroughly
studied my almanacks, and digested all I had dropt on those topics
during the course of twenty-five years. The frequent mention he made
of me must have tired any one else; but my vanity was wonderfully
delighted with it, though I was conscious, that not a tenth part
of the wisdom was my own, which he ascribed to me, but rather the
gleanings that I had made of the sense of all ages and nations.
However, I resolved to be the better for the echo of it; and, though
I had at first determined to buy stuff for a new coat, I went away,
resolved to wear my old one a little longer. Reader, if thou wilt do
the same, thy profit will be as great as mine.

  I am, as ever,

  Thine to serve thee,

  RICHARD SAUNDERS.

FOOTNOTE:

[175] Dr. Franklin, as I have been made to understand, for many years
published the Pensylvania Almanack, called _Poor Richard [Saunders]_,
and furnished it with various sentences and proverbs, which had
principal relation to the topics of "industry, attention to one's
own business, and frugality." The whole or chief of these sentences
and proverbs he at last collected and digested in the above general
preface, which his countrymen read with much avidity and profit. B. V.




  _Advice to a Young Tradesman[176]._

  Written Anno 1748.

  TO MY FRIEND A. B.

As you have desired it of me, I write the following hints, which have
been of service to me, and may, if observed, be so to you.


Remember, that _time_ is money. He, that can earn ten shillings a day
by his labour, and goes abroad, or sits idle one half of that day,
though he spends but sixpence during his diversion or idleness, ought
not to reckon _that_ the only expence; he has really spent, or rather
thrown away, five shillings besides.

Remember, that _credit_ is money. If a man lets his money lie in my
hands after it is due, he gives me the interest, or so much as I can
make of it, during that time. This amounts to a considerable sum
where a man has good and large credit, and makes good use of it.

Remember, that money is of a prolific generating nature. Money can
beget money, and its offspring can beget more, and so on. Five
shillings turned is six, turned again it is seven and three-pence,
and so on till it becomes an hundred pounds. The more there is of it,
the more it produces every turning, so that the profits rise quicker
and quicker. He that kills a breeding sow destroys all her offspring
to the thousandth generation. He that murders a crown destroys all
that it might have produced, even scores of pounds.

Remember, that six pounds a year is but a groat a day. For this
little sum (which may be daily wasted either in time or expence
unperceived) a man of credit may, on his own security, have the
constant possession and use of an hundred pounds. So much in stock,
briskly turned by an industrious man, produces great advantage.

Remember this saying, "the good paymaster is lord of another man's
purse." He that is known to pay punctually and exactly to the time he
promises may at any time, and on any occasion, raise all the money
his friends can spare. This is sometimes of great use. After industry
and frugality, nothing contributes more to the raising of a young
man in the world than punctuality and justice in all his dealings:
therefore, never keep borrowed money an hour beyond the time you
promised, lest a disappointment shut up your friend's purse for ever.

The most trifling actions that affect a man's credit are to be
regarded. The sound of your hammer at five in the morning, or nine
at night, heard by a creditor, makes him easy six months longer: but
if he sees you at a billiard-table, or hears your voice at a tavern,
when you should be at work, he sends for his money the next day;
demands it before he can receive it in a lump.

It shows, besides, that you are mindful of what you owe; it makes you
appear a careful as well as an honest man, and that still increases
your credit.

Beware of thinking all your own that you possess, and of living
accordingly. It is a mistake that many people who have credit fall
into. To prevent this, keep an exact account for some time, both of
your expences and your income. If you take the pains at first to
mention particulars, it will have this good effect: you will discover
how wonderfully small trifling expences mount up to large sums, and
will discern what might have been, and may for the future be saved,
without occasioning any great inconvenience.

In short, the way to wealth, if you desire it, is as plain as the
way to market. It depends chiefly on two words, _industry_ and
_frugality_; that is, waste neither _time_ nor _money_, but make the
best use of both. Without industry and frugality nothing will do, and
with them every thing. He, that gets all he can honestly, and saves
all he gets (necessary expences excepted), will certainly become
_rich_--if that Being who governs the world, to whom all should look
for a blessing on their honest endeavours, doth not, in his wise
providence, otherwise determine.

  AN OLD TRADESMAN.

FOOTNOTE:

[176] This paper and the hints that follow it are from the
Repository, vol. II. p. 169 and 171, where, as they are placed under
the head of original articles, we presume they first appeared.
_Editor._




  _Necessary Hints to those that would be Rich._

  Written Anno 1736.


The use of money is all the advantage there is in having money.

For six pounds a year you may have the use of one hundred pounds,
provided you are a man of known prudence and honesty.

He, that spends a groat a day idly, spends idly above six pounds a
year, which is the price for the use of one hundred pounds.

He, that wastes idly a groat's worth of his time per day, one day
with another, wastes the privilege of using one hundred pounds each
day.

He, that idly loses five shillings worth of time, loses five
shillings, and might as prudently throw five shillings into the sea.

He, that loses five shillings, not only loses that sum, but all the
advantage that might be made by turning it in dealing, which, by the
time that a young man becomes old, will amount to a considerable sum
of money.

Again: he, that sells upon credit, asks a price for what he sells
equivalent to the principal and interest of his money for the time he
is to be kept out of it; therefore, he, that buys upon credit, pays
interest for what he buys, and he, that pays ready money, might let
that money out to use: so that he, that possesses any thing he has
bought, pays interest for the use of it.

Yet, in buying goods, it is best to pay ready money, because he,
that sells upon credit, expects to lose five per cent by bad debts;
therefore he charges, on all he sells upon credit, an advance, that
shall make up that deficiency.

Those, who pay for what they buy upon credit, pay their share of this
advance.

He, that pays ready money, escapes, or may escape, that charge.

    A penny sav'd is two-pence clear,
    A pin a day's a groat a year.




  _The way to make Money Plenty in every Man's Pocket[177]._


At this time, when the general complaint is, that "money is scarce,"
it will be an act of kindness to inform the moneyless how they may
reinforce their pockets. I will acquaint them with the true secret
of money-catching, the certain way to fill empty purses, and how to
keep them always full. Two simple rules, well observed, will do the
business.

First, let honesty and industry be thy constant companions; and

Secondly, spend one penny less than thy clear gains.

Then shall thy hide-bound pocket soon begin to thrive, and will
never again cry with the empty belly-ach: neither will creditors
insult thee, nor want oppress, nor hunger bite, nor nakedness freeze
thee. The whole hemisphere will shine brighter, and pleasure spring
up in every corner of thy heart. Now, therefore, embrace these rules
and be happy. Banish the bleak winds of sorrow from thy mind, and
live independent. Then shalt thou be a man, and not hide thy face at
the approach of the rich, nor suffer the pain of feeling little when
the sons of fortune walk at thy right hand: for independency, whether
with little or much, is good fortune, and placeth thee on even ground
with the proudest of the golden fleece. Oh, then, be wise, and let
industry walk with thee in the morning, and attend thee until thou
reachest the evening hour for rest. Let honesty be as the breath of
thy soul, and never forget to have a penny when all thy expences are
enumerated and paid: then shalt thou reach the point of happiness,
and independence shall be thy shield and buckler, thy helmet and
crown; then shall thy soul walk upright, nor stoop to the silken
wretch because he hath riches, nor pocket an abuse because the hand
which offers it wears a ring set with diamonds.

FOOTNOTE:

[177] From the American Museum, vol. II. p. 86. _Editor._




  _New Mode of Lending Money[178]._


  _Paris, April 22, 1784._

I send you herewith a bill for ten louis d'ors. I do not pretend to
give such a sum. I only _lend_ it to you. When you shall return to
your country, you cannot fail getting into some business, that will
in time enable you to pay all your debts. In that case, when you
meet with another honest man in similar distress, you must _pay me_
by lending this sum to him, enjoining him, to _discharge the debt_
by a like operation, when he shall be able, and shall meet with such
another opportunity. I hope it may thus go through many hands before
it meet with a _knave_ to stop its progress. This is a trick of mine
for doing a good deal with a little money. I am not rich enough to
afford _much_ in good works, and so am obliged to be cunning and make
the most of a _little_.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[178] From the Gentleman's Magazine, for September, 1797;
communicated by the gentleman who received it. _Editor._




  _An Economical Project[179]._

  TO THE AUTHORS OF THE JOURNAL.


  MESSIEURS,

You often entertain us with accounts of new discoveries. Permit me to
communicate to the public, through your paper, one, that has lately
been made by myself, and which I conceive may be of great utility.

I was the other evening in a grand company, where the new lamp of
Messrs. Quinquet and Lange was introduced, and much admired for
its splendor; but a general enquiry was made, whether the oil it
consumed was not in proportion to the light it afforded, in which
case there would be no saving in the use of it. No one present could
satisfy us in that point, which all agreed ought to be known, it
being a very desirable thing to lessen, if possible, the expence of
lighting our apartments, when every other article of family expence
was so much augmented.

I was pleased to see this general concern for economy, for I love
economy exceedingly.

I went home, and to bed, three or four hours after midnight, with my
head full of the subject. An accidental sudden noise waked me about
six in the morning, when I was surprised to find my room filled with
light; and I imagined at first, that a number of those lamps had been
brought into it: but, rubbing my eyes, I perceived the light came
in at the windows. I got up and looked out to see what might be the
occasion of it, when I saw the sun just rising above the horison,
from whence he poured his rays plentifully into my chamber, my
domestic having negligently omitted the preceding evening to close
the shutters.

I looked at my watch, which goes very well, and found that it was
but six o'clock; and still thinking it something extraordinary, that
the sun should rise so early, I looked into the almanack, where I
found it to be the hour given for his rising on that day. I looked
forward too, and found he was to rise still earlier every day till
towards the end of June; and that at no time in the year he retarded
his rising so long as till eight o'clock. Your readers, who with me
have never seen any signs of sunshine before noon, and seldom regard
the astronomical part of the almanack, will be as much astonished
as I was, when they hear of his rising so early; and especially
when I assure them, _that he gives light as soon as he rises_. I
am convinced of this. I am certain of my fact. One cannot be more
certain of any fact. I saw it with my own eyes. And, having repeated
this observation the three following mornings, I found always
precisely the same result.

Yet so it happens, that when I speak of this discovery to others,
I can easily perceive by their countenances, though they forbear
expressing it in words, that they do not quite believe me. One,
indeed, who is a learned natural philosopher, has assured me, that I
must certainly be mistaken as to the circumstance of the light coming
into my room; for it being well known, as he says, that there could
be no light abroad at that hour, it follows that none could enter
from without; and that of consequence, my windows being accidentally
left open, instead of letting in the light, had only served to let
out the darkness: and he used many ingenious arguments to shew me how
I might, by that means, have been deceived. I own, that he puzzled me
a little, but he did not satisfy me; and the subsequent observations
I made, as above mentioned, confirmed me in my first opinion.

This event has given rise in my mind to several serious and important
reflections. I considered that, if I had not been awakened so early
in the morning, I should have slept six hours longer by the light of
the sun, and in exchange have lived six hours the following night by
candle-light; and the latter being a much more expensive light than
the former, my love of economy induced me to muster up what little
arithmetic I was master of, and to make some calculations, which I
shall give you, after observing that utility is, in my opinion, the
test of value in matters of invention, and that a discovery which
can be applied to no use, or is not good for something, is good for
nothing.

I took for the basis of my calculation the supposition that there
are 100,000 families in Paris, and that these families consume in
the night half a pound of bougies, or candles per hour. I think this
is a moderate allowance, taking one family with another; for though
I believe some consume less, I know that many consume a great deal
more. Then estimating seven hours per day, as the medium quantity
between the time of the sun's rising and ours, he rising during the
six following months from six to eight hours before noon, and there
being seven hours of course per night in which we burn candles, the
account will stand thus:--

In the six months between the twentieth of March and the twentieth of
September, there are

  Nights                                                   183

  Hours of each night in which we burn
    candles                                                  7
                                                       -------
  Multiplication gives for the total number
    of hours                                             1,281

  These 1,281 hours multiplied by 100,000,
    the number of inhabitants give                 128,100,000

  One hundred twenty-eight millions and
    one hundred thousand hours, spent at
    Paris by candle-light, which, at half
    a pound of wax and tallow per hour,
    gives the weight of                             64,050,000

  Sixty-four millions and fifty thousand of
    pounds, which, estimating the whole
    at the medium price of thirty sols the
    pound, makes the sum of ninety-six
    millions and seventy-five thousand
    livres tournois                                 96,075,000

An immense sum! that the city of Paris might save every year, by the
economy of using sunshine instead of candles.

If it should be said, that people are apt to be obstinately attached
to old customs, and that it will be difficult to induce them to
rise before noon, consequently my discovery can be of little use: I
answer, _Nil desperandum_. I believe all who have common sense, as
soon as they have learnt from this paper that it is day-light when
the sun rises, will contrive to rise with him; and, to compel the
rest, I would propose the following regulations:

First. Let a tax be laid of a louis per window, on every window that
is provided with shutters to keep out the light of the sun.

Second. Let the same salutary operation of police be made use of to
prevent our burning candles, that inclined us last winter to be more
economical in burning wood; that is, let guards be placed in the
shops of the wax and tallow chandlers, and no family be permitted to
be supplied with more than one pound of candles per week.

Third. Let guards also be posted to stop all the coaches, &c. that
would pass the streets after sun-set, except those of physicians,
surgeons, and midwives.

Fourth. Every morning, as soon as the run rises, let all the bells
in every church be set ringing; and if that is not sufficient, let
cannon be fired in every street, to wake the sluggards effectually,
and make them open their eyes to see their true interest.

All the difficulty will be in the first two or three days: after
which the reformation will be as natural and easy as the present
irregularity: for, _ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute_. Oblige a
man to rise at four in the morning, and it is more than probable he
shall go willingly to bed at eight in the evening; and, having had
eight hours sleep, he will rise more willingly at four the morning
following. But this sum of ninety-six millions and seventy-five
thousand livres is not the whole of what may be saved by my
economical project. You may observe, that I have calculated upon only
one half of the year, and much may be saved in the other, though the
days are shorter. Besides, the immense stock of wax and tallow left
unconsumed during the summer will probably make candles much cheaper
for the ensuing winter, and continue them cheaper as long as the
proposed reformation shall be supported.

For the great benefit of this discovery, thus freely communicated
and bestowed by me on the public, I demand neither place, pension,
exclusive privilege, nor any other reward whatever. I expect only
to have the honour of it. And yet I know there are little envious
minds who will, as usual, deny me this, and say, that my invention
was known to the ancients, and perhaps they may bring passages out of
the old books in proof of it. I will not dispute with these people,
that the ancients knew not the sun would rise at certain hours; they
possibly had, as we have, almanacks that predicted it: but it does
not follow from thence, that they knew _he gave light as soon as he
rose_. This is what I claim as my discovery. If the antients knew
it, it might have been long since forgotten, for it certainly was
unknown to the moderns, at least to the Parisians, which to prove, I
need use but one plain simple argument. They are as well-instructed,
judicious and prudent a people as exist any where in the world, all
professing, like myself, to be lovers of economy; and, from the many
heavy taxes required from them by the necessities of the state, have
surely an abundant reason to be economical. I say it is impossible,
that so sensible a people, under such circumstances, should have
lived so long by the smoaky, unwholesome and enormously expensive
light of candles, if they had really known, that they might have had
as much pure light of the sun for nothing.

  I am, &c.

  An ABONNE.

FOOTNOTE:

[179] "A translation of this letter appeared in one of the daily
papers of Paris about the year 1784. The following is the original
piece, with some additions and corrections made in it by the author."
Note by the editor of the Repository, from which we extract the
letter. _Editor._




TO JOHN ALLEYNE, ESQ.[180]

  _On early Marriages._


  _Craven Street, Aug. 9, 1768_.

  DEAR JACK,

You desire, you say, my impartial thoughts on the subject of an early
marriage, by way of answer to the numberless objections, that have
been made by numberless persons, to your own. You may remember, when
you consulted me on the occasion, that I thought youth on both sides
to be no objection. Indeed, from the marriages that have fallen under
my observation, I am rather inclined to think, that early ones stand
the best chance of happiness. The temper and habits of the young are
not yet become so stiff and uncomplying, as when more advanced in
life; they form more easily to each other, and hence many occasions
of disgust are removed. And if youth has less of that prudence, which
is necessary to manage a family, yet the parents and elder friends of
young married persons are generally at hand to afford their advice,
which amply supplies that defect; and by early marriage, youth is
sooner formed to regular and useful life; and possibly some of those
accidents or connections, that might have injured the constitution,
or reputation, or both, are thereby happily prevented. Particular
circumstances of particular persons may possibly sometimes make it
prudent to delay entering into that state; but in general, when
nature has rendered our bodies fit for it, the presumption is in
nature's favour, that she has not judged amiss in making us desire
it. Late marriages are often attended, too, with this further
inconvenience, that there is not the same chance that the parents
shall live to see their offspring educated. "Late children," says
the Spanish proverb, "are early orphans." A melancholy reflection
to those whose case it may be! With us in America, marriages are
generally in the morning of life; our children are therefore educated
and settled in the world by noon; and thus, our business being done,
we have an afternoon and evening of cheerful leisure to ourselves,
such as our friend at present enjoys. By these early marriages we
are blessed with more children; and from the mode among us, founded
by nature, of every mother suckling and nursing her own child, more
of them are raised. Thence the swift progress of population among
us, unparalleled in Europe. In fine, I am glad you are married, and
congratulate you most cordially upon it. You are now in the way of
becoming a useful citizen; and you have escaped the unnatural state
of celibacy for life--the fate of many here, who never intended it,
but who, having too long postponed the change of their condition,
find, at length, that it is too late to think of it, and so live all
their lives in a situation, that greatly lessens a man's value. An
odd volume of a set of books bears not the value of its proportion
to the set: what think you of the odd half of a pair of scissars? it
cannot well cut any thing; it may possibly serve to scrape a trencher.

Pray make my compliments and best wishes acceptable to your bride.
I am old and heavy, or I should ere this have presented them in
person. I shall make but small use of the old man's privilege, that
of giving advice to younger friends. Treat your wife always with
respect; it will procure respect to you, not only from her, but from
all that observe it. Never use a slighting expression to her, even
in jest; for slights in jest, after frequent bandyings, are apt to
end in angry earnest. Be studious in your profession, and you will be
learned. Be industrious and frugal, and you will be rich. Be sober
and temperate, and you will be healthy. Be in general virtuous, and
you will be happy. At least, you will, by such conduct, stand the
best chance for such consequences. I pray God to bless you both!
being ever your affectionate friend,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[180] From the Gentleman's Magazine for May 1789. _Editor._




TO DOCTOR MATHER OF BOSTON[181].

  _Effect of early Impressions on the Mind._


  REV. SIR,

I received your kind letter, with your excellent advice to the people
of the United States, which I read with great pleasure, and hope it
will be duly regarded. Such writings, though they may be lightly
passed over by many readers, yet, if they make a deep impression on
one active mind in a hundred, the effects may be considerable.

Permit me to mention one little instance, which, though it relates
to myself, will not be quite uninteresting to you. When I was a boy,
I met with a book entitled, "Essays to do good," which I think was
written by your father. It had been so little regarded by a former
possessor, that several leaves of it were torn out; but the remainder
gave me such a turn of thinking, as to have an influence on my
conduct through life: for I have always set a greater value on the
character of a doer of good, than any other kind of reputation; and
if I have been, as you seem to think, a useful citizen, the public
owes the advantage of it to that book.

You mention your being in your seventy-eighth year. I am in my
seventy ninth. We are grown old together. It is now more than sixty
years since I left Boston; but I remember well both your father and
grandfather, having heard them both in the pulpit, and seen them in
their houses. The last time I saw your father was in the beginning
of 1724, when I visited him after my first trip to Pensylvania. He
received me in his library; and, on my taking leave, showed me a
shorter way out of the house, through a narrow passage, which was
crossed by a beam overhead. We were still talking as I withdrew,
he accompanying me behind, and I turning partly towards him, when
he said hastily, "Stoop, stoop!" I did not understand him, till I
felt my head hit against the beam. He was a man who never missed any
occasion of giving instruction; and upon this he said to me: "You
are young, and have the world before you: stoop as you go through
it, and you will miss many hard thumps." This advice, thus beat into
my heart, has frequently been of use to me: and I often think of it,
when I see pride mortified, and misfortunes brought upon people by
their carrying their heads too high.

I long much to see again my native place; and once hoped to lay my
bones there. I left it in 1723. I visited it in 1733, 1743, 1753, and
1763; and in 1773 I was in England. In 1775 I had a sight of it, but
could not enter, it being in possession of the enemy. I did hope to
have been there in 1783, but could not obtain my dismission from this
employment here; and now I fear I shall never have that happiness. My
best wishes however attend my dear country, "_esto perpetua_." It is
now blessed with an excellent constitution: may it last for ever!

This powerful monarchy continues its friendship for the United
States. It is a friendship of the utmost importance to our security,
and should be carefully cultivated. Britain has not yet well digested
the loss of its dominion over us; and has still at times some
flattering hopes of recovering it. Accidents may increase those
hopes, and encourage dangerous attempts. A breach between us and
France would infallibly bring the English again upon our backs:
and yet we have some wild beasts among our countrymen, who are
endeavouring to weaken that connection.

Let us preserve our reputation, by performing our engagements; our
credit, by fulfilling our contracts; and our friends, by gratitude
and kindness: for we know not how soon we may again have occasion for
all of them.

  With great and sincere esteem,

  I have the honour to be,

  Reverend Sir,

  Your most obedient and most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

  _Passy, May 12, 1784._

FOOTNOTE:

[181] From the American Museum, Vol. VII. p. 100. _Editor._




  _The Whistle[182]._


  _Passy, Nov. 10, 1779._

I received my dear friend's two letters, one for Wednesday, and one
for Saturday. This is again Wednesday. I do not deserve one for to
day, because I have not answered the former. But indolent as I am,
and averse to writing, the fear of having no more of your pleasing
epistles, if I do not contribute to the correspondence, obliges me to
take up my pen: and as Mr. B. has kindly sent me word, that he sets
out to-morrow to see you; instead of spending this Wednesday evening,
as I have done its name-sakes, in your delightful company, I sit down
to spend it in thinking of you, in writing to you, and in reading
over and over again your letters.

I am charmed with your description of Paradise, and with your plan
of living there; and I approve much of your conclusion, that in
the mean time, we should draw all the good we can from this world.
In my opinion, we might all draw more good from it than we do, and
suffer less evil, if we would but take care not to give too much for
_whistles_. For to me it seems, that most of the unhappy people we
meet with, are become so by neglect of that caution.

You ask, what I mean? You love stories, and will excuse my telling
one of myself.

When I was a child, at seven years old, my friends, on a holiday,
filled my pocket with coppers. I went directly to a shop where
they sold toys for children; and being charmed with the sound of
a _whistle_, that I met by the way in the hands of another boy, I
voluntarily offered him all my money for it. I then came home, and
went whistling all over the house, much pleased with my _whistle_,
but disturbing all the family. My brothers, and sisters, and cousins,
understanding the bargain I had made, told me I had given four times
as much for it as it was worth. This put me in mind what good things
I might have bought with the rest of the money; and they laughed
at me so much for my folly, that I cried with vexation; and the
reflection gave me more chagrin, than the _whistle_ gave me pleasure.

This however was afterwards of use to me, the impression continuing
on my mind; so that often, when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary
thing, I said to myself, _Don't give too much for the whistle_; and
so I saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men,
I thought I met with many, very many, who _gave too much for the
whistle_.

When I saw any one too ambitious of court favours, sacrificing his
time in attendance on levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue,
and perhaps his friends, to attain it, I have said to myself, _This
man gives too much for his whistle_.

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself
in political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by
that neglect, _He pays, indeed_, says I, _too much for his whistle_.

If I knew a miser, who gave up every kind of comfortable living,
all the pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his
fellow-citizens, and the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake
of accumulating wealth, _Poor man_, says I, _you pay too much for
your whistle_.

When I meet a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable improvement
of the mind, or of his fortune, to mere corporeal sensations, and
ruining his health in their pursuit, _Mistaken man_, says I, _you are
providing pain for yourself, instead of pleasure: you give too much
for your whistle_.

If I see one fond of appearance, of fine clothes, fine houses, fine
furniture, fine equipages, all above his fortune, for which he
contracts debts, and ends his career in a prison, _Alas_, says I, _he
has paid dear, very dear, for his whistle_.

When I see a beautiful, sweet-tempered girl, married to an
ill-natured brute of a husband, _What a pity it is_, says I, _that
she has paid so much for a whistle_!

In short, I conceived, that great part of the miseries of mankind
were brought upon them by the false estimates they had made of the
value of things, and by their giving too much for their _whistles_.

Yet I ought to have charity for these unhappy people, when I
consider, that with all this wisdom of which I am boasting, there
are certain things in the world so tempting, for example, the apples
of king John, which happily are not to be bought; for if they were
put to sale by auction, I might very easily be led to ruin myself in
the purchase, and find, that I had once more given too much for the
_whistle_.

Adieu, my dearest friend, and believe me ever yours very sincerely
and with unalterable affection,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[182] This story has generally been supposed to have been written
by Dr. Franklin for his nephew: but it seems, by the introductory
paragraphs, which we have no where seen prefixed to the story but
in a small collection of our author's works printed at Paris, to
have been addressed to some female relative. The two concluding
paragraphs, which are from the same source, are equally new to us.
_Editor._




  _A Petition to those who have the Superintendency of
  Education[183]._


I address myself to all the friends of youth, and conjure them to
direct their compassionate regards to my unhappy fate, in order
to remove the prejudices of which I am the victim. There are twin
sisters of us: and the two eyes of man do not more resemble, nor are
capable of being upon better terms with each other, than my sister
and myself, were it not for the partiality of our parents, who make
the most injurious distinctions between us. From my infancy, I have
been led to consider my sister as a being of a more elevated rank. I
was suffered to grow up without the least instruction, while nothing
was spared in her education. She had masters to teach her writing,
drawing, music, and other accomplishments; but if by chance I touched
a pencil, a pen, or a needle, I was bitterly rebuked: and more than
once I have been beaten for being aukward, and wanting a graceful
manner. It is true, my sister associated me with her upon some
occasions; but she always made a point of taking the lead, calling
upon me only from necessity, or to figure by her side.

But conceive not, sirs, that my complaints are instigated merely
by vanity--No; my uneasiness is occasioned by an object much more
serious. It is the practice in our family, that the whole business of
providing for its subsistence falls upon my sister and myself. If any
indisposition should attack my sister--and I mention it in confidence
upon this occasion, that she is subject to the gout, the rheumatism
and cramp, without making mention of other accidents--what would be
the fate of our poor family? Must not the regret of our parents be
excessive, at having placed so great a difference between sisters,
who are so perfectly equal? Alas! we must perish from distress: for
it would not be in my power even to scrawl a suppliant petition
for relief, having been obliged to employ the hand of another in
transcribing the request, which I have now the honour to prefer to
you.

Condescend, sirs, to make my parents sensible of the injustice of an
exclusive tenderness, and of the necessity of distributing their care
and affection among all their children equally.

  I am, with a profound respect,

  Sirs,

  Your obedient servant,

  THE LEFT HAND.

FOOTNOTE:

[183] From the American Museum, Vol. VII. p. 265. _Editor._




  _The handsome and deformed Leg[184]._


There are two sorts of people in the world, who, with equal degrees
of health and wealth, and the other comforts of life, become, the
one happy, and the other miserable. This arises very much from the
different views in which they consider things, persons, and events;
and the effect of those different views upon their own minds.

In whatever situation men can be placed, they may find conveniences
and inconveniences; in whatever company, they may find persons and
conversation more or less pleasing: at whatever table, they may
meet with meats and drinks of better and worse taste, dishes better
and worse dressed; in whatever climate, they will find good and bad
weather: under whatever government, they may find good and bad laws,
and good and bad administration of those laws; in whatever poem, or
work of genius, they may see faults and beauties; in almost every
face, and every person, they may discover fine features and defects,
good and bad qualities.

Under these circumstances, the two sorts of people above mentioned
fix their attention, those, who are disposed to be happy, on the
conveniences of things, the pleasant parts of conversation, the
well-dressed dishes, the goodness of the wines, the fine weather,
&c. and enjoy all with cheerfulness. Those, who are to be unhappy,
think and speak only of the contraries. Hence they are continually
discontented themselves, and, by their remarks, sour the pleasures
of society, offend personally many people, and make themselves every
where disagreeable. If this turn of mind was founded in nature,
such unhappy persons would be the more to be pitied. But as the
disposition to criticise, and to be disgusted, is, perhaps, taken up
originally by imitation, and is, unawares, grown into a habit, which,
though at present strong, may nevertheless be cured, when those who
have it are convinced of its bad effects on their felicity; I hope
this little admonition may be of service to them, and put them on
changing a habit, which, though in the exercise it is chiefly an
act of imagination, yet has serious consequences in life, as it
brings on real griefs and misfortunes. For, as many are offended by,
and nobody loves, this sort of people, no one shows them more than
the most common civility and respect, and scarcely that; and this
frequently puts them out of humour, and draws them into disputes
and contentions. If they aim at obtaining some advantage in rank or
fortune, nobody wishes them success, or will stir a step, or speak a
word, to favour their pretensions. If they incur public censure or
disgrace, no one will defend or excuse, and many join to aggravate
their misconduct, and render them completely odious. If these people
will not change this bad habit, and condescend to be pleased with
what is pleasing, without fretting themselves and others about the
contraries, it is good for others to avoid an acquaintance with
them; which is always disagreeable, and sometimes very inconvenient,
especially when one finds oneself entangled in their quarrels.

An old philosophical friend of mine was grown, from experience, very
cautious in this particular, and carefully avoided any intimacy
with such people. He had, like other philosophers, a thermometer,
to show him the heat of the weather, and a barometer, to mark when
it was likely to prove good or bad; but there being no instrument
invented to discover, at first sight, this unpleasing disposition
in a person, he, for that purpose, made use of his legs; one of
which was remarkably handsome, the other, by some accident, crooked
and deformed. If a stranger, at the first interview, regarded his
ugly leg more than his handsome one, he doubted him. If he spoke
of it, and took no notice of the handsome leg, that was sufficient
to determine my philosopher to have no further acquaintance with
him. Every body has not this two-legged instrument; but every
one, with a little attention, may observe signs of that carping,
fault-finding disposition, and take the same resolution of avoiding
the acquaintance of those infected with it, I therefore advise those
critical querulous, discontented, unhappy people, that, if they wish
to be respected and beloved by others, and happy in themselves, they
should _leave off looking at the ugly leg_.

FOOTNOTE:

[184] From the Columbian Magazine, Vol. I. p. 61. _Editor._




  _Morals of Chess[185]._


Playing at chess is the most ancient and most universal game known
among men; for its original is beyond the memory of history, and it
has, for numberless ages, been the amusement of all the civilized
nations of Asia, the Persians, the Indians, and the Chinese. Europe
has had it above a thousand years; the Spaniards have spread it over
their part of America, and it begins lately to make its appearance
in these states. It is so interesting in itself, as not to need the
view of gain to induce engaging in it; and thence it is never played
for money. Those, therefore, who have leisure for such diversions,
cannot find one that is more innocent; and the following piece,
written with a view to correct (among a few young friends) some
little improprieties in the practice of it, shows, at the same time,
that it may, in its effects on the mind, be not merely innocent, but
advantageous, to the vanquished as well as the victor.

The game of chess is not merely an idle amusement. Several very
valuable qualities of the mind, useful in the course of human life,
are to be acquired or strengthened by it, so as to become habits,
ready on all occasions. For life is a kind of chess, in which we have
often points to gain, and competitors or adversaries to contend with,
and in which there is a vast variety of good and ill events, that
are, in some degree, the effects of prudence or the want of it. By
playing at chess, then, we may learn,

I. _Foresight_, which looks a little into futurity, and considers
the consequences that may attend an action: for it is continually
occurring to the player, "If I move this piece, what will be the
advantage of my new situation? What use can my adversary make of it
to annoy me? What other moves can I make to support it, and to defend
myself from his attacks?"

II. _Circumspection_, which surveys the whole chess-board, or scene
of action, the relations of the several pieces and situations, the
dangers they are respectively exposed to, the several possibilities
of their aiding each other, the probabilities that the adversary
may take this or that move, and attack this or the other piece, and
what different means can be used to avoid his stroke, or turn its
consequences against him.

III. _Caution_, not to make our moves too hastily. This habit is best
acquired by observing strictly the laws of the game, such as, "If you
touch a piece, you must move it somewhere: if you set it down, you
must let it stand:" and it is therefore best that these rules should
be observed, as the game thereby becomes more the image of human
life, and particularly of war; in which, if you have incautiously put
yourself into a bad and dangerous position, you cannot obtain your
enemy's leave to withdraw your troops, and place them more securely,
but you must abide all the consequences of your rashness.

And, lastly, we learn by chess the habit of _not being discouraged
by present bad appearances in the state of our affairs_, the habit
of _hoping for a favourable change_, and that of _persevering in the
search of resources_. The game is so full of events, there is such
a variety of turns in it, the fortune of it is so subject to sudden
vicissitudes, and one so frequently, after long contemplation,
discovers the means of extricating oneself from a supposed
insurmountable difficulty, that one is encouraged to continue the
contest to the last, in hopes of victory by our own skill, or at
least of getting a stale mate, by the negligence of our adversary.
And whoever considers, what in chess he often sees instances of,
that particular pieces of success are apt to produce presumption,
and its consequent inattention, by which the loss may be recovered,
will learn not to be too much discouraged by the present success of
his adversary, nor to despair of final good fortune upon every little
check he receives in the pursuit of it.

That we may, therefore, be induced more frequently to choose this
beneficial amusement, in preference to others, which are not attended
with the same advantages, every circumstance which may increase the
pleasures of it should be regarded; and every action or word that
is unfair, disrespectful, or that in any way may give uneasiness,
should be avoided, as contrary to the immediate intention of both the
players, which is to pass the time agreeably.

Therefore, first, if it is agreed, to play according to the strict
rules; then those rules are to be exactly observed by both parties,
and should not be insisted on for one side, while deviated from by
the other--for this is not equitable.

Secondly, if it is agreed, not to observe the rules exactly, but one
party demands indulgencies, he should then be as willing to allow
them to the other.

Thirdly, no false move should ever be made to extricate yourself out
of difficulty, or to gain an advantage. There can be no pleasure in
playing with a person once detected in such unfair practice.

Fourthly, if your adversary is long in playing you ought not to hurry
him, or express any uneasiness at his delay. You should not sing, nor
whistle, nor look at your watch, nor take up a book to read, nor make
a tapping with your feet on the floor, or with your fingers on the
table, nor do any thing that may disturb his attention. For all these
things displease; and they do not show your skill in playing, but
your craftiness or your rudeness.

Fifthly, you ought not to endeavour to amuse and deceive your
adversary, by pretending to have made bad moves, and saying, that you
have now lost the game, in order to make him secure and careless, and
inattentive to your schemes: for this is fraud and deceit, not skill
in the game.

Sixthly, you must not, when you have gained a victory, use any
triumphing or insulting expression, nor show too much pleasure; but
endeavour to console your adversary, and make him less dissatisfied
with himself, by every kind of civil expression, that may be used
with truth, such as, "you understand the game better than I, but you
are a little inattentive;" or, "you play too fast;" or, "you had the
best of the game, but something happened to divert your thoughts, and
that turned it in my favour."

Seventhly, if you are a spectator while others play, observe the most
perfect silence. For if you give advice, you offend both parties,
him against whom you give it, because it may cause the loss of his
game, him in whose favour you give it, because, though it be good
and he follows it, he loses the pleasure he might have had, if you
had permitted him to think until it had occurred to himself. Even
after a move or moves, you must not, by replacing the pieces, show
how it might have been placed better: for that displeases, and may
occasion disputes and doubts about their true situation. All talking
to the players lessens or diverts their attention, and is therefore
unpleasing. Nor should you give the least hint to either party, by
any kind of noise or motion. If you do, you are unworthy to be a
spectator. If you have a mind to exercise or show your judgment, do
it in playing your own game, when you have an opportunity, not in
criticising, or meddling with, or counselling the play of others.

Lastly, if the game is not to be played rigorously, according to the
rules above mentioned, then moderate your desire of victory over your
adversary, and be pleased with one over yourself. Snatch not eagerly
at every advantage offered by his unskilfulness or inattention; but
point out to him kindly, that by such a move he places or leaves a
piece in danger and unsupported; that by another he will put his
king in a perilous situation, &c. By this generous civility (so
opposite to the unfairness above forbidden) you may, indeed, happen
to lose the game to your opponent, but you will win what is better,
his esteem, his respect, and his affection, together with the silent
approbation and good-will of impartial spectators.

FOOTNOTE:

[185] This letter has appeared in too many forms in this country,
and is too well known to be Dr. Franklin's, to require being
authenticated. _Editor._




  _The Art of procuring Pleasant Dreams[186]._

  INSCRIBED TO MISS ****,

  Being written at her request.


As a great part of our life is spent in sleep, during which we have
sometimes pleasing, and sometimes painful dreams, it becomes of some
consequence to obtain the one kind, and avoid the other; for, whether
real or imaginary, pain is pain, and pleasure is pleasure. If we can
sleep without dreaming, it is well that painful dreams are avoided.
If, while we sleep, we can have any pleasing dreams, it is, as the
French say, _tant gagné_, so much added to the pleasure of life.

To this end, it is, in the first place, necessary, to be careful in
preserving health, by due exercise, and great temperance; for, in
sickness, the imagination is disturbed; and disagreeable, sometimes
terrible, ideas are apt to present themselves. Exercise should
precede meals, not immediately follow them: the first promotes, the
latter, unless moderate, obstructs digestion. If, after exercise,
we feed sparingly, the digestion will be easy and good, the body
lightsome, the temper cheerful, and all the animal functions
performed agreeably. Sleep, when it follows, will be natural and
undisturbed, while indolence, with full feeding, occasions nightmares
and horrors inexpressible: we fall from precipices, are assaulted
by wild beasts, murderers, and demons, and experience every variety
of distress. Observe, however, that the quantities of food and
exercise are relative things: those who move much may, and indeed
ought, to eat more; those who use little exercise should eat little.
In general, mankind, since the improvement of cookery, eat about
twice as much as nature requires. Suppers are not bad, if we have not
dined; but restless nights naturally follow hearty suppers, after
full dinners. Indeed, as there is a difference in constitutions, some
rest well after these meals; it costs them only a frightful dream,
and an apoplexy, after which they sleep till doomsday. Nothing is
more common in the newspapers, than instances of people, who, after
eating a hearty supper, are found dead a-bed in the morning.

Another means of preserving health, to be attended to, is the having
a constant supply of fresh air in your bed-chamber. It has been a
great mistake, the sleeping in rooms exactly closed, and in beds
surrounded by curtains. No outward air that may come into you is
so unwholesome, as the unchanged air, often breathed, of a close
chamber. As boiling water does not grow hotter by longer boiling, if
the particles that receive greater heat can escape; so living bodies
do not putrify, if the particles, as fast as they become putrid, can
be thrown off. Nature expels them by the pores of the skin and the
lungs, and in a free open air they are carried off; but, in a close
room, we receive them again and again, though they become more and
more corrupt. A number of persons crowded into a small room thus
spoil the air in a few minutes, and even render it mortal, as in
the Black Hole at Calcutta. A single person is said to spoil only a
gallon of air per minute, and therefore requires a longer time to
spoil a chamber full; but it is done, however, in proportion, and
many putrid disorders hence have their origin. It is recorded of
Methusalem, who, being the longest liver, may be supposed to have
best preserved his health, that he slept always in the open air; for,
when he had lived five hundred years, an angel said to him: "Arise,
Methusalem, and build thee an house, for thou shalt live yet five
hundred years longer." But Methusalem answered and said, "If I am to
live but five hundred years longer it is not worth while to build
me an house--I will sleep in the air, as I have been used to do."
Physicians, after having for ages contended, that the sick should
not be indulged with fresh air, have at length discovered, that it
may do them good. It is therefore to be hoped, that they may in
time discover likewise, that it is not hurtful to those who are in
health, and that we may be then cured of the _aërophobia_, that at
present distresses weak minds, and make them choose to be stifled and
poisoned, rather than leave open the window of a bed-chamber, or put
down the glass of a coach.

Confined air, when saturated with perspirable matter[187], will
not receive more; and that matter must remain in our bodies, and
occasion diseases: but it gives some previous notice of its being
about to be hurtful, by producing certain uneasinesses, slight
indeed at first, such as, with regard to the lungs, is a trifling
sensation, and to the pores of the skin a kind of restlessness,
which is difficult to describe, and few that feel it know the
cause of it. But we may recollect, that sometimes, on waking in
the night, we have, if warmly covered, found it difficult to get
asleep again. We turn often without finding repose in any position.
This figettiness, to use a vulgar expression for want of a better,
is occasioned wholly by an uneasiness in the skin, owing to the
retension of the perspirable matter--the bed-clothes having received
their quantity, and, being saturated, refusing to take any more.
To become sensible of this by an experiment, let a person keep his
position in the bed, but throw off the bed-clothes, and suffer fresh
air to approach the part uncovered of his body; he will then feel
that part suddenly refreshed; for the air will immediately relieve
the skin, by receiving, licking up, and carrying off, the load of
perspirable matter that incommoded it. For every portion of cool air,
that approaches the warm skin, in receiving its part of that vapour,
receives therewith a degree of heat, that rarifies and renders it
lighter, when it will be pushed away, with its burthen, by cooler
and therefore heavier fresh air; which, for a moment, supplies its
place, and then, being likewise changed and warmed, gives way to a
succeeding quantity. This is the order of nature, to prevent animals
being infected by their own perspiration. He will now be sensible of
the difference between the part exposed to the air, and that which,
remaining sunk in the bed, denies the air access: for this part now
manifests its uneasiness more distinctly by the comparison, and the
seat of the uneasiness is more plainly perceived, than when the whole
surface of the body was affected by it.

Here, then, is one great and general cause of unpleasing dreams.
For when the body is uneasy, the mind will be disturbed by it, and
disagreeable ideas of various kinds will, in sleep, be the natural
consequences. The remedies, preventative and curative, follow:

1. By eating moderately (as before advised for health's sake) less
perspirable matter is produced in a given time; hence the bed-clothes
receive it longer before they are saturated; and we may, therefore,
sleep longer, before we are made uneasy by their refusing to receive
any more.

2. By using thinner and more porous bed-clothes, which will suffer
the perspirable matter more easily to pass through them, we are less
incommoded, such being longer tolerable.

3. When you are awakened by this uneasiness, and find you cannot
easily sleep again, get out of bed, beat up and turn your pillow,
shake the bed-clothes well, with at least twenty shakes, then throw
the bed open, and leave it to cool; in the meanwhile, continuing
undrest, walk about your chamber, till your skin has had time to
discharge its load, which it will do sooner as the air may be drier
and colder. When you begin to feel the cold air unpleasant, then
return to your bed, and you will soon fall asleep, and your sleep
will be sweet and pleasant. All the scenes presented to your fancy
will be of the pleasing kind. I am often as agreeably entertained
with them, as by the scenery of an opera. If you happen to be too
indolent to get out of bed, you may, instead of it, lift up your
bed-clothes with one arm and leg, so as to draw in a good deal of
fresh air, and, by letting them fall, force it out again. This,
repeated twenty times, will so clear them of the perspirable matter
they have imbibed, as to permit your sleeping well for some time
afterwards. But this latter method is not equal to the former.

Those who do not love trouble, and can afford to have two beds, will
find great luxury in rising, when they wake in a hot bed, and going
into the cool one. Such shifting of beds would also be of great
service to persons ill of a fever, as it refreshes and frequently
procures sleep. A very large bed, that will admit a removal so
distant from the first situation as to be cool and sweet, may in a
degree answer the same end.

One or two observations more will conclude this little piece. Care
must be taken when you lie down, to dispose your pillow so as to
suit your manner of placing your head, and to be perfectly easy;
then place your limbs so as not to bear inconveniently hard upon one
another, as, for instance, the joints of your ancles: for though a
bad position may at first give but little pain and be hardly noticed,
yet a continuance will render it less tolerable, and the uneasiness
may come on while you are asleep, and disturb your imagination.

These are the rules of the art. But though they will generally prove
effectual in producing the end intended, there is a case in which the
most punctual observance of them will be totally fruitless. I need
not mention the case to you, my dear friend, but my account of the
art would be imperfect without it. The case is, when the person, who
desires to have pleasant dreams, has not taken care to preserve, what
is necessary above all things,

  A GOOD CONSCIENCE.

FOOTNOTES:

[186] From the Columbian Magazine, vol. I. p. 64. _Editor._

[187] What physicians call the perspirable matter, is that vapour
which passes off from our bodies, from the lungs, and through the
pores of the skin. The quantity of this is said to be five-eighths of
what we eat.




  _Dialogue between Franklin and the Gout[188]._


  _Midnight, October 22, 1780._

_Franklin._--Eh! Oh! Eh! What have I done to merit these cruel
sufferings?

_Gout._--Many things; you have ate and drank too freely, and too much
indulged those legs of yours in their indolence.

_Franklin._--Who is it that accuses me?

_Gout._--It is I, even I, the gout.

_Franklin._--What! my enemy in person?

_Gout._--No, not your enemy.

_Franklin._--I repeat it; my enemy: for you would not only torment my
body to death, but ruin my good name: you reproach me as a glutton
and a tipler; now all the world that knows me will allow, that I am
neither the one nor the other.

_Gout._--The world may think as it pleases: it is always very
complaisant to itself, and sometimes to its friends; but I very well
know, that the quantity of meat and drink proper for a man, who takes
a reasonable degree of exercise, would be too much for another, who
never takes any.

_Franklin._--I take--Eh! Oh!--as much exercise--Eh!--as I can, Madam
Gout. You know my sedentary state, and on that account, it would
seem, Madam Gout, as if you might spare me a little, seeing it is
not altogether my own fault.

_Gout._--Not a jot: your rhetoric and your politeness are thrown
away; your apology avails nothing. If your situation in life is a
sedentary one, your amusements, your recreations, at least, should be
active. You ought to walk or ride; or, if the weather prevents that,
play at billiards. But let us examine your course of life. While the
mornings are long, and you have leisure to go abroad, what do you
do? Why, instead of gaining an appetite for breakfast, by salutary
exercise, you amuse yourself with books, pamphlets, or newspapers,
which commonly are not worth the reading. Yet you eat an inordinate
breakfast, four dishes of tea, with cream, and one or two buttered
toasts, with slices of hung beef, which I fancy are not things the
most easily digested. Immediately afterward you sit down to write at
your desk, or converse with persons who apply to you on business.
Thus the time passes till one, without any kind of bodily exercise.
But all this I could pardon, in regard, as you say, to your sedentary
condition. But what is your practice after dinner. Walking in the
beautiful gardens of those friends with whom you have dined would be
the choice of men of sense: yours is to be fixed down to chess, where
you are found engaged for two or three hours! This is your perpetual
recreation, which is the least eligible of any for a sedentary man,
because, instead of accelerating the motion of the fluids, the rigid
attention it requires helps to retard the circulation and obstruct
internal secretions. Wrapt in the speculations of this wretched
game, you destroy your constitution. What can be expected from such
a course of living, but a body replete with stagnant humours, ready
to fall a prey to all kinds of dangerous maladies, if I, the gout,
did not occasionally bring you relief by agitating these humours, and
so purifying or dissipating them. If it was in some nook or alley
in Paris, deprived of walks, that you played awhile at chess after
dinner, this might be excusable, but the same taste prevails with
you in Passey, Auteuil, Montmartre, or Sanoy, places where there are
the finest gardens and walks, a pure air, beautiful women, and most
agreeable and instructive conversation; all which you might enjoy by
frequenting the walks! But these are rejected for this abominable
game of chess. Fie, then, Mr. Franklin! But amidst my instructions, I
had almost forgot to administer my wholsome corrections: so take that
twinge--and that.

_Franklin._--Oh! Eh! Oh!--Ohhh! As much instruction as you please,
Madam Gout, and as many reproaches, but pray, Madam, a truce with
your corrections!

_Gout._--No, sir, no--I will not abate a particle of what is so much
for your good--therefore--

_Franklin._--Oh! Ehhh!--It is not fair to say I take no exercise,
when I do very often, going out to dine, and returning in my carriage.

_Gout._--That of all imaginable exercise is the most slight and
insignificant, if you allude to the motion of a carriage suspended
on springs. By observing the degree of heat obtained by different
kinds of motion we may form an estimate of the quantity of exercise
given by each. Thus, for example, if you turn out to walk in winter
with cold feet, in an hour's time you will be in a glow all over;
ride on horseback, the same effect will scarcely be perceived by
four hours round trotting: but if you loll in a carriage, such as you
have mentioned, you may travel all day, and gladly enter the last
inn to warm your feet by a fire. Flatter yourself then no longer,
that half an hour's airing in your carriage deserves the name of
exercise. Providence has appointed few to roll in carriages, while
he has given to all a pair of legs, which are machines infinitely
more commodious and serviceable. Be grateful, then, and make a proper
use of yours. Would you know, how they forward the circulation of
your fluids, in the very action of transporting you from place to
place? observe when you walk, that all your weight is alternately
thrown from one leg to the other; this occasions a great pressure on
the vessels of the foot, and repels their contents. When relieved,
by the weight being thrown on the other foot, the vessels of the
first are allowed to replenish, and by a return of this weight, this
repulsion again succeeds; thus accelerating the circulation of the
blood. The heat produced in any given time depends on the degree of
this acceleration: the fluids are shaken, the humours attenuated, the
secretions facilitated, and all goes well; the cheeks are ruddy, and
health is established. Behold your fair friend at Auteuil: a lady
who received from bounteous nature more really useful science, than
half a dozen such pretenders to philosophy, as you, have been able to
extract from all your books. When she honours you with a visit, it is
on foot. She walks all hours of the day, and leaves indolence and its
concomitant maladies to be endured by her horses. In this see at once
the preservative of her health and personal charms. But you, when
you go to Auteuil, must have your carriage, though it is no farther
from Passy to Auteuil, than from Auteuil to Passy.

_Franklin._--Your reasonings grow very tiresome.

_Gout._--I stand corrected. I will be silent and continue my office:
take that, and that.

_Franklin._--Oh! Ohh! Talk on, I pray you!

_Gout._--No, no; I have a good number of twinges for you to-night,
and you may be sure of some more to-morrow.

_Franklin._--What, with such a fever! I shall go distracted. Oh! Eh!
Can no one bear it for me?

_Gout._--Ask that of your horses; they have served you faithfully.

_Franklin._--How can you so cruelly sport with my torments?

_Gout._--Sport? I am very serious. I have here a list of your
offences against your own health distinctly written, and can justify
every stroke inflicted on you.

_Franklin._--Read it then.

_Gout._--It is too long a detail; but I will briefly mention some
particulars.

_Franklin._--Proceed--I am all attention.

_Gout._--Do you remember how often you have promised yourself, the
following morning, a walk in the grove of Boulogne, in the garden de
la Muette, or in your own garden, and have violated your promise,
alledging, at one time, it was too cold, at another too warm, too
windy, too moist, or what else you pleased; when in truth it was too
nothing, but your insuperable love of ease?

_Franklin._--That I confess may have happened occasionally, probably
ten times in a year.

_Gout._--Your confession is very far short of the truth; the gross
amount is one hundred and ninety-nine times.

_Franklin._--Is it possible?

_Gout._--So possible that it is fact; you may rely on the accuracy
of my statement. You know Mr. B----'s gardens, and what fine walks
they contain; you know the handsome flight of an hundred steps, which
lead from the terrace above to the lawn below. You have been in the
practice of visiting this amiable family twice a week after dinner,
and as it is a maxim of your own, that "a man may take as much
exercise in walking a mile up and down stairs, as in ten on level
ground," what an opportunity was here for you to have had exercise in
both these ways? Did you embrace it, and how often?

_Franklin._--I cannot immediately answer that question.

_Gout._--I will do it for you; not once.

_Franklin._--Not once?

_Gout._--Even so. During the summer you went there at six o'clock.
You found the charming lady, with her lovely children and friends,
eager to walk with you, and entertain you with their agreeable
conversation: and what has been your choice? Why to sit on the
terrace, satisfying yourself with the fine prospect, and passing
your eye over the beauties of the garden below, without taking one
step to descend and walk about in them. On the contrary, you call
for tea, and the chess-board; and lo! you are occupied in your seat
till nine o'clock, and that beside two hours play after dinner;
and then, instead of walking home, which would have bestirred you
a little, you step into your carriage. How absurd to suppose, that
all this carelessness can be reconcileable with health, without my
interposition!

_Franklin._--I am convinced now of the justness of poor Richard's
remark, that, "Our debts and our sins are always greater than we
think for."

_Gout._--So it is! you philosophers are sages in your maxims, and
fools in your conduct.

_Franklin._--But do you charge among my crimes, that I return in a
carriage from Mr. B----'s?

_Gout._--Certainly: for having been seated all the while, you cannot
object the fatigue of the day, and cannot want therefore the relief
of a carriage.

_Franklin._--What then would you have me do with my carriage?

_Gout._--Burn it, if you choose; you would at least get heat out of
it once in this way; or if you dislike that proposal, here's another
for you: observe the poor peasants who work in the vineyards and
grounds about the villages of Passy, Anteuil, Chaillois, &c.; you may
find every day among these deserving creatures, four or five old men
and women, bent and perhaps crippled by weight of years, and too long
and too great labour. After a most fatiguing day, these people have
to trudge a mile or two to their smoky huts. Order your coachmen to
set them down. That is an act that will be good for your soul; and
at the same time, after your visit to the B----'s, if you return on
foot, that will be good for your body.

_Franklin._--Ah! how tiresome you are.

_Gout._--Well then, to my office; it should not be forgotten, that I
am your physician. There.

_Franklin._--Ohhh! what a devil of a physician!

_Gout._--How ungrateful are you to say so! Is it not I, who, in the
character of your physician, have saved you from the palsy, dropsy,
and apoplexy? one or other of which would have done for you long ago,
but for me.

_Franklin._--I submit, and thank you for the past, but intreat the
discontinuance of your visits for the future: for in my mind one had
better die, than be cured so dolefully. Permit me just to hint, that
I have also not been unfriendly to _you_. I never feed physician, or
quack of any kind, to enter the list against you; if then you do not
leave me to my repose, it may be said you are ungrateful too.

_Gout._--I can scarcely acknowledge that as any objection. As to
quacks, I despise them: they may kill you, indeed, but cannot injure
me. And as to regular physicians, they are at last convinced, that
the gout, in such a subject as you are, is no disease, but a remedy;
and wherefore cure a remedy?--but to our business--There.--

_Franklin._--Oh! Oh!--for heaven's sake leave me; and I promise
faithfully never more to play at chess, but to take exercise daily,
and live temperately.

_Gout._--I know you too well. You promise fair; but, after a few
months of good health, you will return to your old habits; your fine
promises will be forgotten like the forms of the last year's clouds.
Let us then finish the account and I will go. But I leave you with an
assurance, of visiting you again at a proper time and place; for my
object is your good, and you are sensible now, that I am your real
friend.

FOOTNOTE:

[188] We have no authority for ascribing this paper to Dr. Franklin,
but its appearance, with his name, in a small collection of his works
printed a few years ago at Paris, and cited before, page 480. As the
rest of the papers in that collection are genuine, this probably is
also genuine. What we give is a translation. _Editor._




TO MISS HUBBARD.

  _On the Death of Relatives[189]._


  _Philadelphia, Feb. 22, 1756._

I condole with you. We have lost a most dear and valuable
relation[190]. But it is the will of God and nature, that these
mortal bodies be laid aside, when the soul is to enter into real
life. This is rather an embryo state, a preparation for living. A man
is not completely born until he be dead. Why then should we grieve,
that a new child is born among the immortals, a new member added to
their happy society? We are spirits. That bodies should be lent us,
while they can afford us pleasure, assist us in acquiring knowledge,
or doing good to our fellow-creatures, is a kind and benevolent act
of God. When they become unfit for these purposes, and afford us
pain instead of pleasure, instead of an aid become an incumbrance,
and answer none of the intentions for which they were given, it is
equally kind and benevolent, that a way is provided by which we may
get rid of them. Death is that way. We ourselves, in some cases,
prudently choose a partial death. A mangled painful limb, which
cannot be restored, we willingly cut off. He, who plucks out a tooth,
parts with it freely, since the pain goes with it: and he, who quits
the whole body, parts at once with all pains, and possibilities of
pains and diseases, it was liable to, or capable of making him suffer.

Our friend and we were invited abroad on a party of pleasure, which
is to last for ever. His chair was ready first, and he is gone before
us. We could not all conveniently start together: and why should you
and I be grieved at this, since we are soon to follow, and know where
to find him?

  Adieu.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[189] From the Columbian Magazine, Vol. I, p. 208. _Editor._

[190] Dr. Franklin's brother, Mr. John Franklin.




TO MADAME BRILLIANT.

  _The Ephemera an Emblem of human Life[191]._


You may remember, my dear friend, that when we lately spent that
happy day, in the delightful garden and sweet society of the Moulin
Joly, I stopt a little in one of our walks, and staid some time
behind the company. We had been shown numberless skeletons of a kind
of little fly, called an ephemera, whose successive generations,
we were told, were bred and expired within the day. I happened to
see a living company of them on a leaf, who appeared to be engaged
in conversation. You know I understand all the inferior animal
tongues: my too great application to the study of them is the best
excuse I can give for the little progress I have made in your
charming language. I listened through curiosity to the discourse of
these little creatures; but as they, in their national vivacity,
spoke three or four together, I could make but little of their
conversation. I found, however, by some broken expressions that
I heard now and then, they were disputing warmly on the merit of
two foreign musicians, one a _cousin_, the other a _muscheto_; in
which dispute they spent their time, seemingly as regardless of the
shortness of life, as if they had been sure of living a month. Happy
people! thought I, you live certainly under a wise, just, and mild
government, since you have no public grievances to complain of, nor
any subject of contention, but the perfections or imperfections of
foreign music. I turned my head from them to an old grey-headed
one, who was single on another leaf, and talking to himself. Being
amused with his soliloquy, I put it down in writing, in hopes it
will likewise amuse her to whom I am so much indebted for the most
pleasing of all amusements, her delicious company, and heavenly
harmony.

"It was," says he, "the opinion of learned philosophers of our race,
who lived and flourished long before my time, that this vast world,
the Moulin Joly, could not itself subsist more than eighteen hours:
and I think there was some foundation for that opinion; since, by
the apparent motion of the great luminary, that gives life to all
nature, and which in my time has evidently declined considerably
towards the ocean at the end of our earth, it must then finish its
course, be extinguished in the waters that surround us, and leave the
world in cold and darkness, necessarily producing universal death and
destruction. I have lived seven of those hours; a great age, being
no less than four hundred and twenty minutes of time. How very few
of us continue so long? I have seen generations born, flourish, and
expire. My present friends are the children and grand-children of
the friends of my youth, who are now, alas no more! And I must soon
follow them; for, by the course of nature, though still in health,
I cannot expect to live above seven or eight minutes longer. What
now avails all my toil and labour, in amassing honey-dew on this
leaf, which I cannot live to enjoy! What the political struggles I
have been engaged in, for the good of my com-patriot inhabitants of
this bush, or my philosophical studies, for the benefit of our race
in general! for in politics (what can laws do without morals?) our
present race of ephemeræ will in a course of minutes become corrupt,
like those of other and older bushes, and consequently as wretched:
and in philosophy how small our progress! Alas! art is long, and life
is short! My friends would comfort me with the idea of a name, they
say, I shall leave behind me; and they tell me, I have lived long
enough to nature and to glory. But what will fame be to an ephemera,
who no longer exists? and what will become of all history in the
eighteenth hour, when the world itself, even the whole Moulin Joly,
shall come to its end, and be buried in universal ruin?"----

To me, after all my eager pursuits, no solid pleasures now remain,
but the reflection of a long life spent in meaning well, the sensible
conversation of a few good lady ephemeræ, and now and then a kind
smile and a tune from the ever amiable Brilliant.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[191] From the American Museum, Vol. VIII. p. 183. It was written
during the author's residence at Passy, and a translation of it at
that time appeared in one of the Parisian periodical publications.
This appears to be the original piece. _Editor._




  APPENDIX:

  CONTAINING

  1. PAPERS PROPER FOR INSERTION, BUT OMITTED,
  IN THE PRECEDING VOLUMES:

  AND

  2. LETTERS BY SEVERAL EMINENT PERSONS, ILLUSTRATIVE
  OF DR. FRANKLIN'S MANNERS
  AND CHARACTER.




APPENDIX, No. I.

CONTAINING PAPERS PROPER FOR INSERTION, BUT OMITTED, IN THE PRECEDING
VOLUMES.




  _Letter to Sir Hans Sloane[192]._


  _June 2, 1725._

  SIR,

Having lately been in the northern parts of America, I have brought
from thence a purse made of the _asbestos_, a piece of the stone, and
a piece of the wood, the pithy part of which is of the same nature,
and called by the inhabitants salamander cotton. As you are noted
to be a lover of curiosities, I have informed you of these: and if
you have any inclination to purchase or see them, let me know your
pleasure, by a line directed for me at the Golden Fan in Little
Britain, and I will wait upon you with them.

  I am, sir,

  Your most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

P. S. I expect to be out of town in two or three days, and therefore
beg an immediate answer.

FOOTNOTE:

[192] From the Gentleman's Magazine, for [___], 1780, where it
appears among other original letters to Sir Hans Sloane, from
different persons. _Editor._




  _Letter to Michael Collinson, Esq[193]._


  [No date.]

  DEAR SIR,

Understanding that an account of our dear departed friend, Mr. Peter
Collinson, is intended to be given to the public, I cannot omit
expressing my approbation of the design. The characters of good men
are exemplary, and often stimulate the well disposed to an imitation,
beneficial to mankind, and honourable to themselves. And as you
may be unacquainted with the following instances of his zeal and
usefulness in promoting knowledge, which fell within my observation,
I take the liberty of informing you, that in 1730, a subscription
library being set on foot at Philadelphia, he encouraged the design
by making several very valuable presents to it, and procuring others
from his friends: and as the library company had a considerable sum
arising annually to be laid out in books, and needed a judicious
friend in London to transact the business for them, he voluntarily
and cheerfully undertook that service, and executed it for more
than thirty years successively, assisting in the choice of books,
and taking the whole care of collecting and shipping them, without
ever charging or accepting any consideration for his trouble. The
success of this library (greatly owing to his kind countenance and
good advice) encouraged the erecting others in different places on
the same plan; and it is supposed, there are now upwards of thirty
subsisting in the several colonies, which have contributed greatly
to the spreading of useful knowledge in that part of the world; the
books he recommended being all of that kind, and the catalogue
of this first library being much respected and followed by those
libraries that succeeded.

During the same time he transmitted to the directors of the
library the earliest accounts of every new European improvement in
agriculture and the arts, and every philosophical discovery; among
which, in 1745, he sent over an account of the new German experiments
in electricity, together with a glass tube, and some directions for
using it so as to repeat those experiments. This was the first notice
I had of that curious subject, which I afterwards prosecuted with
some diligence, being encouraged by the friendly reception he gave
to the letters I wrote to him upon it. Please to accept this small
testimony of mine to his memory, for which I shall ever have the
utmost respect; and believe me, with sincere esteem, dear sir,

  Your most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[193] From the London Magazine, for April, 1776. _Editor._




  _Letter respecting Captain Cook._

  To all captains and commanders of armed ships, acting by commission
  from the congress of the United States of America, now in war with
  Great Britain.


  GENTLEMEN,

A ship having been fitted out from England, before the commencement
of this war, to make discoveries of new countries in unknown seas,
under the conduct of that most celebrated navigator, Captain
Cook,--an undertaking truly laudable in itself, as the increase of
geographical knowledge facilitates the communication between distant
nations, in the exchange of useful products and manufactures, and the
extension of arts whereby the common enjoyments of human life are
multiplied and augmented, and science of other kinds increased, to
the benefit of mankind in general.--This is therefore most earnestly
to recommend to every one of you, that in case the said ship, which
is now expected to be soon in the European seas on her return, should
happen to fall into your hands, you would not consider her as an
enemy, nor suffer any plunder to be made of the effects contained in
her, nor obstruct her immediate return to England, by detaining her
or sending her into any other part of Europe or America, but that you
would treat the said captain Cook and his people with all civility
and kindness, affording them, as common friends to mankind, all the
assistance in your power, which they may happen to stand in need of.
In so doing, you will not only gratify the generosity of your own
dispositions, but there is no doubt of your obtaining the approbation
of the congress[194], and your own American owners.

  I have the honour to be, gentlemen,

  Your most obedient, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN,

  Minister plenipotentiary from the congress of the
  United States to the court of France.

  _At Passy, near Paris,
  this 10th day of March, 1779._

FOOTNOTE:

[194] Dr. Kippis, in his Life of Captain Cook, had asserted, upon
what he deemed unquestionable authority, that Dr. Franklin's orders
were instantly reversed, and that it was directed by congress, to
seize captain Cook, if an opportunity of doing it occurred: but,
finding that the information was false, he addressed a letter to the
editor of the Gentleman's Magazine, in September, 1795, publicly
acknowledging his mistake.

In the American Museum, from which we have taken Dr. Franklin's
letter, the correspondent who communicated the letter says, that "the
generous proceeding of Dr. Franklin in writing it was so well known
in England, and the sentiments it manifested so much approved by the
government there, that, when Cook's Voyage was printed, the admiralty
sent to Dr. Franklin a copy of the same in three volumes quarto,
accompanied with the elegant collection of plates, and a very polite
letter from lord Howe, signifying, that the present was made with
his majesty's express approbation; and the royal society having, in
honour of that illustrious navigator, one of their members, struck
some gold medals to be distributed among his friends and the friends
of his voyage, one of those medals, was also sent to Dr. Franklin,
by order of the society, together with a letter from their worthy
president, sir Joseph Banks, expressing likewise, that it was sent
with the approbation of his majesty." _Editor._




  _An Address to the Public, from the Pensylvania Society for
  promoting the Abolition of Slavery, and the Relief of free Negroes,
  unlawfully held in Bondage[195]._


It is with peculiar satisfaction, we assure the friends of humanity,
that, in prosecuting the design of our association, our endeavours
have proved successful, far beyond our most sanguine expectations.

Encouraged by this success, and by the daily progress of that
luminous and benign spirit of liberty, which is diffusing itself
throughout the world, and humbly hoping for the continuance of the
divine blessing on our labours, we have ventured to make an important
addition to our original plan, and do, therefore, earnestly solicit
the support and assistance of all, who can feel the tender emotions
of sympathy and compassion, or relish the exalted pleasure of
beneficence.

Slavery is such an atrocious debasement of human nature, that
its very extirpation, if not performed with solicitous care, may
sometimes open a source of serious evils.

The unhappy man, who has long been treated as a brute animal,
too frequently sinks beneath the common standard of the human
species. The galling chains, that bind his body, do also fetter his
intellectual faculties, and impair the social affections of his
heart. Accustomed to move like a mere machine, by the will of a
master, reflection is suspended; he has not the power of choice; and
reason and conscience have but little influence over his conduct,
because he is chiefly governed by the passion of fear. He is poor and
friendless--perhaps worn out by extreme labour, age, and disease.

Under such circumstances, freedom may often prove a misfortune to
himself, and prejudicial to society.

Attention to emancipated black people, it is therefore to be
hoped, will become a branch of our national police; but as far as
we contribute to promote this emancipation, so far that attention
is evidently a serious duty incumbent on us, and which we mean to
discharge to the best of our judgment and abilities.

To instruct, to advise, to qualify those, who have been restored to
freedom, for the exercise and enjoyment of civil liberty, to promote
in them habits of industry, to furnish them with employments suited
to their age, sex, talents, and other circumstances, and to procure
their children an education calculated for their future situation
in life; these are the great outlines of the annexed plan, which
we have adopted, and which we conceive will essentially promote
the public good, and the happiness of these our hitherto too much
neglected fellow-creatures.

A plan so extensive cannot be carried into execution without
considerable pecuniary resources, beyond the present ordinary funds
of the society. We hope much from the generosity of enlightened and
benevolent freemen, and will gratefully receive any donations or
subscriptions for this purpose, which may be made to our treasurer,
James Starr, or to James Pemberton, chairman of our committee of
correspondence.

  Signed by order of the society,

  B. FRANKLIN, PRESIDENT.

  _Philadelphia,
  9th of November, 1789._

FOOTNOTE:

[195] In an American periodical publication, this address and the
plan that follows it are ascribed to the pen of Dr. Franklin, which
induces us to give them a place here. _Editor._




  _Plan for improving the Condition of the Free Blacks._


The business relative to free blacks shall be transacted by a
committee of twenty-four persons, annually elected by ballot, at the
meeting of this society, in the month called April; and in order
to perform the different services with expedition, regularity, and
energy, this committee shall resolve itself into the following
sub-committees, viz:


I.

A committee of inspection, who shall superintend the morals, general
conduct, and ordinary situation of the free negroes, and afford them
advice and instruction, protection from wrongs, and other friendly
offices.


II.

A committee of guardians, who shall place out children and young
people with suitable persons, that they may (during a moderate time
of apprenticeship, or servitude) learn some trade or other business
of subsistence. The committee may effect this partly by a persuasive
influence on parents and the persons concerned; and partly by
co-operating with the laws, which are, or may be enacted for this,
and similar purposes: in forming contracts on these occasions, the
committee shall secure to the society, as far as may be practicable,
the right of guardianship over the persons so bound.


III.

A committee of education, who shall superintend the
school-instruction of the children and youth of the free blacks; they
may either influence them to attend regularly the schools, already
established in this city, or form others with this view; they shall,
in either case, provide, that the pupils may receive such learning,
as is necessary for their future situation in life; and especially
a deep impression of the most important, and generally acknowledged
moral and religious principles. They shall also procure and preserve
a regular record of the marriages, births, and manumissions of all
free blacks.


IV.

A committee of employ, who shall endeavour to procure constant
employment for those free negroes who are able to work: as the want
of this would occasion poverty, idleness, and many vicious habits.
This committee will, by sedulous enquiry, be enabled to find common
labour for a great number; they will also provide, that such, as
indicate proper talents, may learn various trades, which may be
done by prevailing upon them to bind themselves for such a term
of years, as shall compensate their masters for the expence and
trouble of instruction and maintenance. The committee may attempt the
institution of some useful and simple manufactures, which require but
little skill, and also may assist, in commencing business, such as
appear to be qualified for it.

Whenever the committee of inspection shall find persons of any
particular description requiring attention, they shall immediately
direct them to the committee, of whose care they are the proper
objects.

In matters of a mixed nature, the committees shall confer, and, if
necessary, act in concert. Affairs of great importance shall be
referred to the whole committee.

The expence, incurred by the prosecution of this plan, shall be
defrayed by a fund, to be formed by donations, or subscriptions, for
these particular purposes, and to be kept separate from the other
funds of this society.

The committee shall make a report of their proceedings, and of the
state of their stock, to the society, at their quarterly meetings, in
the months called April and October.

  _Philadelphia,
  26th October, 1789._




  _Paper: a Poem[196]._


      Some wit of old--such wits of old there were--
    Whose hints show'd meaning, whose allusions care,
    By one brave stroke to mark all human kind,
    Call'd clear blank paper ev'ry infant mind;
    When still, as opening sense her dictates wrote,
    Fair virtue put a seal, or vice a blot.

      The thought was happy, pertinent, and true;
    Methinks a genius might the plan pursue.
    I (can you pardon my presumption), I--
    No wit, no genius, yet for once will try.

      Various the papers various wants produce,
    The wants of fashion, elegance, and use.
    Men are as various: and, if right I scan,
    Each sort of _paper_ represents some _man_.

      Pray note the fop--half powder and half lace--
    Nice, as a bandbox were his dwelling-place:
    He's the _gilt-paper_, which apart you store,
    And lock from vulgar hands in the 'scrutoire.

      Mechanics, servants, farmers, and so forth,
    Are _copy-paper_, of inferior worth;
    Less priz'd, more useful, for your desk decreed,
    Free to all pens, and prompt at ev'ry need.

      The wretch, whom av'rice bids to pinch and spare,
    Starve, cheat, and pilfer, to enrich an heir,
    Is coarse _brown-paper_; such as pedlars choose
    To wrap up wares, which better men will use.

      Take next the miser's contrast, who destroys
    Health, fame, and fortune, in a round of joys.

    Will any paper match him? Yes, throughout,
    He's a true _sinking-paper_, past all doubt.

      The retail politician's anxious thought
    Deems _this_ side always right, and _that_ stark nought;
    He foams with censure; with applause he raves--
    A dupe to rumours, and a tool of knaves;
    He'll want no type his weakness to proclaim,
    While such a thing as _fools-cap_ has a name.

      The hasty gentleman, whose blood runs high,
    Who picks a quarrel, if you step awry,
    Who can't a jest, or hint, or look endure:
    What's he? What? _Touch-paper_ to be sure.

      What are our poets, take them as they fall,
    Good, bad, rich, poor, much read, not read at all?
    Them and their works in the same class you'll find;
    They are the mere _waste-paper_ of mankind.

      Observe the maiden, innocently sweet,
    She's fair _white-paper_, an unsullied sheet;
    On which the happy man, whom fate ordains,
    May write his _name_, and take her for his pains.

    One instance more, and only one I'll bring;
    'Tis the _great man_ who scorns a little thing,
    Whose thoughts, whose deeds, whose maxims are his own,
    Form'd on the feelings of his heart alone:
    True genuine _royal-paper_ is his breast;
    Of all the kinds most precious, purest, best.

FOOTNOTE:

[196] We have been told, that this poem is not Franklin's, and the
name of some other person was at the time mentioned to us as the
author; but as we have forgotten both the name and the authority, and
as the poem has been ascribed to Dr. Franklin in the American Museum,
we think it not right to omit it. _Editor._




  _Plain Truth; or serious Considerations on the present State of the
  City of Philadelphia, and Province of Pensylvania:_

  BY A TRADESMAN OF PHILADELPHIA[197].

  Capta urbe, nihil fit reliqui victis. Sed, per deos immortales,
  vos ego appello, qui semper domos, villas, signa, tabulas vestras,
  tantæ æstimationis fecistis; si ista, cujuscumque modi sint, quæ
  amplexamini, retinere, si voluptatibus vestris otium præbere
  vultis; expergiscimini aliquando, & capessite rempublicam. Non
  agitur nunc de sociorum injuriis; _libertas & anima_ nostra in
  dubio est. Dux hostium cum exercitu supra caput est. Vos cunctamini
  etiam nunc, & dubitatis quid faciatis? Scilicet, res ipsa aspera
  est, sed vos non timetis eam. Imo vero maxime; sed inertiâ &
  mollitiâ animi, alius alium expectantes, cunctamini; videlicit,
  diis immortalibus confisi, qui hanc rempublicam in maximis
  periculis servavere _non votis, neque suppliciis muliebribus,
  auxilia deorum parantur_: vigilando, agendo, bene consulendo,
  prospere omnia cedunt. Ubi socordiæ tete atque ignaviæ tradideris,
  nequicquam deos implores; irati, infestique sunt.

  M. POR. CAT. IN SALUST.


It is said, the wise Italians make this proverbial remark on our
nation, viz. The English _feel_, but they do not _see_. That is,
they are sensible of inconveniences when they are present, but do
not take sufficient care to prevent them: their natural courage
makes them too little apprehensive of danger, so that they are often
surprised by it, unprovided of the proper means of security. When
it is too late, they are sensible of their imprudence: after great
fires, they provide buckets and engines: after a pestilence, they
think of keeping clean their streets and common sewers: and when a
town has been sacked by their enemies, they provide for its defence,
&c. This kind of _after-wisdom_ is indeed so common with us, as to
occasion the vulgar, though very insignificant saying, _When the
steed is stolen, you shut the stable door_.

But the more insensible we generally are of public danger and
indifferent when warned of it, so much the more freely, openly, and
earnestly, ought such as apprehend it to speak their sentiments;
that, if possible, those who seem to sleep may be awakened, to think
of some means of avoiding or preventing the mischief, before it be
too late.

Believing therefore, that it is my _duty_, I shall honestly speak my
mind in the following paper.

War, at this time, rages over a great part of the known world; our
newspapers are weekly filled with fresh accounts of the destruction
it every where occasions. Pensylvania, indeed, situate in the centre
of the colonies, has hitherto enjoyed profound repose; and though
our nation is engaged in a bloody war, with two great and powerful
kingdoms, yet, defended, in a great degree, from the French, on the
one hand, by the northern provinces, and from the Spaniards, on the
other, by the southern, at no small expence to each, our people have,
till lately, slept securely in their habitations.

There is no British colony, excepting this, but has made some kind
of provision for its defence; many of them have therefore never been
attempted by an enemy; and others, that were attacked, have generally
defended themselves with success. The length and difficulty of our
bay and river have been thought so effectual a security to us, that
hitherto no means have been entered into, that might discourage an
attempt upon us, or prevent its succeeding.

But whatever security this might have been while both country and
city were poor, and the advantage to be expected scarce worth the
hazard of an attempt, it is now doubted, whether we can any longer
safely depend upon it. Our wealth, of late years much encreased,
is one strong temptation, our defenceless state another, to induce
an enemy to attack us; while the acquaintance they have lately
gained with our Bay and river, by means of the prisoners and flags
of truce they have had among us; by spies which they almost every
where maintain, and perhaps from traitors among ourselves; with
the facility of getting pilots to conduct them; and the known
absence of ships of war, during the greatest part of the year, from
both Virginia and New York, ever since the war began, render the
appearance of success to the enemy far more promising, and therefore
highly encrease our danger.

That our enemies may have spies abroad, and some even in these
colonies, will not be made much doubt of, when it is considered, that
such has been the practice of all nations in all ages, whenever
they were engaged, or intended to engage, in war. Of this we have
an early example in the book of Judges (too pertinent to our case,
and therefore I must beg leave a little to enlarge upon it) where
we are told, _Chap._ xviii, v. 2. That _the children of Dan sent of
their family five men from their coasts to spie out the land, and
search it, saying, Go, search the land_. These Danites it seems were
at this time not very orthodox in their religion, and their spies
met with a certain idolatrous priest of their own persuasion, v. 3,
and they said to him, _Who brought thee hither? What makest thou in
this place? And what hast thou here?_ [Would to God no such priests
were to be found among us]. And they said unto him, v. 5. _Ask
counsel of God, that we may know, whether our way which we go shall
be prosperous: and the priest said unto them, Go in peace; before
the Lord is your way wherein you go._ [Are there no priests among
us, think you, that might, in the like case, give an enemy as good
encouragement? It is well known, that we have numbers of the same
religion with those, who of late encouraged the French to invade our
Mother Country.] _And they came_, verse 7, _to Laish, and saw the
people that were therein, how they dwelt_ CARELESS, _after the manner
of the Zidonians_, QUIET _and_ SECURE. They _thought_ themselves
secure, no doubt; and as they _never had been_ disturbed, vainly
imagined they _never should_. It is not unlikely, that some might see
the danger they were exposed to by living in that _careless_ manner;
but that, if these publicly expressed their apprehensions, the rest
reproached them as timorous persons, wanting courage or confidence in
their gods, who (they might say) had hitherto protected them. But
the spies, verse 8, returned, and said to their countrymen, verse 9,
_Arise, that we may go up against them; for we have seen the land,
and behold it is very good! And are ye still? Be not slothful to go._
Verse 10, _when ye go, ye shall come to a people_ SECURE; [that is, a
people that apprehend no danger, and therefore have made no provision
against it; great encouragement this!] _and to a large land, and a
place where there is no want of any thing_. What could they desire
more? Accordingly we find, in the following verses, that _six hundred
men_ only, _appointed with weapons of war_, undertook the conquest of
this _large land_; knowing that 600 men, armed and disciplined, would
be an over-match perhaps for 60,000, unarmed, undisciplined, and off
their guard. And when they went against it, the idolatrous priest,
verse 17, _with his graven image, and his ephod, and his seraphim,
and his molten image_, [plenty of superstitious trinkets] joined with
them, and, no doubt, gave them all the intelligence and assistance in
his power; his heart, as the text assures us, _being glad_, perhaps
for reasons more than one. And now, what was the fate of poor Laish!
The 600 men being arrived, found, as the spies had reported, a people
QUIET and SECURE, verse 20, 21, _And they smote them with the edge
of the sword, and burnt the city with_ FIRE; _and there was no_
DELIVERER, _because it was far from Zidon_.--Not so far from Zidon,
however, as Pensylvania is from Britain; and yet we are, if possible,
more _careless_ than the people of Laish! As the scriptures are given
for our reproof, instruction and warning, may we make a due use of
this example, before it be too late!

And is our _country_, any more than our city, altogether free from
danger? Perhaps not. We have, it is true, had a long peace with the
Indians: but it is a long peace indeed, as well as a long lane, that
has no ending. The French know the power and importance of the Six
Nations, and spare no artifice, pains or expence, to gain them to
their interest. By their priests they have converted many to their
religion, and these[198] have openly espoused their cause. The rest
appear irresolute what part to take; no persuasions, though enforced
with costly presents, having yet been able to engage them generally
on our side, though we had numerous forces on their borders, ready
to second and support them. What then may be expected, now those
forces are, by orders from the crown, to be disbanded, when our
boasted expedition is laid aside, through want (as it may appear to
them) either of strength or courage; when they see, that the French
and their Indians, boldly, and with impunity, ravage the frontiers
of New York, and scalp the inhabitants; when those few Indians,
that engaged with us against the French, are left exposed to their
resentment: when they consider these things, is there no danger that,
through disgust at our usage, joined with fear of the French power,
and greater confidence in their promises and protection than in ours,
they may be wholly gained over by our enemies, and join in the war
against us? If such should be the case, which God forbid, how soon
may the mischief spread to our frontier countries? And what may we
expect to be the consequence, but desertion of plantations, ruin,
bloodshed and confusion!

Perhaps some in the city, towns, and plantations near the river,
may say to themselves, "An Indian war on the frontiers will not
affect us; the enemy will never come near our habitations; let
those concerned take care of themselves." And others who live in
the country, when they are told of the danger the city is in from
attempts by sea, may say, "What is that to us? The enemy will be
satisfied with the plunder of the town, and never think it worth
his while to visit our plantations: let the town take care of
itself."--These are not mere suppositions, for I have heard some
talk in this strange manner. But are these the sentiments of true
Pensylvanians, of fellow-countrymen, or even of men, that have common
sense or goodness? Is not the whole province one body, united by
living under the same laws, and enjoying the same privileges? Are not
the people of city and country connected as relations, both by blood
and marriage, and in friendships equally dear? Are they not likewise
united in interest, and mutually useful and necessary to each other?
When the feet are wounded, shall the head say, it is not me; I will
not trouble myself to contrive relief! Or if the head is in danger,
shall the hands say, we are not affected, and therefore will lend
no assistance! No. For so would the body be easily destroyed: but
when all parts join their endeavours for its security, it is often
preserved. And such should be the union between the country and the
town; and such their mutual endeavours for the safety of the whole.
When New England, a distant colony, involved itself in a grievous
debt to reduce Cape Breton, we freely gave four thousand pounds for
_their_ relief. And at another time, remembering that Great Britain,
still more distant, groaned under heavy taxes in supporting the war,
we threw in our mite to their assistance, by a free gift of three
thousand pounds: and shall country and town join in helping strangers
(as those comparatively are) and yet refuse to assist each other?

But whatever different opinions we have of our security in other
respects, our TRADE, all seem to agree, is in danger of being ruined
in another year. The great success of our enemies, in two different
cruizes this last summer in our bay, must give them the greatest
encouragement to repeat more frequently their visits, the profit
being almost certain, and the risk next to nothing. Will not the
first effect of this be, an enhancing of the price of all foreign
goods to the tradesman and farmer, who use or consume them? For
the rate of insurance will increase, in proportion to the hazard
of importing them; and in the same proportion will the price of
those goods increase. If the price of the tradesman's work, and the
farmer's produce, would increase equally with the price of foreign
commodities, the damage would not be so great: but the direct
contrary must happen. For the same hazard or rate of insurance,
that raises the price of what is imported, must be deducted out of,
and lower the price of what is exported. Without this addition and
deduction, as long as the enemy cruize at our capes, and take those
vessels that attempt to _go out_, as well as those that endeavour to
_come in_, none can afford to trade, and business must be soon at a
stand. And will not the consequences be, a discouragement of many
of the vessels that used to come from other places to purchase our
produce, and thereby a turning of the trade to ports that can be
entered with less danger, and capable of furnishing them with the
same commodities, as New York, &c.; a lessening of business to every
shopkeeper, together with multitudes of bad debts, the high rate of
goods discouraging the buyers, and the low rates of their labour
and produce, rendering them unable to pay for what they had bought;
loss of employment to the tradesman, and bad pay for what little he
does; and lastly, loss of many inhabitants, who will retire to other
provinces not subject to the like inconveniences; whence a lowering
of the value of lands, lots, and houses.

The enemy, no doubt, have been told, that the people of Pensylvania
are Quakers, and against all defence, from a principle of conscience;
this, though true of a part, and that a small part only of the
inhabitants, is commonly said of the whole; and what may make it
look probable to strangers is, that in fact, nothing is done by any
part of the people towards their defence. But to refuse defending
one's self, or one's country, is so unusual a thing among mankind,
that possibly they may not believe it, till by experience, they find
they can come higher and higher up our river, seize our vessels,
land and plunder our plantations and villages, and retire with their
booty unmolested. Will not this confirm the report, and give them the
greatest encouragement to strike one bold stroke for the city, and
for the whole plunder of the river?

It is said by some, that the expence of a vessel, to guard our trade,
would be very heavy, greater than perhaps all the enemy can be
supposed to take from us at sea would amount to; and that it would
be cheaper for the government to open an insurance office, and pay
all losses. But is this right reasoning? I think not; for what the
enemy takes is clear loss to us, and gain to him; increasing his
riches and strength, as much as it diminishes ours, so making the
difference double; whereas the money, paid our own tradesmen for
building and fitting out a vessel of defence, remains in the country,
and circulates among us; what is paid to the officers and seamen,
that navigate her, is also spent ashore, and soon gets into other
hands; the farmer receives the money for her provisions, and, on the
whole, nothing is clearly lost to the country but her wear and tear,
or so much as she sells for at the end of the war less than her first
cost. This loss, and a trifling one it is, is all the inconvenience;
but how many and how great are the conveniences and advantages! and
should the enemy, through our supineness and neglect to provide for
the defence both of our trade and country, be encouraged to attempt
this city, and after plundering us of our goods, either _burn it_,
or put it to ransom, how great would that loss be! besides the
confusion, terror, and distress, so many hundreds of families would
be involved in!

The thought of this latter circumstance so much affects me, that
I cannot forbear expatiating somewhat more upon it. You have, my
dear countrymen and fellow citizens, riches to tempt a considerable
force to unite and attack you, but are under no ties or engagements
to unite for your defence. Hence, on the first alarm, _terror_ will
spread over all; and as no man can with certainty depend that another
will stand by him, beyond doubt very many will seek safety by a
speedy flight. Those, that are reputed rich, will flee, through fear
of torture, to make them produce more than they are able. The man,
that has a wife and children, will find them hanging on his neck,
beseeching him with tears to quit the city, and save his life, to
guide and protect them in that time of general desolation and ruin.
All will run into confusion, amidst cries and lamentations, and the
hurry and disorder of departers, carrying away their effects. The
few that remain will be unable to resist. _Sacking_ the city will
be the first, and _burning_ it, in all probability, the last act of
the enemy. This, I believe, will be the case, if you have timely
notice. But what must be your condition, if suddenly surprized,
without previous alarm, perhaps in the night! Confined to your
houses, you will have nothing to trust to but the enemy's mercy.
Your best fortune will be, to fall under the power of commanders of
king's ships, able to controul the mariners; and not into the hands
of _licentious privateers_. Who can, without the utmost horror,
conceive the miseries of the latter! when your persons, fortunes,
wives, and daughters, shall be subject to the wanton and unbridled
rage, rapine, and lust, of negroes, mulattoes, and others, the vilest
and most abandoned of mankind[199]. A dreadful scene! which some may
represent as exaggerated. I think it my duty to warn you: judge for
yourselves.

It is true, with very little notice, the rich may shift for
themselves. The means of speedy flight are ready in their hands;
and with some previous care to lodge money and effects in distant
and secure places, though they should lose much, yet enough may be
left them, and to spare. But most unhappily circumstanced indeed are
we, the middling people, the tradesmen, shopkeepers, and farmers of
this province and city! We cannot all fly with our families; and if
we could, how shall we subsist? No; we and they, and what little we
have gained by hard labour and industry, must bear the brunt: the
weight of contributions, extorted by the enemy (as it is of taxes
among ourselves) must be surely borne by us. Nor can it be avoided,
as we stand at present; for though we are numerous, we are quite
defenceless, having neither forts, arms, union, nor discipline. And
though it were true, that our trade might be protected at no great
expence, and our country and our city easily defended, if proper
measures were but taken; yet, who shall take these measures? Who
shall pay that expence? On whom may we fix our eyes with the least
expectation, that they will do any thing for our security? Should
we address that wealthy and powerful body of people, who have ever
since the war governed our elections, and filled almost every seat
in our assembly; should we intreat them to consider, if not as
friends, at least as legislators, that _protection_ is as truly due
from the government to the people, as _obedience_ from the people to
the government; and that if, on account of their religious scruples,
they themselves could do no act for our defence, yet they might
retire, relinquish their power for a season, quit the helm to freer
hands during the present tempest, to hands, chosen by their own
interest too, whose prudence and moderation, with regard to them,
they might safely confide in; secure, from their own native strength,
of resuming again their present station, whenever it shall please
them: should we remind them, that the public money, raised _from
all_, belongs _to all_; that since they have, for their own ease,
and to secure themselves in the quiet enjoyment of their religious
principles (and may they long enjoy them) expended such large sums
to oppose petitions, and engage favourable representations of their
conduct, if they themselves could by no means be free to appropriate
any part of the public money for our defence; yet it would be no
more than justice, to spare us a reasonable sum for that purpose,
which they might easily give to the king's use as heretofore,
leaving all the appropriation to others, who would faithfully apply
it as we desired: should we tell them, that though the treasury be
at present empty, it may soon be filled by the outstanding public
debts collected; or at least credit might be had for such a sum, on
a single vote of the assembly: that though _they_ themselves may
be resigned and easy under this naked, defenceless state of the
country, it is far otherwise with a very great part of the people;
with _us_, who can have no confidence that God will protect those,
that neglect the use of rational means for their security; nor have
any reason to hope, that our losses, if we should suffer any, may
be made up by collections in our favour at home. Should we conjure
them by all the ties of neighbourhood, friendship, justice, and
humanity, to consider these things; and what distraction, misery, and
confusion, what desolation and distress, may possibly be the effect
of their _unseasonable_ predominancy and perseverance; yet all would
be in vain: for they have already been, by great numbers of the
people, petitioned in vain. Our late governor did for years solicit,
request, and even threaten them in vain. The council have since twice
remonstrated to them in vain. Their religious prepossessions are
unchangeable, their obstinacy invincible. Is there then the least
hope remaining, that from that quarter any thing should arise for our
security?

And is our prospect better, if we turn our eyes to the strength of
the opposite party, those great and rich men, merchants and others,
who are ever railing at Quakers for doing what their principles
seem to require, and what in charity we ought to believe they think
their duty, but take no one step themselves for the public safety.
They have so much wealth and influence, if they would use it, that
they might easily, by their endeavours and example, raise a military
spirit among us, make us fond, studious of, and expert in, martial
discipline, and affect every thing that is necessary, under God, for
our protection. But _envy_ seems to have taken possession of their
hearts, and to have eaten out and destroyed every generous, noble,
public-spirited sentiment. _Rage_ at the disappointment of their
little schemes for power, gnaws their souls, and fills them with
such cordial hatred to their opponents, that every proposal, by the
execution of which _those_ may receive benefit as well as themselves,
is rejected with indignation. "What," say they, "shall we lay out
our money to protect the trade of Quakers? Shall we fight to defend
Quakers? No; let the trade perish, and the city burn; let what will
happen, we shall never lift a finger to prevent it." Yet the Quakers
have _conscience_ to plead for their resolution not to fight, which
these gentlemen have not. Conscience with you, gentlemen, is on the
other side of the question: conscience enjoins it as a _duty_ on you
(and indeed I think it such on every man) to defend your country,
your friends, your aged parents, your wives, and helpless children:
and yet you resolve not to perform this duty, but act contrary to
your own consciences, because the Quakers act according to theirs.
Till of late, I could scarce believe the story of him, who refused
to pump in a sinking ship, because one on board, whom he hated,
would be saved by it as well as himself. But such, it seems, is the
unhappiness of human nature, that our passions, when violent, often
are too hard for the united force of reason, duty, and religion.

Thus unfortunately are we circumstanced at this time, my dear
countrymen and fellow-citizens; we, I mean, the middling people;
the farmers, shopkeepers, and tradesmen of this city and country.
Through the dissensions of our leaders, through mistaken principles
of religion, joined with a love of worldly power, on the one hand;
through pride, envy, and implacable resentment on the other;
our lives, our families, and little fortunes, dear to us as any
great man's can be to him, are to remain continually exposed to
destruction, from an enterprising, cruel, now well-informed, and
by success encouraged, enemy. It seems as if heaven, justly
displeased at our growing wickedness, and determined to punish[200]
this once-favoured land, had suffered our chiefs to engage in these
foolish and mischievous contentions, for _little posts_ and _paltry
distinctions_, that our hands might be bound up, our understandings
darkened and misled, and every means of our security neglected. It
seems as if our greatest men, our _cives nobilissimi_[201] of both
parties, had sworn the ruin of the country, and invited the French,
our most inveterate enemy to destroy it. Where then shall we seek
for succour and protection? The government we are immediately under
denies it to us; and if the enemy comes, we are _far from Zidon, and
there is no deliverer near_. Our case is dangerously bad; but perhaps
there is yet a remedy, if we have but the prudence and the spirit to
apply it.

If this new flourishing city, and greatly improving colony, is
destroyed and ruined, it will not be for want of numbers of
inhabitants able to bear arms in its defence. It is computed, that we
have at least (exclusive of the Quakers) sixty thousand fighting men,
acquainted with fire arms, many of them hunters and marksmen, hardy
and bold. All we want is order, discipline, and a few cannon. At
present we are like the separate filaments of flax before the thread
is formed, without strength, because without connection; but UNION
would make us strong, and even formidable. Though the _great_ should
neither help nor join us; though they should even oppose our uniting,
from some mean views of their own, yet, if we resolve upon it, and it
please God to inspire us with the necessary prudence and vigour, it
_may_ be effected. Great numbers of our people are of British race,
and though the fierce fighting animals of those happy islands are
said to abate their native fire and intrepidity, when removed to a
foreign clime, yet with the people it is not so; our neighbours of
New England afford the world a convincing proof, that Britons, though
a hundred years transplanted, and to the remotest part of the earth,
may yet retain, even to the third and fourth descent, that zeal for
the public good, that military prowess, and that undaunted spirit,
which has in every age distinguished their nation. What numbers
have we likewise of _those brave people_, whose fathers in the last
age made so glorious a stand for our religion and liberties, when
invaded by a powerful French army, joined by Irish Catholics, under
a bigotted popish king! Let the memorable siege of Londonderry, and
the signal actions of the Iniskillingers, by which the heart of that
prince's schemes was broken, be perpetual testimonies of the courage
and conduct of those noble warriors! Nor are there wanting amongst
us, thousands of _that warlike_ nation, whose sons have ever since
the time of Cæsar maintained the character he gave their fathers,
of joining the most _obstinate courage_ to all the other military
virtues: I mean the brave and steady Germans. Numbers of whom have
actually borne arms in the service of their respective princes; and
if they fought well for their tyrants and oppressors, would they
refuse to unite with us in defence of their newly acquired and most
precious liberty and property? Were this union formed, were we once
united, thoroughly armed and disciplined, was every thing in our
power done for our security, as far as human means and foresight
could provide, we might then, with more propriety, humbly ask the
assistance of Heaven, and a blessing on our lawful endeavours.
The very fame of our strength and readiness would be a means of
discouraging our enemies; for it is a wise and true saying, that _one
sword often keeps another in the scabbard_. The way to secure peace
is to be prepared for war. They, that are on their guard, and appear
ready to receive their adversaries, are in much less danger of being
attacked, than the supine, secure and negligent. We have yet a winter
before us, which may afford a good and almost sufficient opportunity
for this, if we seize and improve it with a becoming vigour. And if
the hints contained in this paper are so happy as to meet with a
suitable disposition of mind in his countrymen and fellow-citizens,
the writer of it will, in a few days, lay before them a form of
an ASSOCIATION for the purposes herein mentioned, together with a
practicable scheme for raising the money necessary for the defence of
our trade, city, and country, without laying a burthen on any man.

_May the God of wisdom, strength, and power, the Lord of the armies
of Israel, inspire us with prudence in this time of danger, take
away from us all the seeds of contention and division, and unite the
hearts and counsels of all of us, of whatever sect or nation, in one
bond of peace, brotherly love, and generous public spirit; may he
give us strength and resolution to amend our lives, and remove from
among us every thing that is displeasing to him; afford us his most
gracious protection, confound the designs of our enemies, and give
peace in all our borders, is the sincere prayer of_

  A TRADESMAN of Philadelphia.

FOOTNOTES:

[197] For this pamphlet we are indebted to the same American
correspondent, who furnished us with the papers intitled The
Busy-Body: but it came too late for insertion in its proper place,
which, agreeably to its date, is at the commencement of the present
volume. Dr. W. Smith, in his eulogium on our author, delivered before
the American philosophical society, speaks of this production as
follows: "In 1744, a Spanish privateer, having entered the Bay of
Delaware, ascended as high as Newcastle, to the great terror of the
citizens of Philadelphia. On this occasion Franklin wrote his first
political pamphlet called Plain Truth, to exhort his fellow-citizens
to the bearing of arms; which laid the foundation of those military
associations, which followed, at different times, for the defence of
the country." We presume that Dr. Smith is correct in his date, but
the copy sent us by our correspondent, which is the second edition,
was printed in 1747. _Editor._

[198] The praying Indians.

[199] By accounts, the ragged crew of the Spanish privateer that
plundered Mr. Liston's, and another plantation, a little below
Newcastle, was composed of such as these. The _honour_ and _humanity_
of their officers may be judged of, by the treatment they gave
poor captain Brown, whom they took with Martin's ship in returning
from their cruize. Because he bravely defended himself and vessel
longer than they expected, for which every generous enemy would
have esteemed him, did they, after he had struck and submitted,
barbarously _stab_ and _murder_ him, though on his knees begging
quarter!

[200] When God determined to punish his chosen people, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, who, though breakers of his other laws,
were scrupulous observers of that ONE, which required keeping holy
the Sabbath-day; he suffered even the strict observation of that
command to be their ruin: for Pompey, observing that they then
obstinately refused to fight, made a general assault on that day,
took the town, and butchered them with as little mercy as he found
resistance.

  JOSEPHUS.

[201] Conjuravere cives nobilissimi patriam incendere; GALLORUM
GENTEM, infestissimam nomini Romano, ad bellum arcessunt.

  CAT. IN SALUST.




  _Four Letters[202] to George Whatley, Esq. Treasurer of the
  Foundling Hospital, London._


Letter I.

  _Passy, near Paris, Aug. 21, 1784._

  MY DEAR OLD FRIEND,

I received your kind letter of May 3, 1783. I am ashamed that it
has been so long unanswered. The indolence of old age, frequent
indisposition, and too much business, are my only excuses. I had
great pleasure in reading it, as it informed me of your welfare.

Your excellent little work, "The Principles of Trade," is too
little known. I wish you would send me a copy of it by the bearer,
my grandson and secretary, whom I beg leave to recommend to your
civilities. I would get it translated and printed here, and if your
bookseller has any quantity of them left, I should be glad he would
send them to America. The ideas of our people there, though rather
better than those that prevail in Europe, are not so good as they
should be: and that piece might be of service among them.

Since and soon after the date of your letter, we lost, unaccountably
as well as unfortunately, that worthy, valuable young man you
mention, your namesake Maddeson. He was infinitely regretted by all
that knew him.

I am sorry your favourite charity does not go on as you could wish
it. It is shrunk indeed by your admitting only 60 children in a year.
What you have told your brethren respecting America is true. If you
find it difficult to dispose of your children in England, it looks
as if you had too many people. And yet you are afraid of emigration.
A subscription is lately set on foot here to encourage and assist
mothers in nursing their infants themselves at home; the practice of
sending them to the _Enfans Trouvés_ having risen here to a monstrous
excess, as by the annual bills it appears they amount to near one
third of the children born in Paris. This subscription is likely to
succeed, and may do a great deal of good, though it cannot answer all
the purposes of a foundling hospital.

Your eyes must continue very good, since you are able to write so
small a hand without spectacles. I cannot distinguish a letter even
of large print, but am happy in the invention of double spectacles,
which, serving for distant objects as well as near ones, make my
eyes as useful to me as ever they were. If all the other defects and
infirmities of old age could be as easily and cheaply remedied, it
would be worth while, my friend, to live a good deal longer. But I
look upon death to be as necessary to our constitutions as sleep. We
shall rise refreshed in the morning.--Adieu, and believe me ever,

  Your's most affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.


Letter II.

  _Passy, May 19, 1785._

  DEAR OLD FRIEND,

I received the very good letter you sent me by my grandson, together
with your resemblance, which is placed in my chamber and gives me
great pleasure: there is no trade, they say, without returns, and
therefore I am punctual in making those you have ordered. I intended
this should have been a long epistle, but I am interrupted, and can
only add, that I am ever,

  Yours, most affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

My grandson presents his most affectionate respects.


Letter III.

  _Passy, May 23, 1785._

  DEAR OLD FRIEND,

I sent you a few lines the other day with the medallion, when I
should have written more, but was prevented by the coming in of a
_bavard_, who worried me till evening. I bore with him, and now you
are to bear with me, for I shall probably _bavarder_ in answering
your letter.

I am not acquainted with the saying of Alphonsus, which you allude to
as a sanctification of your rigidity in refusing to allow me the plea
of old age as an excuse for my want of exactitude in correspondence.
What was that saying?--You do not, it seems, feel any occasion for
such an excuse, though you are, as you say, rising 75, but I am
rising (perhaps more properly falling) 80--and I leave the excuse
with you till you arrive at that age; perhaps you may then be more
sensible of its validity, and see fit to use it for yourself.

I must agree with you, that the gout is bad, and that the stone is
worse. I am happy in not having them both together, and I join in
your prayer, that you may live till you die without either. But I
doubt the author of the epitaph you sent me is a little mistaken,
when, speaking of the world, he says, that

    ----------------He ne'er car'd a pin
    What they said or may say of the mortal within.

It is so natural to wish to be well spoken of, whether alive or dead,
that I imagine he could not be quite exempt from that desire, and
that at least he wished to be thought a wit, or he would not have
given himself the trouble of writing so good an epitaph to leave
behind him. Was it not worthy of his care, that the world should
say he was an honest and a good man? I like better the concluding
sentiment in the old song, called the old man's wish, wherein, after
wishing for a warm house in a country town, an easy horse, some good
old authors, ingenious and cheerful companions, pudding on Sundays,
with stout ale and a bottle of burgundy, &c. &c. in separate
stanzas, each ending with this burden,

    May I govern my passions with absolute sway,
    And grow wiser and better as strength wears away,
    Without gout or stone by a gentle decay--

he adds for the last stanza,

    With courage undaunted may I face my last day,
    And when I am gone may the better sort say,
    In the morning when sober, in the evening when mellow,
    He's gone--and not left behind him his fellow.
    For he govern'd his passions, &c.

What signifies our wishing? Things happen after all as they will
happen. I have sung that _wishing song_ a thousand times when I was
young, and now find at fourscore, that the three contraries have
befallen me, being subject to the gout, and the stone, and not being
yet master of all my passions. Like the proud girl in my country,
who wished and resolved not to marry a parson, nor a presbyterian,
nor an Irishman, and at length found herself married to an Irish
presbyterian parson! You see I have some reason to wish that in a
future state I may not only be _as well as I was_, but a little
better. And I hope it: for I too, with your poet, _trust in God_. And
when I observe, that there is great frugality as well as wisdom in
his works, since he has been evidently sparing, both of labour and
materials; for by the various wonderful inventions of propagation,
he has provided for the continual peopling his world with plants and
animals without being at the trouble of repeated new creations; and
by the natural reduction of compound substances to their original
elements, capable of being employed in new compositions, he has
prevented the necessity of creating new matter; for that the earth,
water, air, and perhaps fire, which being compounded, form wood, do,
when the wood is dissolved, return, and again become air, earth, fire
and water:--I say, that when I see nothing annihilated, and not even
a drop of water wasted, I cannot suspect the annihilation of souls,
or believe that he will suffer the daily waste of millions of minds
ready made that now exist, and put himself to the continual trouble
of making new ones. Thus finding myself to exist in the world, I
believe I shall in some shape or other always exist. And with all the
inconveniences human _life_ is liable to, I shall not object to a new
edition of mine; hoping, however, that the errata of the last may be
corrected.

I return your note of children received in the foundling hospital
at Paris, from 1741 to 1755 inclusive, and I have added the
years preceding, as far back as 1710, together with the general
christenings of the city; and the years succeeding, down to 1770.
Those since that period I have not been able to obtain. I have noted
in the margin the gradual increase, viz. from every tenth child so
thrown upon the public, till it comes to every third. Fifteen years
have passed since the last account, and probably it may now amount
to one half. Is it right to encourage this monstrous deficiency of
natural affection? A surgeon I met with here excused the women of
Paris, by saying seriously, that they _could not_ give suck, _Car,
dit-il, ils n'ont point de tetons_. He assured me it was a fact, and
bade me look at them, and observe how flat they were on the breast;
they have nothing more there, says he, than I have upon the back
of my hand. I have since thought that there might be some truth in
his observation, and that possibly Nature finding they made no use
of bubbies, has left off giving them any. Yet since Rousseau, with
admirable eloquence pleaded for the rights of children to their
mother's milk, the mode has changed a little, and some ladies of
quality now suckle their infants and find milk enough. May the mode
descend to the lower ranks, till it becomes no longer the custom to
pack their infants away, as soon as born, to the _Enfants Trouvés_,
with the careless observation, that the king is better able to
maintain them. I am credibly informed, that nine-tenths of them
die there pretty soon; which is said to be a great relief to the
institution, whose funds would not otherwise be sufficient to bring
up the remainder. Except the few persons of quality above-mentioned,
and the multitude who send to the hospital, the practice is to hire
nurses in the country, to carry out the children and take care of
them there. Here is an office for examining the health of nurses and
giving them licences. They come to town on certain days of the week
in companies to receive the children, and we often meet trains of
them on the road returning to the neighbouring villages with each
a child in arms. But those who are good enough to try this way of
raising their children are often not able to pay the expence, so that
the prisons of Paris are crouded with wretched fathers and mothers
confined _pour mois de nourice_; though it is laudably a favourite
charity to pay for them, and set such prisoners at liberty. I wish
success to the new project of assisting the poor to keep their
children at home, because I think there is no nurse like a mother (or
not many) and that if parents did not immediately send their infants
out of their sight, they would in a few days begin to love them, and
thence be spurred to greater industry for their maintenance. This is
a subject you understand better than I, and therefore, having perhaps
said too much, I drop it. I only add to the notes a remark from the
history of the Academy of Sciences, much in favour of the foundling
institution.

The Philadelphia bank goes on, as I hear, very well. What you call
the Cincinnati institution is no institution of our government, but
a private convention among the officers of our late army, and so
universally disliked by the people, that it is supposed it will be
dropped. It was considered as an attempt to establish something like
an hereditary rank or nobility. I hold with you that it was wrong;
may I add, that all descending honours are wrong and absurd; that
the honour of virtuous actions appertains only to him that performs
them, and is in its nature incommunicable. If it were communicable
by descent, it must also be divisible among the descendants, and
the more ancient the family the less would be found existing in any
one branch of it; to say nothing of the greater chance of unlucky
interruptions.

Our constitution seems not to be well understood with you. If the
congress were a permanent body, there would be more reason in being
jealous of giving it powers. But its members are chosen annually, and
cannot be chosen more than three years successively, nor more than
three years in seven, and any of them may be recalled at any time,
whenever their constituents shall be dissatisfied with their conduct.
They are of the people, and return again to mix with the people,
having no more durable pre-eminence than the different grains of sand
in an hour-glass. Such an assembly cannot easily become dangerous
to liberty. They are the servants of the people, sent together to do
the people's business and promote the public welfare; their powers
must be sufficient, or their duties cannot be performed. They have
no profitable appointments, but a mere payment of daily wages, such
as are scarcely equivalent to their expences, so that having no
chance for great places and enormous salaries or pensions, as in some
countries, there is no briguing or bribing for elections. I wish old
England were as happy in its government, but I do not see it. Your
people, however, think their constitution the best in the world, and
affect to despise ours. It is comfortable to have a good opinion of
one's self, and of every thing that belongs to us, to think one's own
religion, king, and wife, the best of all possible wives, kings, and
religions. I remember three Greenlanders, who had travelled two years
in Europe, under the care of some Moravian missionaries, and had
visited Germany, Denmark, Holland and England, when I asked them at
Philadelphia (when they were in their way home) whether, now they had
seen how much more commodiously the white people lived by the help of
the arts, they would not chuse to remain among us--their answer was,
that they were pleased with having had an opportunity of seeing many
fine things, _but they chose to live in their own country_: which
country, by the way, consisted of rock only, for the Moravians were
obliged to carry earth in their ship from New York, for the purpose
of making there a cabbage garden!

By Mr. Dollond's saying, that my double spectacles could only serve
particular eyes, I doubt he has not been rightly informed of their
construction, I imagine it will be found pretty generally true, that
the same convexity of glass through which a man sees clearest and
best at the distance proper for reading, is not the best for greater
distances. I therefore had formerly two pair of spectacles, which I
shifted occasionally, as in travelling I sometimes read and often
want to regard the prospects. Finding this change troublesome, and
not always sufficiently ready, I had the glasses cut out and half
of each kind associated in the same circle, the least convex, for
distant objects the upper half, and the most convex, for reading,
the lower half: by this means, as I wear my spectacles constantly,
I have only to move my eyes up or down, as I want to see distinctly
far or near, the proper glasses being always ready. This I find more
particularly convenient since my being in France; the glasses that
serve me best at table to see what I eat, being the best to see the
faces of those on the other side of the table who speak to me, and
when one's ears are not well accustomed to the sounds of a language,
a sight of the movements in the features of him that speaks helps
to explain; so that I understand French better by the help of my
spectacles.

My intended translator of your piece, the only one I know who
understands _the subject_ as well as the two languages, which a
translator ought to do, or he cannot make so good a translation, is
at present occupied in an affair that prevents his undertaking it;
but that will soon be over.--I thank you for the notes. I should be
glad to have another of the printed pamphlets.

We shall always be ready to take your children, if you send them to
us; I only wonder, that since London draws to itself and consumes
such numbers of your country people, your country should not, to
supply their places, want and willingly receive the children you have
to dispose of. That circumstance, together with the multitude who
voluntarily part with their freedom as men, to serve for a time as
lacqueys, or for life as soldiers in consideration of small wages,
seems to me a proof that your island is over-peopled, and yet it is
afraid of emigrations! Adieu, my dear friend, and believe me ever,

  Yours, very affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.





  _Letter from Mr. Thomas Jefferson to the late Dr. William Smith, of
  Philadelphia[204]._


I feel both the wish and the duty to communicate, in compliance with
your request, whatever, within my knowledge, might render justice to
the memory of our great countryman, Dr. Franklin, in whom philosophy
has to deplore one of its principal luminaries extinguished. But my
opportunities of knowing the interesting facts of his life have not
been equal to my desire of making them known.

I can only, therefore, testify in general, that there appeared
to me more respect and veneration attached to the character of
Dr. Franklin in France, than to that of any other person in the
same country, foreign or native. I had opportunities of knowing
particularly, how far these sentiments were felt by the foreign
ambassadors and ministers at the court of Versailles. The fable of
his capture by the Algerines, propagated by the English newspapers,
excited no uneasiness, as it was seen at once to be a dish cooked up
to please certain readers; but nothing could exceed the anxiety of
his diplomatic brethren on a subsequent report of his death, which,
although premature, bore some marks of authenticity.

I found the ministers of France equally impressed with his talents
and integrity. The count de Vergennes, particularly, gave me repeated
and unequivocal demonstrations of his entire confidence in him.

When he left Passy, it seemed as if the village had lost its
patriarch. On taking leave of the court, which he did by letter, the
king ordered him to be handsomely complimented, and furnished him
with a litter and mules of his own, the only kind of conveyance the
state of his health could bear.

The succession to Dr. Franklin, at the court of France, was an
excellent school of humility to me. On being presented to any one, as
the minister of America, the common-place question was, "_c'est vous
Monsieur, qui remplacez le Docteur Franklin?_"--is it you, sir, who
replace Dr. Franklin? I generally answered--"No one can replace him,
sir; I am only his successor."

I could here relate a number of those _bon mots_, with which he was
used to charm every society, as having heard many of them; but these
are not your object. Particulars of greater dignity happened not to
occur, during his stay of nine months after my arrival in France.

A little before that time, Argand had invented his celebrated lamp,
in which the flame is spread into a hollow cylinder, and thus brought
into contact with the air, within as well as without. Dr. Franklin
had been on the point of the same discovery. The idea had occurred to
him; but he had tried a bullrush as a wick, which did not succeed.
His occupations did not permit him to repeat and extend his trials to
the introduction of a larger column of air, than could pass through
the stem of a bullrush.

About that time, also, the king of France gave him a signal testimony
of respect, by joining him with some of the most illustrious men of
the nation to examine that ignis-fatuus of philosophy, the animal
magnetism of the maniac, Mesmer; the pretended effects of which had
astonished all Paris. From Dr. Franklin's hand, in conjunction with
his brethren of the learned committee, that compound of fraud and
folly was unveiled, and received its death-wound. After this nothing
very interesting was before the public, either in philosophy or
politics, during his stay; and he was principally occupied in winding
up his affairs, and preparing for his return to America.

These small offerings to the memory of our great and dear friend
(whom time will be making still greater, while it is spunging us from
its records) must be accepted by you, sir, in that spirit of love
and veneration for him, in which they are made; and not according to
their insignificancy in the eyes of a world, which did not want this
mite to fill up the measure of his worth.

His death was an affliction which was to happen to us at some time or
other. We have reason to be thankful he was so long spared; that the
most useful life should be the longest also; that it was protracted
so far beyond the ordinary span allotted to humanity, as to avail us
of his wisdom and virtue, in the establishment of our freedom in the
west; and to bless him with a view of its dawn in the east, where men
seemed till now to have learned every thing--but _how to be free_.

FOOTNOTE:

[204] Extracted from the Eulogium on Dr. Franklin, delivered by Dr.
W. Smith, before the American philosophical society. _Editor._




  _Letter from the late Dr. Joseph Priestley to the Editor of the
  Monthly Magazine[205]._


  SIR,

I have just read in the Monthly Review, vol. 36, p. 357, that the
late Mr. Pennant said of Dr. Franklin, that, "living under the
protection of our mild government, he was secretly playing the
incendiary, and too successfully inflaming the minds of our fellow
subjects in America, till that great explosion happened, which for
ever disunited us from our once happy colonies."

As it is in my power, as far as my testimony will be regarded, to
refute this charge, I think it due to our friendship to do it. It
is probable, that no person now living was better acquainted with
Dr. Franklin and his sentiments on all subjects of importance, than
myself, for several years before the American war. I think I knew him
as well as one man can generally know another. At that time I spent
the winters in London, in the family of the Marquis of Lansdown,
and few days passed without my seeing more or less of Dr. Franklin;
and the last day that he passed in England, having given out that
he should depart the day before, we spent together, without any
interruption, from morning till night.

Now he was so far from wishing for a rupture with the colonies,
that he did more than most men would have done, to prevent it. His
constant advice to his countrymen, he always said, was "to bear every
thing from England, however unjust;" saying, that "it could not
last long, as they would soon outgrow all their hardships." On this
account Dr. Price, who then corresponded with some of the principal
persons in America, said, he began to be very unpopular there. He
always said, "If there must be a war, it will be a war of ten years,
and I shall not live to see the end of it." This I have heard him say
many times.

It was at his request, enforced by that of Dr. Fothergil, that I
wrote an anonymous pamphlet, calculated to show the injustice and
impolicy of a war with the colonies, previous to the meeting of a new
parliament. As I then lived at Leeds, he corrected the press himself,
and, to a passage, in which I lamented the attempt to establish
arbitrary power in so large a part of the British empire, he added
the following clause, "to the imminent danger of our most valuable
commerce, and of that national strength, security, and felicity,
which depend on union and on liberty."

The unity of the British empire, in all its parts, was a favourite
idea of his. He used to compare it to a beautiful China vase, which,
if once broken, could never be put together again: and so great an
admirer was he at the time of the British constitution, that he said
he saw no inconvenience from its being extended over a great part
of the globe. With these sentiments he left England; but when, on
his arrival in America, he found the war begun, and that there was
no receding, no man entered more warmly into the interests of what
he then considered as _his country_, in opposition to that of Great
Britain. Three of his letters to me, one written immediately on his
landing, and published in the collection of his Miscellaneous Works,
p. 365, 552, and 555[206], will prove this.

By many persons, Dr. Franklin is considered as having been a
cold-hearted man, so callous to every feeling of humanity, that the
prospect of all the horrors of a civil war could not affect him. This
was far from being the case. A great part of the day abovementioned
that we spent together, he was looking over a number of American
newspapers, directing me what to extract from them for the English
ones; and, in reading them, he was frequently not able to proceed
for the tears literally running down his cheeks. To strangers he was
cold and reserved; but where he was intimate, no man indulged to more
pleasantry and good humour. By this he was the delight of a club, to
which he alludes in one of the letters above referred to, called the
_whig-club_, that met at the London coffee-house, of which Dr. Price,
Dr. Kippis, Mr. John Lee, and others of the same stamp, were members.

Hoping that this vindication of Dr. Franklin will give pleasure to
many of your readers, I shall proceed to relate some particulars
relating to his behaviour, when lord Loughborough, then Mr.
Wedderburn, pronounced his violent invective against him at the
privy-council, on his presenting the complaints of the province of
Massachusetts (I think it was) against their governor. Some of the
particulars may be thought amusing.

On the morning of the day on which the cause was to be heard, I
met Mr. Burke, in Parliament-street, accompanied by Dr. Douglas,
afterwards bishop of Carlisle; and after introducing us to each
other, as men of letters, he asked me whither I was going? I said I
could tell him where I _wished_ to go. He then asking me where that
was, I said to the privy-council, but that I was afraid I could not
get admission. He then desired me to go along with him. Accordingly
I did; but when we got into the anti-room, we found it quite filled
with persons as desirous of getting admission as ourselves. Seeing
this, I said, we should never get through the crowd. He said, "Give
me your arm;" and locking it fast in his, he soon made his way to
the door of the privy-council. I then said, Mr. Burke, you are an
excellent leader; he replied, "I wish other persons thought so too."

After waiting a short time, the door of the privy-council opened,
and we entered the first, when Mr. Burke took his stand behind the
first chair next to the president, and I behind that the next to his.
When the business was opened, it was sufficiently evident, from the
speech of Mr. Wedderburn, who was counsel for the governor, that the
real object of the court was to insult Dr. Franklin. All this time
he stood in a corner of the room, not far from me, without the least
apparent emotion.

Mr. Dunning, who was the leading counsel on the part of the colony,
was so hoarse, that he could hardly make himself heard; and Mr. Lee,
who was the second, spoke but feebly in reply; so that Mr. Wedderburn
had a complete triumph. At the sallies of his sarcastic wit, all
the members of the council, the president himself (Lord Gower) not
excepted, frequently laughed outright. No person belonging to the
council behaved with decent gravity, except Lord North, who, coming
late, took his stand behind the chair opposite to me.

When the business was over, Dr. Franklin, in going out, took me by
the hand, in a manner that indicated some feeling. I soon followed
him, and going through the anti-room, saw Mr. Wedderburn there
surrounded with a circle of his friends and admirers. Being known to
him, he stepped forwards as if to speak to me; but I turned aside,
and made what haste I could out of the place.

The next morning I breakfasted with the doctor, when he said, "He
had never before been so sensible of the power of a good conscience;
for that if he had not considered the thing for which he had been
so much insulted, as one of the best actions of his life, and what
he should certainly do again in the same circumstances, he could not
have supported it." He was accused of clandestinely procuring certain
letters, containing complaints against the governor, and sending them
to America, with a view to excite their animosity against him, and
thus to embroil the two countries. But he assured me, that he did not
even know that such letters existed, till they were brought to him
as agent for the colony, in order to be sent to his constituents;
and the cover of the letters on which the direction had been
written, being lost, he only guessed at the person to whom they were
addressed, by the contents.

That Dr. Franklin, notwithstanding he did not show it at the time,
was much impressed by the business of the privy council, appeared
from this circumstance: when he attended there, he was dressed in
a suit of Manchester velvet; and Silas Dean told me, that, when
they met at Paris to sign the treaty between France and America, he
purposely put on that suit.

Hoping that this communication will be of some service to the memory
of Dr. Franklin, and gratify his friends,




  Read at the Royal Society, June 3, 1756.

The particles of air are kept at a distance from each other by their
mutual repulsion.

Every three particles, mutually and equally repelling each other,
must form an equilateral triangle.

All the particles of air gravitate towards the earth, which
gravitation compresses them, and shortens the sides of the triangles,
otherwise their mutual repellency would force them to greater
distances from each other.

Whatever particles of other matter (not endued with that repellency)
are supported in air, must adhere to the particles of air, and be
supported by them; for in the vacancies there is nothing they can
rest on.

Air and water mutually attract each other. Hence water will dissolve
in air, as salt in water.

The specific gravity of matter is not altered by dividing the
matter, though the superficies be increased. Sixteen leaden bullets,
of an ounce each, weigh as much in water as one of a pound, whose
superficies is less.

Therefore the supporting of salt in water is not owing to its
superficies being increased.

A lump of salt, though laid at rest at the bottom of a vessel of
water, will dissolve therein, and its parts move every way, till
equally diffused in the water; therefore there is a mutual attraction
between water and salt. Every particle of water assumes as many of
salt as can adhere to it; when more is added, it precipitates, and
will not remain suspended.

Water, in the same manner, will dissolve in air, every particle of
air assuming one or more particles of water. When too much is added,
it precipitates in rain.

But there not being the same contiguity between the particles of air
as of water, the solution of water in air is not carried on without a
motion of the air, so as to cause a fresh accession of dry particles.

Part of a fluid, having more of what it dissolves, will communicate
to other parts that have less. Thus very salt water, coming in
contact with fresh, communicates its saltness till all is equal, and
the sooner if there is a little motion of the water.

Even earth will dissolve, or mix with air. A stroke of a horse's hoof
on the ground, in a hot dusty road, will raise a cloud of dust, that
shall, if there be a light breeze, expand every way, till, perhaps,
near as big as a common house. It is not by mechanical motion
communicated to the particles of dust by the hoof, that they fly so
far, nor by the wind, that they spread so wide: but the air near
the ground, more heated by the hot dust struck into it, is rarefied
and rises, and in rising mixes with the cooler air, and communicates
of its dust to it, and it is at length so diffused as to become
invisible. Quantities of dust are thus carried up in dry seasons:
showers wash it from the air, and bring it down again. For water
attracting it stronger, it quits the air, and adheres to the water.

Air, suffering continual changes in the degrees of its heat, from
various causes and circumstances, and, consequently, changes in its
specific gravity, must therefore be in continual motion.

A small quantity of fire mixed with water (or degree of heat therein)
so weakens the cohesion of its particles, that those on the surface
easily quit it, and adhere to the particles of air.

A greater degree of heat is required to break the cohesion between
water and air.

Air moderately heated will support a greater quantity of water
invisibly than cold air; for its particles being by heat repelled
to a greater distance from each other, thereby more easily keep
the particles of water that are annexed to them from running into
cohesions that would obstruct, refract, or reflect the light.

Hence when we breathe in warm air, though the same quantity of
moisture may be taken up from the lungs, as when we breathe in cold
air, yet that moisture is not so visible.

Water being extremely heated, _i.e._ to the degree of boiling, its
particles in quitting it so repel each other, as to take up vastly
more space than before, and by that repellency support themselves,
expelling the air from the space they occupy. That degree of
heat being lessened, they again mutually attract, and having no
air-particles mixed to adhere to, by which they might be supported
and kept at a distance, they instantly fall, coalesce, and become
water again.

The water commonly diffused in our atmosphere never receives such
a degree of heat from the sun, or other cause, as water has when
boiling; it is not, therefore, supported by such heat, but by
adhering to air.

Water being dissolved in, and adhering to air, that air will not
readily take up oil, because of the mutual repellency between water
and oil.

Hence cold oils evaporate but slowly, the air having generally a
quantity of dissolved water.

Oil being heated extremely, the air that approaches its surface will
be also heated extremely; the water then quitting it, it will attract
and carry off oil, which can now adhere to it. Hence the quick
evaporation of oil heated to a great degree.

Oil being dissolved in air, the particles to which it adheres will
not take up water.

Hence the suffocating nature of air impregnated with burnt grease, as
from snuffs of candles and the like. A certain quantity of moisture
should be every moment discharged and taken away from the lungs; air
that has been frequently breathed, is already overloaded, and, for
that reason, can take no more, so will not answer the end. Greasy
air refuses to touch it. In both cases suffocation for want of the
discharge.

Air will attract and support many other substances.

A particle of air loaded with adhering water, or any other matter, is
heavier than before and would descend.

The atmosphere supposed at rest, a loaded descending particle must
act with a force on the particles it passes between, or meets with,
sufficient to overcome, in some degree, their mutual repellency, and
push them nearer to each other.

[Illustration: (of air particles interacting)

         A
    O    O    O

   F    B   C   G
  O    O    O   O

     O    O    O
           D
  O    O    O    O
           E
]

Thus, supposing the particles A B C D, and the other near them, to
be at the distance caused by their mutual repellency (confined by
their common gravity) if A would descend to E, it must pass between B
and C; when it comes between B and C, it will be nearer to them than
before, and must either have pushed them nearer to F and G, contrary
to their mutual repellency, or pass through by a force exceeding
its repellency with them. It then approaches D, and, to move it out
of the way, must act on it with a force sufficient to overcome its
repellency with the two next lower particles, by which it is kept in
its present situation.

Every particle of air, therefore, will bear any load inferior to the
force of these repulsions.

Hence the support of fogs, mists, clouds.

Very warm air, clear, though supporting a very great quantity of
moisture, will grow turbid and cloudy on the mixture of a colder air,
as foggy turbid air will grow clear by warming.

Thus the sun shining on a morning fog, dissipates it; clouds are seen
to waste in a sun-shiny day.

But cold condenses and renders visible the vapour; a tankard or
decanter filled with cold water will condense the moisture of warm
clear air on its outside, where it becomes visible as dew, coalesces
into drops, descends in little streams.

The sun heats the air of our atmosphere most near the surface of
the earth; for there, besides the direct rays, there are many
reflections. Moreover, the earth itself being heated, communicates of
its heat to the neighbouring air.

The higher regions, having only the direct rays of the sun passing
through them, are comparatively very cold. Hence the cold air on the
tops of mountains, and snow on some of them all the year, even in the
torrid zone. Hence hail in summer.

If the atmosphere were, all of it (both above and below) always of
the same temper as to cold or heat, then the upper air would always
be _rarer_ than the lower, because the pressure on it is less;
consequently lighter, and therefore would keep its place.

But the upper air may be more condensed by cold, than the lower air
by pressure; the lower more expanded by heat, than the upper for want
of pressure. In such case the upper air will become the heavier, the
lower the lighter.

The lower region of air being heated and expanded heaves up, and
supports for some time the colder heavier air above, and will
continue to support it while the equilibrium is kept. Thus water
is supported in an inverted open glass, while the equilibrium is
maintained by the equal pressure upwards of the air below; but the
equilibrium by any means breaking, the water descends on the heavier
side, and the air rises into its place.

The lifted heavy cold air over a heated country, becoming by any
means unequally supported, or unequal in its weight, the heaviest
part descends first, and the rest follows impetuously. Hence gusts
after heats, and hurricanes in hot climates. Hence the air of gusts
and hurricanes cold, though in hot climes and seasons; it coming from
above.

The cold air descending from above, as it penetrates our warm region
full of watry particles, condenses them, renders them visible,
forms a cloud thick and dark, overcasting sometimes, at once, large
and extensive; sometimes, when seen at a distance, small at first,
gradually increasing; the cold edge, or surface of the cloud,
condensing the vapours next it, which form smaller clouds that join
it, increase its bulk, it descends with the wind and its acquired
weight, draws nearer the earth, grows denser with continual additions
of water, and discharges heavy showers.

Small black clouds thus appearing in a clear sky, in hot climates,
portend storms, and warn seamen to hand their sails.

The earth, turning on its axis in about twenty-four hours, the
equatorial parts must move about fifteen miles in each minute; in
northern and southern latitudes this motion is gradually less to the
poles, and there nothing.

If there was a general calm over the face of the globe, it must be by
the air's moving in every part as fast as the earth or sea it covers.

He that sails, or rides, has insensibly the same degree of motion as
the ship or coach with which he is connected. If the ship strikes
the shore, or the coach stops suddenly, the motion continuing in the
man, he is thrown forward. If a man were to jump from the land into
a swift sailing ship, he would be thrown backward (or towards the
stern) not having at first the motion of the ship.

He that travels by sea or land, towards the equinoctial, gradually
acquires motion; from it, loses.

But if a man were taken up from latitude 40 (where suppose the
earth's surface to move twelve miles per minute) and immediately set
down at the equinoctial, without changing the motion he had, his
heels would be struck up, he would fall westward. If taken up from
the equinoctial, and set down in latitude 40, he would fall eastward.

The air under the equator, and between the tropics, being constantly
heated and rarefied by the sun, rises. Its place is supplied by air
from northern and southern latitudes, which coming from parts where
the earth and air had less motion, and not suddenly acquiring the
quicker motion of the equatorial earth, appears an east wind blowing
westward; the earth moving from west to east, and slipping under the
air[1].

Thus, when we ride in a calm, it seems a wind against us: if we ride
with the wind, and faster, even that will seem a small wind against
us.

The air rarefied between the tropics, and rising, must flow in the
higher region north and south. Before it rose, it had acquired the
greatest motion the earth's rotation could give it. It retains some
degree of this motion, and descending in higher latitudes, where the
earth's motion is less, will appear a westerly wind, yet tending
towards the equatorial parts, to supply the vacancy occasioned by
the air of the lower regions flowing thitherwards.

Hence our general cold winds are about north west, our summer cold
gusts the same.

The air in sultry weather, though not cloudy, has a kind of haziness
in it, which makes objects at a distance appear dull and indistinct.
This haziness is occasioned by the great quantity of moisture equally
diffused in that air. When, by the cold wind blowing down among it,
it is condensed into clouds, and falls in rain, the air becomes purer
and clearer. Hence, after gusts, distant objects appear distinct,
their figures sharply terminated.

Extreme cold winds congeal the surface of the earth, by carrying off
its fire. Warm winds afterwards blowing over that frozen surface will
be chilled by it. Could that frozen surface be turned under, and
a warmer turned up from beneath it, those warm winds would not be
chilled so much.

The surface of the earth is also sometimes much heated by the sun:
and such heated surface not being changed heats the air that moves
over it.

Seas, lakes, and great bodies of water, agitated by the winds,
continually change surfaces; the cold surface in winter is turned
under by the rolling of the waves, and a warmer turned up; in summer,
the warm is turned under, and colder turned up. Hence the more equal
temper of sea-water, and the air over it. Hence, in winter, winds
from the sea seem warm, winds from the land cold. In summer the
contrary.

Therefore the lakes north-west of us[2], as they are
not so much frozen, nor so apt to freeze as the earth, rather
moderate than increase the coldness of our winter winds.

The air over the sea being warmer, and therefore lighter in winter
than the air over the frozen land, may be another cause of our
general N. W. winds, which blow off to sea at right angles from our
North-American coast. The warm light sea air rising, the heavy cold
land air pressing into its place.

Heavy fluids descending, frequently form eddies, or whirlpools, as
is seen in a funnel, where the water acquires a circular motion,
receding every way from a centre, and leaving a vacancy in the
middle, greatest above, and lessening downwards, like a speaking
trumpet, its big end upwards.

Air descending, or ascending, may form the same kind of eddies,
or whirlings, the parts of air acquiring a circular motion, and
receding from the middle of the circle by a centrifugal force, and
leaving there a vacancy; if descending, greatest above, and lessening
downwards; if ascending, greatest below, and lessening upwards; like
a speaking trumpet, standing its big end on the ground.

When the air descends with violence in some places, it may rise with
equal violence in others, and form both kinds of whirlwinds.

The air in its whirling motion receding every way from the centre or
axis of the trumpet leaves there a vacuum, which cannot be filled
through the sides, the whirling air, as an arch, preventing; it must
then press in at the open ends.

The greatest pressure inwards must be at the lower end, the greatest
weight of the surrounding atmosphere being there. The air entering
rises within, and carries up dust, leaves, and even heavier bodies
that happen in its way, as the eddy, or whirl, passes over land.

If it passes over water, the weight of the surrounding atmosphere
forces up the water into the vacuity, part of which, by degrees,
joins with the whirling air, and adding weight, and receiving
accelerated motion, recedes still farther from the centre or axis of
the trump, as the pressure lessens; and at last, as the trump widens,
is broken into small particles, and so united with air as to be
supported by it, and become black clouds at the top of the trump.

Thus these eddies may be whirlwinds at land, water-spouts at sea. A
body of water so raised, may be suddenly let fall, when the motion,
&c. has not strength to support it, or the whirling arch is broken so
as to admit the air: falling in the sea, it is harmless, unless ships
happen under it; but if in the progressive motion of the whirl it has
moved from the sea, over the land, and then breaks, sudden, violent,
and mischievous torrents are the consequences.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] See a paper on this subject, by the late ingenious Mr. Hadley,
in the Philosophical Transactions, wherein this hypothesis for
explaining the trade-winds first appeared.

[2] In Pensylvania.




DOCTOR ----[3] OF BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _On Water-Spouts._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 3, 1756.


  _Boston, October 16, 1752_.

  SIR,

I find by a word or two in your last[4], that you are willing to
be found fault with; which authorises me to let you know what I
am at a loss about in your papers, which is only in the article
of the water-spout. I am in doubt, whether water in bulk, or even
broken into drops, ever ascends into the region of the clouds _per
vorticem_; i. e. whether there be, in reality, what I call a direct
water-spout. I make no doubt of direct and inverted whirl-winds; your
description of them, and the reason of the thing, are sufficient.
I am sensible too, that they are very strong, and often move
considerable weights. But I have not met with any historical accounts
that seem exact enough to remove my scruples concerning the ascent
abovesaid.

Descending spouts (as I take them to be) are many times seen, as I
take it, in the calms, between the sea and land trade-winds on the
coast of Africa. These contrary winds, or diverging, I can conceive
may occasion them, as it were by suction, making a breach in a large
cloud. But I imagine they have, at the same time, a tendency to
hinder any direct or rising spout, by carrying off the lower part of
the atmosphere as fast as it begins to rarefy; and yet spouts are
frequent here, which strengthens my opinion, that all of them descend.

But however this be, I cannot conceive a force producible by the
rarefication and condensation of our atmosphere, in the circumstances
of our globe, capable of carrying water, in large portions, into the
region of the clouds. Supposing it to be raised, it would be too
heavy to continue the ascent beyond a considerable height, unless
parted into small drops; and even then, by its centrifugal force,
from the manner of conveyance, it would be flung out of the circle,
and fall scattered, like rain.

But I need not expatiate on these matters to you. I have mentioned
my objections, and, as truth is my pursuit, shall be glad to be
informed. I have seen few accounts of these whirl or eddy winds, and
as little of the spouts; and these, especially, lame and poor things
to obtain any certainty by. If you know any thing determinate that
has been observed, I shall hope to hear from you; as also of any
mistake in my thoughts. I have nothing to object to any other part
of your suppositions: and as to that of the trade-winds, I believe
nobody can.

  I am, &c.

  _P. S._. The figures in the _Philosophical Transactions_ show, by
  several circumstances, that they all descended, though the relators
  seemed to think they took up water.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] Dr. Perkins. _Editor._

[4] A Letter on Inoculation, which is transferred to a subsequent
part of this volume, that the papers on meteorological subjects may
not be interrupted. _Editor._




DR. PERKINS OF BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _The same Subject continued._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 24, 1756.


  _Boston, October 23, 1752._

  SIR,

In the inclosed, you have all I have to say of that matter[5]. It
proved longer than I expected, so that I was forced to add a cover to
it. I confess it looks like a dispute; but that is quite contrary to
my intentions.

The sincerity of friendship and esteem were my motives; nor do I
doubt your scrupling the goodness of the intention. However, I must
confess I cannot tell exactly how far I was acted by hopes of better
information, in discovering the whole foundation of my opinion,
which, indeed, is but an opinion, as I am very much at a loss about
the validity of the reasons. I have not been able to differ from you
in sentiment concerning any thing else in your _Suppositions_. In the
present case I lie open to conviction, and shall be the gainer when
informed. If I am right, you will know that, without my adding any
more. Too much said on a merely speculative matter, is but a robbery
committed on practical knowledge. Perhaps I am too much pleased with
these dry notions: however, by this you will see that I think it
unreasonable to give you more trouble about them, than your leisure
and inclination may prompt you to.

  I am, &c.


Since my last I considered, that, as I had begun with the reasons of
my dissatisfaction about the ascent of water in spouts, you would not
be unwilling to hear the whole I have to say, and then you will know
what I rely upon.

What occasioned my thinking all spouts descend, is, that I found some
did certainly do so. A difficulty appeared concerning the ascent of
so heavy a body as water, by any force I was apprised of, as probably
sufficient. And, above all, a view of Mr. Stuart's portraits of
spouts, in the _Philosophical Transactions_.

Some observations on these last will include the chief part of my
difficulties. Mr. Stuart has given us the figures of a number
observed by him in the Mediterranean: all with some particulars which
make for my opinion, if well drawn.

The great spattering, which relators mention in the water where the
spout descends, and which appears in all his draughts, I conceive to
be occasioned by drops descending very thick and large into the place.

On the place of this spattering, arises the appearance of a bush,
into the centre of which the spout comes down. This bush I take to
be formed by a spray, made by the force of these drops, which being
uncommonly large, and descending with unusual force by a stream of
wind descending from the cloud with them, increases the height of
the spray: which wind being repulsed by the surface of the waters
rebounds and spreads; by the first raising the spray higher than it
otherwise would go; and by the last making the top of the bush appear
to bend outwards (_i. e._) the cloud of spray is forced off from the
trunk of the spout, and falls backward.

The bush does the same where there is no appearance of a spout
reaching it; and is depressed in the middle, where the spout is
expected. This, I imagine, to be from numerous drops of the spout
falling into it, together with the wind I mentioned, by their
descent, which beat back the rising spray in the centre.

This circumstance, of the bush bending outwards at the top, seems not
to agree with what I call a direct whirlwind, but consistent with the
reversed; for a direct one would sweep the bush inwards; if, in that
case, any thing of a bush would appear.

The pillar of water, as they call it, from its likeness, I suppose
to be only the end of the spout immersed in the bush, a little
blackened by the additional cloud, and, perhaps, appears to the eye
beyond its real bigness, by a refraction in the bush, and which
refraction may be the cause of the appearance of separation, betwixt
the part in the bush, and that above it. The part in the bush is
cylindrical, as it is above (_i. e._) the bigness the same from the
top of the bush to the water. Instead of this shape, in case of a
whirlwind, it must have been pyramidical.

Another thing remarkable, is, the curve in some of them: this is
easy to conceive, in case of descending parcels of drops through
various winds, at least till the cloud condenses so fast as to come
down, as it were, _uno rivo_. But it is harder to me to conceive it
in the ascent of water, that it should be conveyed along, secure of
not leaking or often dropping through the under side, in the prone
part: and, should the water be conveyed so swiftly, and with such
force, up into the cloud, as to prevent this, it would, by a natural
disposition to move on in a present direction, presently straiten the
curve, raising the shoulder very swiftly, till lost in the cloud.

Over every one of Stuart's figures, I see a cloud: I suppose his
clouds were first, and then the spout; I do not know whether it be so
with all spouts, but suppose it is. Now, if whirlwinds carried up the
water, I should expect them in fair weather, but not under a cloud;
as is observable of whirlwinds; they come in fair weather, not under
the shade of a cloud, nor in the night; since shade cools the air:
but, on the contrary, violent winds often descend from the clouds;
strong gusts which occupy small spaces; and from the higher regions,
extensive hurricanes, &c.

Another thing is the appearance of the spout _coming from_ the cloud.
This I cannot account for on the notion of a direct spout, but in the
real descending one, it is easy. I take it, that the cloud begins
first of all to pour out drops at that particular spot, or _foramen_;
and, when that current of drops increases, so as to force down wind
and vapour, the spout becomes so far as that goes opaque. I take it,
that no clouds drop spouts, but such as make very fast, and happen
to condense in a particular spot, which perhaps is coldest, and
gives a determination downwards, so as to make a passage through the
subjacent atmosphere.

If spouts ascend, it is to carry up the warm rarefied air below, to
let down all and any that is colder above; and, if so, they must
carry it through the cloud they go into (for that is cold and dense,
I imagine) perhaps far into the higher region, making a wonderful
appearance at a convenient distance to observe it, by the swift rise
of a body of vapour, above the region of the clouds. But as this has
never been observed in any age, if it be supposeable that is all.

I cannot learn by mariners, that any wind blows towards a spout more
than any other way; but it blows towards a whirlwind, for a large
distance round.

I suppose there has been no instance of the water of a spout being
salt, when coming across any vessel at sea. I suppose too, that there
have been no salt rains; these would make the case clear.

I suppose it is from some unhappy effects of these dangerous
creatures of nature, that sailors have an universal dread on them of
breaking in their decks, should they come across them. I imagine
spouts, in cold seasons, as Gordon's in the Downs, prove the descent.

_Query._ Whether there is not always more or less cloud, first, where
a spout appears?

Whether they are not, generally, on the borders of trade-winds; and
whether this is for, or against me?

Whether there be any credible account of a whirlwind's carrying up
all the water in a pool, or small pond: as when shoal, and the banks
low, a strong gust might be supposed to blow it all out?

Whether a violent tornado, of a small extent, and other sudden
and strong gusts, be not winds from above, descending nearly
perpendicular; and, whether many that are called whirlwinds at sea,
are any other than these; and so might be called air-spouts, if they
were objects of sight?

I overlooked, in its proper place, Stuart's No. 11, which is curious
for its inequalities, and, in particular, the approach to breaking,
which, if it would not be too tedious, I would have observed a little
upon, in my own way, as, I think, this would argue against the
ascent, &c. but I must pass it, not only for the reason mentioned,
but want of room besides.

As to Mr. Stuart's ocular demonstration of the ascent in his great
perpendicular spout, the only one it appears in, I say, as to this,
what I have written supposes him mistaken, which, yet, I am far from
asserting.

The force of an airy vortex, having less influence on the solid drops
of water, than on the interspersed cloudy vapours, makes the last
whirl round swifter, though it descend slower: and this might easily
deceive, without great care, the most unprejudiced person.

FOOTNOTE:

[5] Water-Spouts.




TO DOCTOR ----[6], OF BOSTON.

  _Water-Spouts and Whirlwinds compared._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 24, 1756.


  _Philadelphia, Feb. 4, 1753._

  SIR,

I ought to have written to you, long since, in answer to yours of
October 16, concerning the water-spout; but business partly, and
partly a desire of procuring further information, by enquiry among my
seafaring acquaintance, induced me to postpone writing, from time to
time, till I am now almost ashamed to resume the subject, not knowing
but you may have forgot what has been said upon it.

Nothing certainly, can be more improving to a searcher into nature,
than objections judiciously made to his opinion, taken up, perhaps,
too hastily: for such objections oblige him to re-study the
point, consider every circumstance carefully, compare facts, make
experiments, weigh arguments, and be slow in drawing conclusions.
And hence a sure advantage results; for he either confirms a truth,
before too slightly supported; or discovers an error, and receives
instruction from the objector.

In this view I consider the objections and remarks you sent me, and
thank you for them sincerely: but, how much soever my inclinations
lead me to philosophical enquiries, I am so engaged in business,
public and private, that those more pleasing pursuits are frequently
interrupted, and the chain of thought, necessary to be closely
continued in such disquisitions, is so broken and disjointed, that it
is with difficulty I satisfy myself in any of them: and I am now not
much nearer a conclusion, in this matter of the spout, than when I
first read your letter.

Yet, hoping we may, in time, sift out the truth between us, I will
send you my present thoughts, with some observations on your reasons
on the accounts in the _Transactions_, and on other relations I have
met with. Perhaps, while I am writing, some new light may strike me,
for I shall now be obliged to consider the subject with a little more
attention.

I agree with you, that, by means of a vacuum in a whirlwind, water
cannot be supposed to rise in large masses to the region of the
clouds; for the pressure of the surrounding atmosphere could not
force it up in a continued body, or column, to a much greater height,
than thirty feet. But, if there really is a vacuum in the centre, or
near the axis of whirlwinds, then, I think, water may rise in such
vacuum to that height, or to a less height, as the vacuum may be less
perfect.

I had not read Stuart's account, in the _Transactions_, for many
years, before the receipt of your letter, and had quite forgot it;
but now, on viewing his draughts, and considering his descriptions, I
think they seem to favour _my hypothesis_; for he describes and draws
columns of water, of various heights, terminating abruptly at the
top, exactly as water would do, when forced up by the pressure of the
atmosphere into an exhausted tube.

I must, however, no longer call it _my hypothesis_, since I find
Stuart had the same thought, though somewhat obscurely expressed,
where he says, "he imagines this phenomenon may be solved by suction
(improperly so called) or rather pulsion, as in the application of a
cupping glass to the flesh, the air being first voided by the kindled
flax." In my paper, I supposed a whirlwind and a spout to be the
same thing, and to proceed from the same cause; the only difference
between them being, that the one passes over land, the other over
water, I find, also, in the _Transactions_, that M. de la Pryme was
of the same opinion; for he there describes two spouts, as he calls
them, which were seen at different times, at Hatfield, in Yorkshire,
whose appearances in the air were the same with those of the spouts
at sea, and effects the same with those of real whirlwinds.

Whirlwinds have generally a progressive, as well as a circular
motion; so had what is called the spout, at Topsham--(_See the
account of it in the Transactions_) which also appears, by its
effects described, to have been a real whirlwind. Water-spouts have,
also, a progressive motion; this is sometimes greater, and sometimes
less; in some violent, in others barely perceivable. The whirlwind at
Warrington continued long in Acrement-Close.

Whirlwinds generally arise after calms and great heats: the same
is observed of water-spouts, which are, therefore, most frequent
in the warm latitudes. The spout that happened in cold weather, in
the Downs, described by Mr. Gordon in the _Transactions_, was, for
that reason, thought extraordinary; but he remarks withal, that the
weather, though cold when the spout appeared, was soon after much
colder; as we find it, commonly, less warm after a whirlwind.

You agree, that the wind blows every way towards a whirlwind,
from a large space round. An intelligent whaleman of Nantucket,
informed me that three of their vessels, which were out in search
of whales, happening to be becalmed, lay in sight of each other,
at about a league distance, if I remember right, nearly forming a
triangle: after some time, a water-spout appeared near the middle
of the triangle, when a brisk breeze of wind sprung up, and every
vessel made sail; and then it appeared to them all, by the setting
of the sails, and the course each vessel stood, that the spout was
to the leeward of every one of them; and they all declared it to
have been so, when they happened afterwards in company, and came to
confer about it. So that in this particular likewise, whirlwinds and
water-spouts agree.

But, if that which appears a water-spout at sea, does sometimes,
in its progressive motion, meet with and pass over land, and there
produce all the phenomena and effects of a whirlwind, it should
thence seem still more evident, that a whirlwind and a spout are the
same. I send you, herewith, a letter from an ingenious physician of
my acquaintance, which gives one instance of this, that fell within
his observation.

A fluid, moving from all points horizontally, towards a centre, must,
at that centre, either ascend or descend. Water being in a tub, if a
hole be opened in the middle of the bottom, will flow from all sides
to the centre, and there descend in a whirl. But, air flowing on and
near the surface of land or water, from all sides, towards a centre,
must, at that centre ascend; the land or water hindering its descent.

If these concentring currents of air be in the upper region, they
may, indeed, descend in the spout or whirlwind; but then, when the
united current reached the earth or water, it would spread, and,
probably, blow every way from the centre. There may be whirlwinds
of both kinds, but from the commonly observed effects, I suspect
the rising one to be the most common: when the upper air descends,
it is, perhaps, in a greater body, extending wider, as in our
thunder-gusts, and without much whirling; and, when air descends in a
spout, or whirlwind, I should rather expect it would press the roof
of a house _inwards_, or force _in_ the tiles, shingles, or thatch,
force a boat down into the water, or a piece of timber into the
earth, than that it would lift them up, and carry them away.

It has so happened, that I have not met with any accounts of spouts,
that certainly descended; I suspect they are not frequent. Please to
communicate those you mention. The apparent dropping of a pipe from
the clouds towards the earth or sea, I will endeavour to explain
hereafter.

The augmentation of the cloud, which, as I am informed, is generally,
if not always the case, during a spout, seems to shew an ascent,
rather than a descent of the matter of which such cloud is composed;
for a descending spout, one would expect, should diminish a cloud.
I own, however, that cold air descending, may, by condensing the
vapours in a lower region, form and increase clouds; which, I think,
is generally the case in our common thunder-gusts, and, therefore, do
not lay great stress on this argument.

Whirlwinds and spouts, are not always, though most commonly, in
the day time. The terrible whirlwind which damaged a great part of
Rome, June 11, 1749, happened in the night of that day. The same was
supposed to have been first a spout, for it is said to be beyond
doubt, that it gathered in the neighbouring sea, as it could be
tracked from Ostia to Rome. I find this in Pere Boschovich's account
of it, as abridged in the Monthly Review for December 1750. In that
account, the whirlwind is said to have appeared as a very black,
long, and lofty cloud, discoverable, notwithstanding the darkness of
the night, by its continually lightning or emitting flashes on all
sides, pushing along with a surprising swiftness, and within three
or four feet of the ground. Its general effects on houses, were
stripping off the roofs, blowing away chimneys, breaking doors and
windows, _forcing up the floors, and unpaving the rooms_ (some of
these effects seem to agree well with a supposed vacuum in the centre
of the whirlwind) and the very rafters of the houses were broken and
dispersed, and even hurled against houses at a considerable distance,
&c.

It seems, by an expression of Pere Boschovich's, as if the wind blew
from all sides towards the whirlwind; for, having carefully observed
its effects, he concludes of all whirlwinds, "that their motion is
circular, and their action attractive."

He observes, on a number of histories of whirlwinds, &c. "that a
common effect of them is, to carry up into the air, tiles, stones,
and animals themselves, which happen to be in their course, and all
kinds of bodies unexceptionably, throwing them to a considerable
distance, with great impetuosity."

Such effects seem to shew a rising current of air.

I will endeavour to explain my conceptions of this matter by figures,
representing a plan and an elevation of a spout or whirlwind.

I would only first beg to be allowed two or three positions,
mentioned in my former paper.

1. That the lower region of air is often more heated, and so more
rarefied, than the upper; consequently, specifically lighter. The
coldness of the upper region is manifested by the hail which
sometimes falls from it in a hot day.

2. That heated air may be very moist, and yet the moisture so equally
diffus'd and rarefied, as not to be visible, till colder air mixes
with it, when it condenses, and becomes visible. Thus our breath,
invisible in summer, becomes visible in winter.

Now let us suppose a tract of land, or sea, of perhaps sixty miles
square, unscreened by clouds, and unfanned by winds, during great
part of a summer's day, or, it may be, for several days successively,
till it is violently heated, together with the lower region of air
in contact with it, so that the said lower air becomes specifically
lighter than the superincumbent higher region of the atmosphere, in
which the clouds commonly float: let us suppose, also, that the air
surrounding this tract has not been so much heated during those days,
and, therefore, remains heavier. The consequence of this should be,
as I conceive, that the heated lighter air, being pressed on all
sides, must ascend, and the heavier descend; and, as this rising
cannot be in all parts, or the whole area of the tract at once,
for that would leave too extensive a vacuum, the rising will begin
precisely in that column that happens to be the lightest, or most
rarefied; and the warm air will flow horizontally from all points to
this column, where the several currents meeting, and joining to rise,
a whirl is naturally formed, in the same manner as a whirl is formed
in the tub of water, by the descending fluid flowing from all sides
of the tub, to the hole in the centre.

And, as the several currents arrive at this central rising column,
with a considerable degree of horizontal motion, they cannot suddenly
change it to a vertical motion; therefore as they gradually, in
approaching the whirl, decline from right to curve or circular lines,
so, having joined the whirl, they _ascend_ by a spiral motion, in the
same manner as the water _descends_ spirally through the hole in the
tub before-mentioned.

Lastly, as the lower air, and nearest the surface, is most rarefied
by the heat of the sun, that air is most acted on by the pressure
of the surrounding cold and heavy air, which is to take its place;
consequently, its motion towards the whirl is swiftest, and so the
force of the lower part of the whirl, or trump, strongest, and the
centrifugal force of its particles greatest; and hence the vacuum
round the axis of the whirl should be greatest near the earth or
sea, and be gradually diminished as it approaches the region of the
clouds, till it ends in a point, as at P in Fig. II. Plate V. forming
a long and sharp cone.

In Fig. I. which is a plan or ground-plat of a whirlwind, the circle
V. represents the central vacuum.

Between _a a a a_ and _b b b b_ I suppose a body of air, condensed
strongly by the pressure of the currents moving towards it, from all
sides without, and by its centrifugal force from within, moving round
with prodigious swiftness, (having, as it were, the momenta of all
the currents -----> -----> -----> -----> united in itself) and with a
power equal to its swiftness and density.

[Illustration: (Water Spouts)

  _Plate V._      _Vol. II. page 26._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

It is this whirling body of air between _a a a a_ and _b b b b_ that
rises spirally; by its force it tears buildings to pieces, twists
up great trees by the roots, &c. and, by its spiral motion, raises
the fragments so high, till the pressure of the surrounding and
approaching currents diminishing, can no longer confine them to the
circle, or their own centrifugal force encreasing, grows too strong
for such pressure, when they fly off in tangent lines, as stones out
of a sling, and fall on all sides, and at great distances.

If it happens at sea, the water under and between _a a a a_ and _b
b b b_ will be violently agitated and driven about, and parts of it
raised with the spiral current, and thrown about so as to form a
bush-like appearance.

This circle is of various diameters, sometimes very large.

If the vacuum passes over water, the water may rise in it in a body,
or column, to near the height of thirty-two feet.

If it passes over houses, it may burst their windows or walls
outwards, pluck off the roofs, and pluck up the floors, by the sudden
rarefaction of the air contained within such buildings; the outward
pressure of the atmosphere being suddenly taken off: so the stopped
bottle of air bursts under the exhausted receiver of the air-pump.

FIG. II. is to represent the elevation of a water-spout, wherein I
suppose P P P to be the cone, at first a vacuum, till W W, the rising
column of water, has filled so much of it. S S S S, the spiral whirl
of air, surrounding the vacuum, and continued higher in a close
column after the vacuum ends in the point P, till it reaches the cool
region of the air. B B, the bush described by Stuart, surrounding the
foot of the column of water.

Now, I suppose this whirl of air will, at first, be as invisible as
the air itself, though reaching, in reality, from the water, to the
region of cool air, in which our low summer thunder-clouds commonly
float; but presently it will become visible at its extremities. _At
its lower end_, by the agitation of the water, under the whirling
part of the circle, between P and S forming Stuart's bush, and by
the swelling and rising of the water, in the beginning vacuum, which
is, at first, a small, low, broad cone, whose top gradually rises
and sharpens, as the force of the whirl encreases. _At its upper
end_ it becomes visible, by the warm air brought up to the cooler
region, where its moisture begins to be condensed into thick vapour,
by the cold, and is seen first at A, the highest part, which being
now cooled, condenses what rises next at B, which condenses that at
C, and that condenses what is rising at D, the cold operating by
the contact of the vapours faster in a right line downwards, than
the vapours themselves can climb in a spiral line upwards; they
climb, however, and as by continual addition they grow denser, and,
consequently, their centrifugal force greater, and being risen above
the concentrating currents that compose the whirl, fly off, spread,
and form a cloud.

It seems easy to conceive, how, by this successive condensation from
above, the spout appears to drop or descend from the cloud, though
the materials of which it is composed are all the while ascending.

The condensation of the moisture, contained in so great a quantity
of warm air as may be supposed to rise in a short time in this
prodigiously rapid whirl, is, perhaps, sufficient to form a great
extent of cloud, though the spout should be over land, as those at
Hatfield; and if the land happens not to be very dusty, perhaps the
lower part of the spout will scarce become visible at all; though
the upper, or what is commonly called the descending part, be very
distinctly seen.

The same may happen at sea, in case the whirl is not violent enough
to make a high vacuum, and raise the column, &c. In such case, the
upper part A B C D only will be visible, and the bush, perhaps, below.

But if the whirl be strong, and there be much dust on the land, and
the column W W be raised from the water, then the lower part becomes
visible, and sometimes even united to the upper part. For the dust
may be carried up in the spiral whirl, till it reach the region where
the vapour is condensed, and rise with that even to the clouds: and
the friction of the whirling air, on the sides of the column W W, may
detach great quantities of its water, break it into drops, and carry
them up in the spiral whirl mixed with the air; the heavier drops
may, indeed, fly off, and fall, in a shower, round the spout; but
much of it will be broken into vapour, yet visible; and thus, in both
cases, by dust at land, and, by water at sea, the whole tube may be
darkened and rendered visible.

As the whirl weakens, the tube may (in appearance) separate in the
middle; the column of water subsiding, and the superior condensed
part drawing up to the cloud. Yet still the tube, or whirl of air,
may remain entire, the middle only becoming invisible, as not
containing visible matter.

Dr. Stuart says, "It was observable of all the spouts he saw, but
more perceptible of the great one; that; towards the end, it began to
appear like a hollow canal, only black in the borders, but white in
the middle; and though at first it was altogether black and opaque,
yet, now, one could very distinctly perceive the sea-water to fly up
along the middle of this canal, as smoak up a chimney."

And Dr. Mather, describing a whirlwind, says, "a thick dark small
cloud arose, with a pillar of light in it, of about eight or ten feet
diameter, and passed along the ground in a tract not wider than a
street, horribly tearing up trees by the roots, blowing them up in
the air like feathers, and throwing up stones of great weight to a
considerable height in the air, &c."

[Illustration: (cross-section of a whirlwind)]

These accounts, the one of water-spouts, the other of a whirlwind,
seem, in this particular, to agree; what one gentleman describes as
a tube, black in the borders, and white in the middle, the other
calls a black cloud, with a pillar of light in it; the latter
expression has only a little more of the _marvellous_, but the thing
is the same; and it seems not very difficult to understand. When
Dr. Stuart's spouts were full charged, that is, when the whirling
pipe of air was filled between _a a a a_ and _b b b b_, Fig. I.,
with quantities of drops, and vapour torn off from the column W W,
Fig. II., the whole was rendered so dark, as that it could not be
seen thro', nor the spiral ascending motion discovered; but when
the quantity ascending lessened, the pipe became more transparent,
and the ascending motion visible. For, by inspection of the figure
in the opposite page, representing a section of our spout, with the
vacuum in the middle, it is plain that if we look at such a hollow
pipe in the direction of the arrows, and suppose opaque particles
to be equally mixed in the space between the two circular lines,
both the part between the arrows _a_ and _b_, and that between the
arrows _c_ and _d_, will appear much darker than that between _b_
and _c_, as there must be many more of those opaque particles in
the line of vision across the sides, than across the middle. It is
thus that a hair in a microscope evidently appears to be a pipe, the
sides shewing darker than the middle. Dr. Mather's whirl was probably
filled with dust, the sides were very dark, but the vacuum within
rendering the middle more transparent, he calls it a pillar of light.

It was in this more transparent part, between _b_ and _c_, that
Stuart could see the spiral motion of the vapours, whose lines on
the nearest and farthest side of the transparent part crossing each
other, represented smoak ascending in a chimney; for the quantity
being still too great in the line of sight through the sides of
the tube, the motion could not be discovered there, and so they
represented the solid sides of the chimney.

When the vapours reach in the pipe from the clouds near to the earth,
it is no wonder now to those who understand electricity, that flashes
of lightning should descend by the spout, as in that of Rome.

But you object, if water may be thus carried into the clouds, why
have we not salt rains? The objection is strong and reasonable, and
I know not whether I can answer it to your satisfaction. I never
heard but of one salt rain, and that was where a spout passed pretty
near a ship, so I suppose it to be only the drops thrown off from the
spout, by the centrifugal force (as the birds were at Hatfield) when
they had been carried so high as to be above, or to be too strongly
centrifugal for, the pressure of the concurring winds surrounding it:
and, indeed, I believe there can be no other kind of salt rain; for
it has pleased the goodness of God so to order it, that the particles
of air will not attract the particles of salt, though they strongly
attract water.

Hence, though all metals, even gold, may be united with air, and
rendered volatile, salt remains fixt in the fire, and no heat can
force it up to any considerable height, or oblige the air to hold
it. Hence, when salt rises, as it will a little way, into air with
water, there is instantly a separation made; the particles of water
adhere to the air, and the particles of salt fall down again, as if
repelled and forced off from the water by some power in the air;
or, as some metals, dissolved in a proper menstruum, will quit the
solvent when other matter approaches, and adhere to that, so the
water quits the salt, and embraces the air; but air will not embrace
the salt, and quit the water, otherwise our rains would indeed be
salt, and every tree and plant on the face of the earth be destroyed,
with all the animals that depend on them for subsistence.----He who
hath proportioned and given proper qualities to all things, was not
unmindful of this. Let us adore HIM with praise and thanksgiving! By
some accounts of seamen, it seems the column of water W W, sometimes
falls suddenly; and if it be, as some say, fifteen or twenty yards
diameter, it must fall with great force, and they may well fear for
their ships. By one account, in the _Transactions_, of a spout that
fell at Colne in Lancashire, one would think the column is sometimes
lifted off from the water, and carried over land, and there let fall
in a body; but this, I suppose, happens rarely.

Stuart describes his spouts as appearing no bigger than a mast, and
sometimes less; but they were seen at a league and a half distance.

I think I formerly read in Dampier, or some other voyager, that a
spout, in its progressive motion, went over a ship becalmed, on the
coast of Guinea, and first threw her down on one side, carrying away
her foremast, then suddenly whipped her up, and threw her down on the
other side, carrying away her mizen-mast, and the whole was over in
an instant. I suppose the first mischief was done by the fore-side of
the whirl, the latter by the hinder-side, their motion being contrary.

I suppose a whirlwind, or spout, may be stationary, when the
concurring winds are equal; but if unequal, the whirl acquires a
progressive motion, in the direction of the strongest pressure.

When the wind that gives the progressive motion becomes stronger
below than above, or above than below, the spout will be bent, and,
the cause ceasing, straiten again.

Your queries, towards the end of your paper, appear judicious,
and worth considering. At present I am not furnished with facts
sufficient to make any pertinent answer to them; and this paper has
already a sufficient quantity of conjecture.

Your manner of accommodating the accounts to your hypothesis of
descending spouts, is, I own, ingenious, and perhaps that hypothesis
may be true. I will consider it farther, but, as yet, I am not
satisfied with it, though hereafter I may be.

Here you have my method of accounting for the principal phenomena,
which I submit to your candid examination.

And as I now seem to have almost written a book, instead of a letter,
you will think it high time I should conclude; which I beg leave to
do, with assuring you, that

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[6] Perkins. _Editor._




DOCTOR M----[7], TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _Description of a Water-Spout at Antigua._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 24, 1756.


  _New-Brunswick, November 11, 1752._

  SIR,

I am favoured with your letter of the 2d instant, and shall, with
pleasure, comply with your request, in describing (as well as my
memory serves me) the water-spout I saw at Antigua; and shall think
this, or any other service I can do, well repaid, if it contributes
to your satisfaction in so curious a disquisition.

I had often seen water-spouts at a distance, and heard many strange
stories of them, but never knew any thing satisfactory of their
nature or cause, until that which I saw at Antigua; which convinced
me that a water-spout is a whirlwind, which becomes visible in all
its dimensions by the water it carries up with it.

There appeared, not far from the mouth of the harbour of St. John's,
two or three water-spouts, one of which took its course up the
harbour. Its progressive motion was slow and unequal, not in a strait
line, but, as it were, by jerks or starts. When just by the wharf, I
stood about one hundred yards from it. There appeared in the water a
circle of about twenty yards diameter, which, to me, had a dreadful,
though pleasing appearance. The water in this circle was violently
agitated, being whisked about, and carried up into the air with great
rapidity and noise, and reflected a lustre, as if the sun shined
bright on that spot, which was more conspicuous, as there appeared
a dark circle around it. When it made the shore, it carried up with
the same violence shingles, staves[8], large pieces of the roofs of
houses, &c. and one small wooden house it lifted entire from the
foundation on which it stood, and carried it to the distance of
fourteen feet, where it settled without breaking or oversetting;
and, what is remarkable, though the whirlwind moved from west to
east, the house moved from east to west. Two or three negroes and a
white woman, were killed by the fall of timber, which it carried up
into the air and dropped again. After passing through the town, I
believe it was soon dissipated; for, except tearing a large limb from
a tree, and part of the cover of a sugar-work near the town, I do
not remember any farther damage done by it. I conclude, wishing you
success in your enquiry,

  And am, &c.

  W. M.

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Dr. Mercer. _Editor._

[8] I suppose shingles, staves, timber, and other lumber, might be
lying in quantities on the wharf, for sale, as brought from the
northern colonies. B. F.




DOCTOR ----[9], OF BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _Shooting Stars._

  Read at the Royal Society, July 8, 1756.


  _Boston, May 14, 1753._

  SIR,

I received your letter of April last, and thank you for it. Several
things in it make me at a loss which side the truth lies on, and
determine me to wait for farther evidence.

As to shooting-stars, as they are called, I know very little, and
hardly know what to say. I imagine them to be passes of electric
fire from place to place in the atmosphere, perhaps occasioned by
accidental pressures of a non-electric circumambient fluid, and
so by propulsion, or allicited by the circumstance of a distant
quantity _minus_ electrified, which it shoots to supply, and becomes
apparent by its contracted passage through a non-electric medium.
Electric fire in our globe is always in action, sometimes ascending,
descending, or passing from region to region. I suppose it avoids too
dry air, and therefore we never see these shoots ascend. It always
has freedom enough to pass down unobserved, but, I imagine, not
always so, to pass to distant climes and meridians less stored with
it.

The shoots are sometimes all one way, which, in the last case, they
should be.

Possibly there may be collections of particles in our atmosphere,
which gradually form, by attraction, either similar ones _per se_,
or dissimilar particles, by the intervention of others. But then,
whether they shoot or explode of themselves, or by the approach of
some suitable foreign collection, accidentally brought near by the
usual commotions and interchanges of our atmosphere, especially when
the higher and lower regions intermix, before change of winds and
weather, I leave.

I believe I have now said enough of what I know nothing about. If it
should serve for your amusement, or any way oblige you, it is all
I aim at, and shall, at your desire, be always ready to say what I
think, as I am sure of your candour.

  I am, &c.

FOOTNOTE:

[9] Dr. Perkins. _Editor._




  _A subsequent Paper from the same._

  _Water-Spouts and Whirlwinds._

  Read at the Royal Society, July 8, 1756.


Spouts have been generally believed ascents of water from below, to
the region of the clouds, and whirlwinds the means of conveyance.
The world has been very well satisfied with these opinions, and
prejudiced with respect to any observations about them. Men of
learning and capacity have had many opportunities in passing
those regions where these phenomena were most frequent, but seem
industriously to have declined any notice of them, unless to escape
danger, as a matter of mere impertinence in a case so clear and
certain as their nature and manner of operation are taken to be.
Hence it has been very difficult to get any tolerable accounts of
them. None but those they fell near can inform us any thing to be
depended on; three or four such instances follow, where the vessels
were so near, that their crews could not avoid knowing something
remarkable with respect to the matters in question.

Capt. John Wakefield, junior, passing the Straits of Gibraltar, had
one fall by the side of his ship; it came down of a sudden, as they
think, and all agree the descent was certain.

Captain Langstaff, on a voyage to the West Indies, had one come
across the stern of his vessel, and passed away from him. The water
came down in such quantity that the present Captain Melling, who was
then a common sailor at helm, says it almost drowned him, running
into his mouth, nose, ears, &c. and adds, that it tasted perfectly
fresh.

One passed by the side of Captain Howland's ship, so near that it
appeared pretty plain that the water descended from first to last.

Mr. Robert Spring was so near one in the Straits of Malacca, that he
could perceive it to be a small very thick rain.

All these assure me, that there was no wind drawing towards them, nor
have I found any others that have observed such a wind.

It seems plain, by these few instances, that whirlwinds do not always
attend spouts; and that the water really descends in some of them.
But the following consideration, in confirmation of this opinion,
may, perhaps, render it probable that all the spouts are descents.

It seems unlikely that there should be two sorts of spouts, one
ascending and the other descending.

It has not yet been proved that any one spout ever ascended. A
specious appearance is all that can be produced in favour of this;
and those who have been most positive about it, were at more than a
league's distance when they observed, as Stuart and others, if I am
not mistaken. However, I believe it impossible to be certain whether
water ascends or descends at half the distance.

It may not be amiss to consider the places where they happen most.
These are such as are liable to calms from departing winds on both
sides, as on the borders of the equinoctial trade, calms on the
coast of Guinea, in the Straits of Malacca, &c. places where the
under region of the atmosphere is drawn off horizontally. I think
they do not come where the calms are without departing winds; and
I take the reason to be, that such places, and places where winds
blow towards one another, are liable to whirlwinds, or other ascents
of the lower region, which I suppose contrary to spouts. But the
former are liable to descents, which I take to be necessary to their
production. Agreeable to this, it seems reasonable to believe, that
any Mediterranean sea should be more subject to spouts than others.
The sea usually so called is so. The Straits of Malacca is. Some
large gulphs may probably be so, in suitable latitudes; so the Red
Sea, &c. and all for this reason, that the heated lands on each side
draw off the under region of the air, and make the upper descend,
whence sudden and wonderful condensations may take place, and make
these descents.

It seems to me, that the manner of their appearance and procedure,
favour the notion of a descent.

More or less of a cloud, as I am informed, always appears over the
place first; then a spattering on the surface of the water below; and
when this is advanced to a considerable degree, the spout emerges
from the cloud, and descends, and that, if the causes are sufficient,
down to the places of spattering, with a roaring in proportion to the
quantity of the discharge; then it abates, or stops, sometimes more
gradually, sometimes more suddenly.

I must observe a few things on these particulars, to shew how I think
they agree with my hypothesis.

The preceding cloud over the place shews condensation, and,
consequently, tendency downwards, which therefore must naturally
prevent any ascent. Besides that, so far as I can learn, a whirlwind
never comes under a cloud, but in a clear sky.

The spattering may be easily conceived to be caused by a stream of
drops, falling with great force on the place, imagining the spout
to begin so, when a sudden and great condensation happens in a
contracted space, as the Ox-Eye on the coast of Guinea.

The spout appearing to descend from the cloud seems to be, by the
stream of nearly contiguous drops bringing the air into consent,
so as to carry down a quantity of the vapour of the cloud; and the
pointed appearance it makes may be from the descending course being
swiftest in the middle, or centre of the spout: this naturally
drawing the outer parts inward, and the centre to a point; and
that will appear foremost that moves swiftest. The phenomenon of
retiring and advancing, I think may be accounted for, by supposing
the progressive motion to exceed or not equal the consumption of
the vapour by condensation. Or more plainly thus: the descending
vapour which forms the apparent spout, if it be slow in its progress
downwards, is condensed as fast as it advances, and so appears at a
stand; when it is condensed faster than it advances, it appears to
retire; and _vice versa_.

Its duration, and manner of ending, are as the causes, and may vary
by several accidents.

The cloud itself may be so circumstanced as to stop it; as when,
extending wide, it weighs down at a distance round about, while a
small circle at the spout being exonerated by the discharge ascends
and shuts up the passage. A new determination of wind may, perhaps,
stop it too. Places liable to these appearances are very liable to
frequent and sudden alterations of it.

Such accidents as a clap of thunder, firing cannon, &c. may stop
them, and the reason may be, that any shock of this kind may occasion
the particles that are near cohering, immediately to do so; and then
the whole, thus condensed, falls at once (which is what I suppose
is vulgarly called the breaking of the spout) and in the interval,
between this period and that of the next set of particles being ready
to unite, the spout shuts up. So that if this reasoning is just,
these phenomena agree with my hypothesis.

The usual temper of the air, at the time of their appearance, if I
have a right information, is for me to; it being then pretty cool for
the season and climate; and this is worth remark, because cool air
is weighty, and will not ascend; besides, when the air grows cool,
it shews that the upper region descends, and conveys this temper
down; and when the tempers are equal, no whirlwind can take place.
But spouts have been known, when the lower region has been really
cold. Gordon's spout in the Downs is an instance of this--(_Vide_
_Philosophical Transactions_)--where the upper region was probably
not at all cooler, if so cold as the lower: it was a cold day in the
month of March, hail followed, but not snow, and it is observable,
that not so much as hail follows or accompanies them in moderate
seasons or climes, when and where they are most frequent. However,
it is not improbable, that just about the place of descent may be
cooler than the neighbouring parts, and so favour the wonderful
celerity of condensation. But, after all, should we allow the under
region to be ever so much the hottest, and a whirlwind to take place
in it: suppose then the sea-water to ascend, it would certainly cool
the spout, and then, query, whether it would not very much, if not
wholly, obstruct its progress.

It commonly rains when spouts disappear, if it did not before, which
it frequently does not, by the best accounts I have had; but the
cloud encreases much faster after they disappear, and it soon rains.
The first shews the spout to be a contracted rain, instead of the
diffused one that follows; and the latter that the cloud was not
formed by ascending water, for then it would have ceased growing when
the spout vanished.

However, it seems that spouts have sometimes appeared after it began
to rain; but this is one way a proof of my hypothesis, viz. as
whirlwinds do not come under a cloud.

I forgot to mention, that the increase of cloud, while the spout
subsists, is no argument of an ascent of water, by the spout. Since
thunder-clouds sometimes encrease greatly while it rains very hard.

Divers effects of spouts seem not so well accounted for any other way
as by descent.

The bush round the feet of them seems to be a great spray of water
made by the violence of descent, like that in great falls of water
from high precipices.

The great roar, like some vast inland falls, is so different from the
roar of whirlwinds, by all acounts, as to be no ways compatible.

The throwing things from it with great force, instead of carrying
them up into the air, is another difference.

There seems some probability that the sailors traditionary belief,
that spouts may break in their decks, and so destroy vessels, might
originate from some facts of that sort in former times. This danger
is apparent on my hypothesis, but it seems not so on the other:
and my reason for it is, that the whole column of a spout from the
sea to the clouds, cannot, in a natural way, even upon the largest
supposition, support more than about three feet water, and from truly
supposeable causes, not above one foot, as may appear more plainly
by and by. Supposing now the largest of these quantities to rise, it
must be disseminated into drops, from the surface of the sea to the
region of the clouds, or higher; for this reason it is quite unlikely
to be collected into masses, or a body, upon its falling; but would
descend in progression according to the several degrees of altitude
the different portions had arrived at when it received this new
determination.

Now that there cannot more rise upon the common hypothesis than
I have mentioned, may appear probable, if we attend to the only
efficient cause in supposed ascending spouts, viz. whirlwinds.

We know that the rarefaction of the lower, and the condensation of
the upper region of air, are the only natural causes of whirlwinds.
Let us then suppose the former as hot as their greatest summer heat
in England, and the latter as cold as the extent of their winter.
These extremes have been found there to alter the weight of the air
one-tenth, which is equal to a little more than three feet water.
Were this case possible, and a whirlwind take place in it, it might
act with a force equal to the mentioned difference. But as this is
the whole strength, so much water could not rise; therefore to allow
it due motion upwards, we must abate, at least, one-fourth part,
perhaps more, to give it such a swift ascension as some think usual.
But here several difficulties occur, at least they are so to me. As,
whether this quantity would render the spout opaque? since it is
plain that in drops it could not do so. How, or by what means it may
be reduced small enough? or, if the water be not reduced into vapour,
what will suspend it in the region of the clouds when exonerated
there? And, if vapourized while ascending, how can it be dangerous by
what they call the breaking? For it is difficult to conceive how a
condensative power should instantaneously take place of a rarefying
and disseminating one.

The sudden fall of the spout, or rather, the sudden ceasing of it, I
accounted for, in my way, before. But it seems necessary to mention
something I then forgot. Should it be said to do so (_i. e._) to
fall, because all the lower rarefied air is ascended, whence the
whirlwind must cease, and its burden drop; I cannot agree to this,
unless the air be observed on a sudden to have grown much colder,
which I cannot learn has been the case. Or should it be supposed that
the spout was, on a sudden, obstructed at the top, and this the cause
of the fall, however plausible this might appear, yet no more water
would fall than what was at the same time contained in the column,
which is often, by many and satisfactory accounts to me, again far
from being the case.

We are, I think, sufficiently assured, that not only tons, but scores
or hundreds of tons descend in one spout. Scores of tons more than
can be contained in the trunk of it, should we suppose water to
ascend.

But, after all, it does not appear that the above-mentioned different
degrees of heat and cold concur in any region where spouts usually
happen, nor, indeed, in any other.




  _Observations on the Meteorological Paper; by a Gentleman in
  Connecticut._

  Read at the Royal Society, Nov. 4, 1756.


"Air and water mutually attract each other, (saith Mr. F.) hence
water will dissolve in air, as salt in water." I think that he hath
demonstrated, that the supporting of salt in water is not owing to
its superficies being increased, because "the specific gravity of
salt is not altered by dividing of it, any more than that of lead,
sixteen bullets of which, of an ounce each, weigh as much in water
as one of a pound." But yet, when this came to be applied to the
supporting of water in air, I found an objection rising in my mind.

In the first place, I have always been loth to seek for any new
hypothesis, or particular law of nature, to account for any thing
that may be accounted for from the known, general, and universal law
of nature; it being an argument of the infinite wisdom of the author
of the world, to effect so many things by one general law. Now I
had thought that the rising and support of water in air, might be
accounted for from the general law of gravitation, by only supposing
the spaces occupied by the same quantity of water increased.

And, with respect to the lead, I queried thus in my own mind; whether
if the superficies of a bullet of lead should be increased four or
five fold by an internal vacuity, it would weigh the same in water
as before. I mean, if a pound of lead should be formed into a hollow
globe, empty within, whose superficies should be four or five times
as big as that of the same lead when a solid lump, it would weigh as
much in water as before. I supposed it would not. If this concavity
was filled with water, perhaps it might; if with air, it would weigh
at least as much less, as this difference between the weight of that
included air, and that of water.

Now although this would do nothing to account for the dissolution
of salt in water, the smallest lumps of salt being no more hollow
spheres, or any thing of the like nature than the greatest; yet,
perhaps, it might account for water's rising and being supported in
air. For you know that such hollow globules, or bubbles, abound upon
the surface of the water, which even by the breath of our mouths, we
can cause to quit the water, and rise in the air.

These bubbles I used to suppose to be coats of water, containing
within them air rarefied and expanded with fire, and that, therefore,
the more friction and dashing there is upon the surface of the
waters, and the more heat and fire, the more they abound.

And I used to think, that although water be specifically heavier than
air, yet such a bubble, filled only with fire and very rarefied air,
may be lighter than a quantity of common air, of the same cubical
dimensions, and, therefore, ascend; for the rarefied air inclosed,
may more fall short of the same bulk of common air, in weight, than
the watery coat exceeds a like bulk of common air in gravity.

This was the objection in my mind, though, I must confess, I know
not how to account for the watery coat's encompassing the air, as
above-mentioned, without allowing the attraction between air and
water, which the gentleman supposes; so that I do not know but
that this objection, examined by that sagacious genius, will be an
additional confirmation of the hypothesis.

The gentleman observes, "that a certain quantity of moisture should
be every moment discharged and taken away from the lungs; and
hence accounts for the suffocating nature of snuffs of candles, as
impregnating the air with grease, between which and water there is
a natural repellency; and of air that hath been frequently breathed
in, which is overloaded with water, and, for that reason, can take
no more air. Perhaps the same observation will account for the
suffocating nature of damps in wells."

But then if the air can support and take off but such a proportion of
water, and it is necessary that water be so taken off from the lungs,
I queried with myself how it is we can breathe in an air full of
vapours, so full as that they continually precipitated. Do not we see
the air overloaded, and casting forth water plentifully when there is
no suffocation?

The gentleman again observes, "That the air under the equator, and
between the tropics, being constantly heated and rarefied by the
sun, rises; its place is supplied by air from northern and southern
latitudes, which, coming from parts where the air and earth had
less motion, and not suddenly acquiring the quicker motion of the
equatorial earth, appears an east wind blowing westward; the earth
moving from west to east, and slipping under the air."

In reading this, two objections occurred to my mind:

First, that it is said, the trade-wind doth not blow in the forenoon,
but only in the afternoon.

Secondly, that either the motion of the northern and southern air
towards the equator is so slow, as to acquire almost the same motion
as the equatorial air when it arrives there, so that there will be no
sensible difference; or else the motion of the northern and southern
air towards the equator, is quicker, and must be sensible; and then
the trade-wind must appear either as a south-east or north-east wind:
south of the equator, a south-east wind; north of the equator, a
north-east. For the apparent wind must be compounded of this motion
from north to south, or _vice versa_; and of the difference between
its motion from west to east, and that of the equatorial air.




  _Observations in Answer to the foregoing, by B. Franklin._

  Read at the Royal Society, Nov. 4, 1756.


1st. The supposing a mutual attraction between the particles of water
and air is not introducing a new law of nature; such attractions
taking place in many other known instances.

2dly. Water is specifically 850 times heavier than air. To render a
bubble of water, then, specifically lighter than air, it seems to me
that it must take up more than 850 times the space it did before it
formed the bubble; and within the bubble should be either a vacuum
or air rarefied more than 850 times. If a vacuum, would not the
bubble be immediately crushed by the weight of the atmosphere? And no
heat, we know of, will rarefy air any thing near so much; much less
the common heat of the sun, or that of friction by the dashing on
the surface of the water. Besides, water agitated ever so violently
produces no heat, as has been found by accurate experiments.

3dly. A hollow sphere of lead has a firmness and consistency in it,
that a hollow sphere or bubble of fluid unfrozen water cannot be
supposed to have. The lead may support the pressure of the water it
is immersed in, but the bubble could not support the pressure of the
air, if empty within.

4thly. Was ever a visible bubble seen to rise in air? I have made
many, when a boy, with soap-suds and a tobacco-pipe; but they all
descended when loose from the pipe, though slowly, the air impeding
their motion. They may, indeed, be forced up by a wind from below,
but do not rise of themselves, though filled with warm breath.

5thly. The objection relating to our breathing moist air seems
weighty, and must be farther considered. The air that has been
breathed has, doubtless, acquired an addition of the perspirable
matter which nature intends to free the body from, and which would be
pernicious if retained and returned into the blood; such air then may
become unfit for respiration, as well for that reason, as on account
of its moisture. Yet I should be glad to learn, by some accurate
experiment, whether a draft of air, two or three times inspired,
and expired, perhaps in a bladder, has, or has not, acquired more
moisture than our common air in the dampest weather. As to the
precipitation of water in the air we breathe, perhaps it is not
always a mark of that air's being overloaded. In the region of the
clouds, indeed, the air must be overloaded if it lets fall its water
in drops, which we call rain; but those drops may fall through a
drier air near the earth; and accordingly we find that the hygroscope
sometimes shews a less degree of moisture, during a shower, than
at other times when it does not rain at all. The dewy dampness,
that settles on the insides of our walls and wainscots, seems more
certainly to denote an air overloaded with moisture; and yet this is
no sure sign: for, after a long continued cold season, if the air
grows suddenly warm, the walls, &c. continuing longer their coldness,
will, for some time, condense the moisture of such air, till they
grow equally warm, and then they condense no more, though the air is
not become drier. And, on the other hand, after a warm season, if the
air grows cold, though moister than before, the dew is not so apt to
gather on the walls. A tankard of cold water will, in a hot and dry
summer's day, collect a dew on its outside; a tankard of hot water
will collect none in the moistest weather.

6thly. It is, I think, a mistake that the trade-winds blow only in
the afternoon. They blow all day and all night, and all the year
round, except in some particular places. The southerly sea-breezes
on your coasts, indeed, blow chiefly in the afternoon. In the very
long run from the west side of America to Guam, among the Philippine
Islands, ships seldom have occasion to hand their sails, so equal
and steady is the gale, and yet they make it in about 60 days, which
could not be if the wind blew only in the afternoon.

7thly. That really is, which the gentleman justly supposes ought to
be on my hypothesis. In sailing southward, when you first enter the
trade-wind, you find it north-east, or thereabouts, and it gradually
grows more east as you approach the line. The same observation is
made of its changing from south-east to east gradually, as you come
from the southern latitudes to the equator.




  _Observations on the Meteorological Paper; sent by a Gentleman[10]
  in New-York to B. Franklin._

  Read at the Royal Society, Nov. 4, 1756.


That power by which the air expands itself, you attribute to a mutual
repelling power in the particles which compose the air, by which
they are separated from each other with some degree of force: now
this force, on this supposition, must not only act when the particles
are in mutual contact, but likewise when they are at some distance
from each other. How can two bodies, whether they be great or small,
act at any distance, whether that distance be small or great, without
something intermediate on which they act? For if any body act on
another, at any distance from it, however small that distance be,
without some medium to continue the action, it must act where it is
not, which to me seems absurd.

It seems to me, for the same reason, equally absurd to give a mutual
attractive power between any other particles supposed to be at a
distance from each other, without any thing intermediate to continue
their mutual action. I can neither attract nor repel any thing at a
distance, without something between my hand and that thing, like a
string, or a stick; nor can I conceive any mutual action without some
middle thing, when the action is continued to some distance.

The encrease of the surface of any body lessens its weight, both in
air, and water, or any other fluid, as appears by the slow descent of
leaf-gold in the air.

The observation of the different density of the upper and lower
air, from heat and cold, is good, and I do not remember it is taken
notice of by others; the consequences also are well drawn; but as to
winds, they seem principally to arise from some other cause. Winds
generally blow from some large tracts of land, and from mountains.
Where I live, on the north side of the mountains, we frequently have
a strong southerly wind, when they have as strong a northerly wind,
or calm, on the other side of these mountains. The continual passing
of vessels on Hudson's River, through these mountains, give frequent
opportunities of observing this.

In the spring of the year the sea-wind (by a piercing cold) is always
more uneasy to me, accustomed to winds which pass over a tract of
land, than the north-west wind.

You have received the common notion of water-spouts, which, from my
own ocular observation, I am persuaded is a false conception. In a
voyage to the West-Indies, I had an opportunity of observing many
water-spouts. One of them passed nearer than thirty or forty yards to
the vessel I was in, which I viewed with a good deal of attention;
and though it be now forty years since I saw it, it made so strong
an impression on me, that I very distinctly remember it. These
water-spouts were in the calm latitudes, that is, between the trade
and the variable winds, in the month of July. That spout which passed
so near us was an inverted cone, with the _tip_ or _apex_ towards
the sea, and reached within about eight feet of the surface of the
sea, its basis in a large black cloud. We were entirely becalmed. It
passed slowly by the vessel. I could plainly observe, that a violent
stream of wind issued from the spout, which made a hollow of about
six feet diameter in the surface of the water, and raised the water
in a circular uneven ring round the hollow, in the same manner that a
strong blast from a pair of bellows would do when the pipe is placed
perpendicular to the surface of the water; and we plainly heard the
same hissing noise which such a blast of wind must produce on the
water. I am very sure there was nothing like the sucking of water
from the sea into the spout, unless the spray, which was raised in a
ring to a small height, could be mistaken for a raising of water. I
could plainly distinguish a distance of about eight feet between the
sea and the tip of the cone, in which nothing interrupted the sight,
which must have been, had the water been raised from the sea.

In the same voyage I saw several other spouts at a greater distance,
but none of them whose tip of the cone came so near the surface of
the water. In some of them the axis of the cone was considerably
inclined from the perpendicular, but in none of them was there the
least appearance of sucking up of water. Others of them were bent
or arched. I believe that a stream of wind issued from all of them,
and it is from this stream of wind that vessels are often overset,
or founder at sea suddenly. I have heard of vessels being overset
when it was perfectly calm, the instant before the stream of wind
struck them, and immediately after they were overset; which could not
otherwise be but by such a stream of wind from a cloud.

That wind is generated in clouds will not admit of a dispute. Now if
such wind be generated within the body of the cloud, and issue in
one particular place, while it finds no passage in the other parts
of the cloud, I think it may not be difficult to account for all the
appearances in water-spouts; and from hence the reason of breaking
those spouts, by firing a cannon-ball through them, as thereby a
horizontal vent is given to the wind. When the wind is spent, which
dilated the cloud, or the fermentation ceases, which generates the
air and wind, the clouds may descend in a prodigious fall of water
or rain. A remarkable intestine motion, like a violent fermentation,
is very observable in the cloud from whence the spout issues. No
salt-water, I am persuaded, was ever observed to fall from the
clouds, which must certainly have happened if sea-water had been
raised by a spout.

FOOTNOTE:

[10] Mr. Cadwallader Colden. _Editor._




  _Answer to the foregoing Observations, by B. Franklin._

  Read at the Royal Society, NOV. 4, 1756.


I agree with you, that it seems absurd to suppose that a body can act
where it is not. I have no idea of bodies at a distance attracting or
repelling one another without the assistance of some medium, though
I know not what that medium is, or how it operates. When I speak of
attraction or repulsion, I make use of those words for want of others
more proper, and intend only to express _effects_ which I see, and
not _causes_ of which I am ignorant. When I press a blown bladder
between my knees, and find I cannot bring its sides together, but my
knees feel a springy matter, pushing them back to a greater distance,
or repelling them, I conclude that the air it contains is the cause.
And when I operate on the air, and find I cannot by pressure force
its particles into contact, but they still spring back against the
pressure, I conceive there must be some medium between its particles
that prevents their closing, though I cannot tell what it is. And
if I were acquainted with that medium, and found its particles to
approach and recede from each other, according to the pressure they
suffered, I should imagine there must be some finer medium between
them, by which these operations were performed.

I allow that increase of the surface of a body may occasion it
to descend slower in air, water, or any other fluid; but do not
conceive, therefore, that it lessens its weight. Where the increased
surface is so disposed as that in its falling a greater quantity
of the fluid it sinks in must be moved out of its way, a greater
time is required for such removal. Four square feet of sheet-lead
sinking in water _broadways_, cannot descend near so fast as it
would _edgeways_, yet its weight in the hydrostatic balance would,
I imagine, be the same, whether suspended by the middle or by the
corner.

I make no doubt but that ridges of high mountains do often interrupt,
stop, reverberate, or turn the winds that blow against them,
according to the different degrees of strength of the winds, and
angles of incidence. I suppose, too, that the cold upper parts of
mountains may condense the warmer air that comes near them, and so by
making it specifically heavier, cause it to descend on one or both
sides of the ridge into the warmer valleys, which will seem a wind
blowing from the mountain.

Damp winds, though not colder by the thermometer, give a more
uneasy sensation of cold than dry ones; because (to speak like an
electrician) they _conduct_ better; that is, are better fitted to
convey away the heat from our bodies. The body cannot feel _without_
itself; our sensation of cold is not in the air _without_ the body,
but in those parts of the body which have been deprived of their
heat by the air. My desk, and its lock, are, I suppose, of the same
temperament when they have been long exposed to the same air; but
now if I lay my hand on the wood, it does not seem so cold to me as
the lock; because (as I imagine) wood is not so good a conductor,
to receive and convey away the heat from my skin, and the adjacent
flesh, as metal is. Take a piece of wood, of the size and shape of
a dollar, between the thumb and finger of one hand, and a dollar,
in like manner, with the other hand; place the edges of both, at
the same time, in the flame of a candle; and though the edge of the
wooden piece takes flame, and the metal piece does not, yet you will
be obliged to drop the latter before the former, it conducting the
heat more suddenly to your fingers. Thus we can, without pain, handle
glass and china cups filled with hot liquors, as tea, &c. but not
silver ones. A silver tea-pot must have a wooden handle. Perhaps it
is for the same reason that woollen garments keep the body warmer
than linen ones equally thick; woollen keeping the natural heat in,
or, in other words, not conducting it out to air.

In regard to water-spouts, having, in a long letter to a gentleman
of the same sentiment with you as to their direction, said all
that I have to say in support of my opinion; I need not repeat the
arguments therein contained, as I intend to send you a copy of it by
some other opportunity, for your perusal. I imagine you will find all
the appearances you saw, accounted for by my hypothesis. I thank you
for communicating the account of them. At present I would only say,
that the opinion of winds being generated in clouds by fermentation,
is new to me, and I am unacquainted with the facts on which it is
founded. I likewise find it difficult to conceive of winds confined
in the body of clouds, which I imagine have little more solidity than
the fogs on the earth's surface. The objection from the freshness
of rain-water is a strong one, but I think I have answered it in the
letter above-mentioned, to which I must beg leave, at present, to
refer you.


[In Mr. Collinson's edition, there followed here, several extracts,
on water-spouts, from Dampier's Voyages, which, as Dampier's book is
by no means scarce, and is consequently accessible to the reader, we
have omitted, and shall content ourselves with giving the references.
The extracts are three. The first is from Vol. I. p. 451. The second
and third from Vol. III. p. 182 and 223.]




  _Gentleman of New York in Reply._

  Read at the Royal Society, December 6, 1756.


  _April 2, 1754._

Any knowledge I have of the winds, and other changes which happen in
the atmosphere, is so very defective, that it does not deserve the
name; neither have I received any satisfaction from the attempts of
others on this subject. It deserves then your thoughts, as a subject
in which you may distinguish yourself, and be useful.

Your notion of some things conducting heat or cold better than others
pleases me, and I wish you may pursue the scent. If I remember right,
Dr. Boerhaave, in his chymistry, thinks that heat is propagated
by the vibration of a subtle elastic fluid, dispersed through the
atmosphere and through all bodies. Sir Isaac Newton says, there
are many phenomena to prove the existence of such a fluid; and
this opinion has my assent to it. I shall only observe that it is
essentially different from that which I call ether; for ether,
properly speaking, is neither a fluid nor elastic; its power consists
in re-acting any action communicated to it, with the same force it
receives the action.

I long to see your explication of water-spouts, but I must tell you
before-hand, that it will not be easy for you to convince me that the
principal phenomena were not occasioned by a stream of wind issuing
with great force, my eyes and ears both concurring to give me this
sentiment, I could have no more evidence than to feel the effects,
which I had no inclination to do.

It surprises me a little, that wind, generated by fermentation, is
new to you, since it may be every day observed in fermenting liquor.
You know with what force fermenting liquors will burst the vessels
which contain them, if the generated wind have not vent; and with
what force it issues on giving it a small vent, or by drawing the
cork of a bottle. Dr. Boerhaave says, that the steam issuing from
fermenting liquors received through a very small vent-hole, into the
nose, will kill as suddenly and certainly as lightning. That air is
generated by fermentation, I think you will find fully proved in Dr.
Hales's Analysis of the Air, in his Vegetable Statics. If you have
not read the book, you have a new pleasure to come.

The solution you give to the objection I made from the contrary winds
blowing from the opposite sides of the mountains, from their being
eddies, does not please me, because the extent of these winds is by
far too large to be occasioned by any eddy. It is forty miles from
New York to our mountains, through which Hudson's River passes. The
river runs twelve miles in the mountains, and from the north side of
the mountains it is about ninety miles to Albany. I have myself been
on board a vessel more than once, when we have had a strong northerly
wind against us, all the way from New York, for two or three days.
We have met vessels from Albany, who assured us, that, on the other
side of the mountains, they had, at the same time, a strong continued
southerly wind against them; and this frequently happens.

I have frequently seen, both on the river, in places where there
could be no eddy-weeds, and on the open sea, two vessels sailing with
contrary winds, within half a mile of each other; but this happens
only in easy winds, and generally calm in other places near these
winds.

You have, no doubt, frequently observed a single cloud pass, from
which a violent gust of wind issues, but of no great extent. I have
observed such a gust make a lane through the woods, of some miles
in length, by laying the trees flat to the ground, and not above
eight or ten chains in breadth. Though the violence of the wind be
in the same direction in which the cloud moves and precedes it, yet
wind issues from all sides of it; so that supposing the cloud moves
south-easterly, those on the north-east side of it feel a south-west
wind, and others on the south-west side, a north-east. And where the
cloud passes over, we frequently have a south-east wind from the
hinder part of it, but none violent, except the wind in the direction
in which the cloud moves. To shew what it is which prevents the wind
from issuing out equally on all sides, is not an easy problem to me,
and I shall not attempt to solve it; but when you shall show what
it is which restrains the electrical fluid from spreading itself
into the air surrounding it, when it rushes with great violence
through the air along, or in the conductor, for a great extent in
length, then I may hope to explain the other problem, and remove the
difficulty we have in conceiving it.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. LONDON.

  _Account of a Whirlwind at Maryland._


  _Philadelphia, Aug. 25, 1755._

  DEAR SIR,

As you have my former papers on whirlwinds, &c. I now send you an
account of one which I had lately an opportunity of seeing and
examining myself.

Being in Maryland, riding with Colonel Tasker, and some other
gentlemen, to his country seat, where I and my son were entertained
by that amiable and worthy man with great hospitality and kindness,
we saw, in the vale below us, a small whirlwind beginning in the
road, and shewing itself by the dust it raised and contained. It
appeared in the form of a sugar-loaf, spinning on its point, moving
up the hill towards us, and enlarging as it came forward. When it
passed by us, its smaller part near the ground appeared no bigger
than a common barrel, but widening upwards, it seemed, at forty or
fifty feet high, to be twenty or thirty feet in diameter. The rest of
the company stood looking after it, but my curiosity being stronger,
I followed it, riding close by its side, and observed its licking
up, in its progress, all the dust that was under its smaller part.
As it is a common opinion that a shot, fired through a water-spout,
will break it, I tried to break this little whirlwind, by striking my
whip frequently through it, but without any effect. Soon after, it
quitted the road and took into the woods, growing every moment larger
and stronger, raising, instead of dust, the old dry leaves with which
the ground was thick covered, and making a great noise with them
and the branches of the trees, bending some tall trees round in a
circle swiftly and very surprisingly, though the progressive motion
of the whirl was not so swift but that a man on foot might have kept
pace with it, but the circular motion was amazingly rapid. By the
leaves it was now filled with, I could plainly perceive that the
current of air they were driven by moved upwards in a spiral line;
and when I saw the passing whirl continue entire, after leaving the
trunks and bodies of large trees which it had enveloped, I no longer
wondered that my whip had no effect on it in its smaller state. I
accompanied it about three quarters of a mile, till some limbs of
dead trees, broken off by the whirl, flying about, and falling near
me, made me more apprehensive of danger; and then I stopped, looking
at the top of it as it went on, which was visible, by means of the
leaves contained in it, for a very great height above the trees.
Many of the leaves, as they got loose from the upper and widest
part, were scattered in the wind; but so great was their height in
the air, that they appeared no bigger than flies. My son, who was,
by this time, come up with me, followed the whirlwind till it left
the woods, and crossed an old tobacco-field, where, finding neither
dust nor leaves to take up, it gradually became invisible below as
it went away over that field. The course of the general wind then
blowing was along with us as we travelled, and the progressive motion
of the whirlwind was in a direction nearly opposite, though it did
not keep a strait line, nor was its progressive motion uniform, it
making little sallies on either hand as it went, proceeding sometimes
faster, and sometimes slower, and seeming sometimes for a few seconds
almost stationary, then starting forwards pretty fast again. When
we rejoined the company, they were admiring the vast height of the
leaves now brought by the common wind, over our heads. These leaves
accompanied us as we travelled, some falling now and then round about
us, and some not reaching the ground till we had gone near three
miles from the place where we first saw the whirlwind begin. Upon my
asking Colonel Tasker if such whirlwinds were common in Maryland,
he answered pleasantly, No, not at all common, but we got this on
purpose to treat Mr. Franklin. And a very high treat it was to,

  Dear Sir,

  Your affectionate friend and humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MR. ALEXANDER SMALL, LONDON.

  _On the North-East Storms in North America._


  _May 12, 1760._

  DEAR SIR,

Agreeable to your request, I send you my reasons for thinking that
our north-east storms in North America begin first, in point of
time, in the south-west parts: that is to say, the air in Georgia,
the farthest of our colonies to the south-west, begins to move
south-westerly before the air of Carolina, which is the next colony
north-eastward; the air of Carolina has the same motion before the
air of Virginia, which lies still more north-eastward; and so on
north-easterly through Pensylvania, New-York, New-England, &c. quite
to Newfoundland.

These north-east storms are generally very violent, continue
sometimes two or three days, and often do considerable damage in the
harbours along the coast. They are attended with thick clouds and
rain.

What first gave me this idea, was the following circumstance. About
twenty years ago, a few more or less, I cannot from my memory be
certain, we were to have an eclipse of the moon at Philadelphia, on
a Friday evening, about nine o'clock. I intended to observe it, but
was prevented by a north-east storm, which came on about seven, with
thick clouds as usual, that quite obscured the whole hemisphere. Yet
when the post brought us the Boston news-paper, giving an account of
the effects of the same storm in those parts, I found the beginning
of the eclipse had been well observed there, though Boston lies N. E.
of Philadelphia about four hundred miles. This puzzled me, because
the storm began with us so soon as to prevent any observation, and
being a north-east storm, I imagined it must have begun rather sooner
in places farther to the north-east-ward than it did at Philadelphia.
I therefore mentioned it in a letter to my brother, who lived at
Boston; and he informed me the storm did not begin with them till
near eleven o'clock, so that they had a good observation of the
eclipse: and upon comparing all the other accounts I received from
the several colonies, of the time of beginning of the same storm, and
since that of other storms of the same kind, I found the beginning to
be always later the farther north-eastward. I have not my notes with
me here in England, and cannot, from memory, say the proportion of
time to distance, but I think it is about an hour to every hundred
miles.

From thence I formed an idea of the cause of these storms, which I
would explain by a familiar instance or two.--Suppose a long canal
of water stopped at the end by a gate. The water is quite at rest
till the gate is open, then it begins to move out through the gate;
the water next the gate is first in motion, and moves towards the
gate; the water next to that first water moves next, and so on
successively, till the water at the head of the canal is in motion,
which is last of all. In this case all the water moves indeed towards
the gate, but the successive times of beginning motion are the
contrary way, viz. from the gate backwards to the head of the canal.
Again, suppose the air in a chamber at rest, no current through the
room till you make a fire in the chimney. Immediately the air in the
chimney being rarefied by the fire rises; the air next the chimney
flows in to supply its place, moving towards the chimney; and, in
consequence, the rest of the air successively, quite back to the
door. Thus to produce our north-east storms, I suppose some great
heat and rarefaction of the air in or about the Gulph of Mexico; the
air thence rising has its place supplied by the next more northern,
cooler, and therefore denser and heavier, air; that, being in motion,
is followed by the next more northern air, &c. &c. in a successive
current, to which current our coast and inland ridge of mountains
give the direction of north-east, as they lie N. E. and S. W.

This I offer only as an hypothesis to account for this particular
fact; and perhaps, on farther examination, a better and truer may be
found. I do not suppose all storms generated in the same manner. Our
north-west thunder-gusts in America, I know are not; but of them I
have written my opinion fully in a paper which you have seen.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Meteorological Imaginations and Conjectures_[11].


There seems to be a region higher in the air over all countries,
where it is always winter, where frost exists continually, since in
the midst of summer, on the surface of the earth, ice falls often
from above in the form of hail.

Hailstones, of the great weight we sometimes find them, did not
probably acquire their magnitude before they began to descend. The
air, being eight hundred times rarer than water, is unable to support
it but in the shape of vapour, a state in which its particles are
separated. As soon as they are condensed by the cold of the upper
region, so as to form a drop, that drop begins to fall. If it freezes
into a grain of ice, that ice descends. In descending, both the
drop of water and the grain of ice are augmented by particles of
the vapour they pass through in falling, and which they condense by
coldness, and attach to themselves.

It is possible that, in summer, much of what is rain, when it arrives
at the surface of the earth, might have been snow when it began its
descent; but being thawed, in passing through the warm air near the
surface, it is changed from snow into rain.

How immensely cold must be the original particle of hail, which
forms the centre of the future hailstone, since it is capable of
communicating sufficient cold, if I may so speak, to freeze all the
mass of vapour condensed round it, and form a lump of perhaps six or
eight ounces in weight!

When, in summer time, the sun is high, and continues long every day
above the horizon, his rays strike the earth more directly, and with
longer continuance, than in the winter; hence the surface is more
heated, and to a greater depth, by the effect of those rays.

When rain falls on the heated earth, and soaks down into it, it
carries down with it a great part of the heat, which by that means
descends still deeper.

The mass of earth, to the depth perhaps of thirty feet, being thus
heated to a certain degree, continues to retain its heat for some
time. Thus the first snows that fall in the beginning of winter,
seldom lie long on the surface, but are soon melted, and soon
absorbed. After which, the winds, that blow over the country on which
the snows had fallen, are not rendered so cold as they would have
been, by those snows, if they had remained, and thus the approach of
the severity of winter is retarded; and the extreme degree of its
cold is not always at the time we might expect it, viz. when the sun
is at its greatest distance, and the day shortest, but some time
after that period, according to the English proverb, which says, "as
the day lengthens, the cold strengthens;" the causes of refrigeration
continuing to operate, while the sun returns too slowly, and his
force continues too weak to counteract them.

During several of the summer months of the year 1783, when the
effects of the sun's rays to heat the earth in these northern regions
should have been the greatest, there existed a constant fog over all
Europe, and great part of North America. This fog was of a permanent
nature: it was dry, and the rays of the sun seemed to have little
effect towards dissipating it, as they easily do a moist fog, arising
from water. They were indeed rendered so faint in passing through
it, that when collected in the focus of a burning glass, they would
scarce kindle brown paper. Of course, their summer effect in heating
the earth was exceedingly diminished.

Hence the surface was early frozen.

Hence the first snows remained on it unmelted, and received continual
additions.

Hence perhaps the winter of 1783-4, was more severe than any that had
happened for many years.

The cause of this universal fog is not yet ascertained. Whether
it was adventitious to this earth, and merely a smoke proceeding
from the consumption by fire of some of those great burning balls
or globes which we happen to meet with in our rapid course round
the sun, and which are sometimes seen to kindle and be destroyed
in passing our atmosphere, and whose smoke might be attracted and
retained by our earth; or whether it was the vast quantity of smoke,
long continuing to issue during the summer from Hecla, in Iceland,
and that other volcano which arose out of the sea near that island,
which smoke might be spread by various winds, over the northern part
of the world, is yet uncertain.

It seems however worth the enquiry, whether other hard winters,
recorded in history, were preceded by similar permanent and widely
extended summer fogs. Because, if found to be so, men might from such
fogs conjecture the probability of a succeeding hard winter, and of
the damage to be expected by the breaking up of frozen rivers in the
spring; and take such measures as are possible and practicable, to
secure themselves and effects from the mischiefs that attended the
last.

  _Passy, May 1784._

FOOTNOTE:

[11] This paper is taken from the Memoirs of the Literary and
Philosophical Society of Manchester, Vol. II. page 373. It was
communicated by Dr. Percival, and read December 22, 1784. _Editor._




  _Suppositions and Conjectures towards forming an Hypothesis, for
  the Explanation of the Aurora Borealis_[12].


1. Air heated by any means, becomes rarefied, and specifically
lighter than other air in the same situation not heated.

2. Air being made thus lighter rises, and the neighbouring cooler
heavier air takes its place.

3. If in the middle of a room you heat the air by a stove, or pot
of burning coals near the floor, the heated air will rise to the
ceiling, spread over the cooler air till it comes to the cold walls;
there, being condensed and made heavier, it descends to supply the
place of that cool air, which had moved towards the stove or fire, in
order to supply the place of the heated air, which had ascended from
the space around the stove or fire.

4. Thus there will be a continual circulation of air in the room;
which may be rendered visible by making a little smoke, for that
smoke will rise and circulate with the air.

5. A similar operation is performed by nature on the air of this
globe. Our atmosphere is of a certain height, perhaps at a medium [___]
miles: above that height it is so rare as to be almost a vacuum. The
air heated between the tropics is continually rising; its place is
supplied by northerly and southerly winds, which come from the cooler
regions.

6. The light heated air, floating above the cooler and denser, must
spread northward and southward; and descend near the two poles, to
supply the place of the cool air, which had moved towards the equator.

7. Thus a circulation of air is kept up in our atmosphere, as in the
room above-mentioned.

8. That heavier and lighter air may move in currents of different and
even opposite direction, appears sometimes by the clouds that happen
to be in those currents, as plainly as by the smoke in the experiment
above-mentioned. Also in opening a _door_ between two chambers, one
of which has been warmed, by holding a candle near the top, near the
bottom, and near the middle, you will find a strong current of warm
air passing out of the warmed room above, and another of cool air
entering below; while in the middle there is little or no motion.

9. The great quantity of vapour rising between the tropics forms
clouds, which contain much electricity.

Some of them fall in rain, before they come to the polar regions.

10. If the rain be received in an isolated vessel, the vessel will be
electrified; for every drop brings down some electricity with it.

11. The same is done by snow or hail.

12. The electricity so descending, in temperate climates, is received
and imbibed by the earth.

13. If the clouds are not sufficiently discharged by this gradual
operation, they sometimes discharge themselves suddenly by striking
into the earth, where the earth is fit to receive their electricity.

14. The earth in temperate and warm climates is generally fit to
receive it, being a good conductor.

15. A certain quantity of heat will make some bodies good conductors,
that will not otherwise conduct.

16. Thus wax rendered fluid, and glass softened by heat, will both of
them conduct.

17. And water, though naturally a good conductor, will not conduct
well, when frozen into ice by a common degree of cold; not at all,
where the cold is extreme.

18. Snow falling upon frozen ground has been found to retain its
electricity; and to communicate it to an isolated body, when after
falling, it has been driven about by the wind.

19. The humidity, contained in all the equatorial clouds that reach
the polar regions, must there be condensed and fall in snow.

20. The great cake of ice that eternally covers those regions may be
too hard frozen to permit the electricity, descending with that snow,
to enter the earth.

21. It may therefore be _accumulated upon that ice_.

22. The atmosphere being heavier in the polar regions than in the
equatorial, will there be lower; as well from that cause, as from the
smaller effect of the centrifugal force: consequently the distance
of the vacuum above the atmosphere will be less at the poles, than
elsewhere; and probably much less than the distance (upon the surface
of the globe) extending from the pole to those latitudes in which
the earth is so thawed as to receive and imbibe electricity; (the
frost continuing to lat. 80, which is ten degrees, or six hundred
miles from the pole; while the height of the atmosphere there of such
density as to obstruct the motion of the electric fluid, can scarce
be esteemed above [___] miles).

23. The _vacuum_ above is a good conductor.

24. May not then the great quantity of electricity, brought into the
polar regions by the clouds, which are condensed there, and fall in
snow, which electricity would enter the, earth, but cannot penetrate
the ice; may it not, I say, (_as a bottle overcharged_) break through
that low atmosphere, and run along in the vacuum over the air towards
the equator; diverging as the degrees of longitude enlarge; strongly
visible where densest, and becoming less visible as it more diverges;
till it finds a passage to the earth in more temperate climates, or
is mingled with their upper air?

25. If such an operation of nature were really performed, would it
not give all the appearances of an aurora borealis?

26. And would not the auroras become more frequent _after the
approach of winter_: not only because more visible in longer nights;
but also because in summer the long presence of the sun may soften
the surface of the great ice cake, and render it a conductor, by
which the accumulation of electricity in the polar regions will be
prevented?

27. The _atmosphere of the polar regions_ being made more dense by
the extreme cold, and all the moisture in that air being frozen; may
not any great light arising therein, and passing, through it, render
its density in some degree visible, during the night time, to those
who live in the rarer air of more southern latitudes; and would it
not in that case, although in itself a complete and full circle,
extending perhaps ten degrees from the pole, appear to spectators so
placed (who could see only a part of it) _in the form of a segment_;
its chord resting on the horizon, and its arch elevated more or less
above it as seen from latitudes more or less distant; _darkish in
colour_, but yet _sufficiently transparent_ to permit some stars to
be seen through it.

28. The _rays_ of electric matter issuing out of a body, diverge by
mutually repelling each other, unless there be some conducting body
near, to receive them: and if that conducting body be at a greater
distance, they will _first diverge_, and then _converge_ in order
to enter it. May not this account for some of the varieties of
figure seen at times in the _motions_ of the luminous matter of the
auroras: since it is possible, that in passing over the atmosphere,
from the north in all directions or meridians, towards the equator,
the rays of that matter may find, in many places, portions of cloudy
region, or moist atmosphere under them, which (being in the natural
or negative state) may be fit to receive them, and towards which
they may therefore converge: and when one of those receiving bodies
is more than saturated, they may _again_ diverge from it, towards
other surrounding masses of such humid atmosphere, and thus form the
_crowns_, as they are called, and other figures mentioned in the
histories of this meteor?

29. If it be true that the clouds which go to the polar regions, and
carry thither the vapours of the equatorial and temperate regions,
[have their] vapours condensed by the extreme cold of the polar
regions, and fall in snow or hail; the winds which come from those
regions ought to be generally dry, unless they gain some humidity
by sweeping the ocean in their way. And if I mistake not, the winds
between the north east and the north west, are for the most part dry,
when they have continued for some time.


[In the Philosophical Transactions for 1774, p. 122, is a letter from
Mr. I. S. Winn to Dr. Franklin, stating, that since he had first made
the observation concerning the south or south west winds succeeding
an aurora, he had found it invariably obtaining in twenty-three
instances; and he adds in a note a fresh confirming instance. In
reply, Dr. Franklin makes the following conjecture.]


The _Auroræ Boreales_, though visible almost every night of clear
weather in the more northern regions and very high in the atmosphere,
can scarce be visible in England, but when the atmosphere is pretty
clear of clouds for the whole space between us and those regions;
and therefore are seldom visible here. This extensive clearness may
have been produced by a long continuance of northerly winds. When
the winds have long continued in one quarter, the return is often
violent. Allowing the fact so repeatedly observed by Mr. Winn,
perhaps this may account for the violence of the southerly winds,
that soon follow the appearance of the aurora on our coasts.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] If I mistake not, this paper was read to the Royal Academy of
Sciences, at Paris, at the meeting held immediately after Easter,
1779. B. V[13].

[13] For an explanation of the signature B. V. see the note in page
399 of Vol. I. _Editor._




TO DR. L.[14] AT CHARLES-TOWN, SOUTH-CAROLINA.

  _On Cold produced by Evaporation._


  _New-York, April_ 14, 1757.

  SIR,

It is a long time since I had the pleasure of a line from you; and,
indeed, the troubles of our country, with the hurry of business
I have been engaged in on that account, have made me so bad a
correspondent, that I ought not to expect punctuality in others.

But being about to embark for England, I could not quit the continent
without paying my respects to you, and, at the same time, taking
leave to introduce to your acquaintance a gentleman of learning and
merit, colonel Henry Bouquet, who does me the favour to present you
this letter, and with whom I am sure you will be much pleased.

Professor Simpson, of Glasgow, lately communicated to me some
curious experiments of a physician of his acquaintance, by which it
appeared, that an extraordinary degree of cold, even to freezing,
might be produced by evaporation. I have not had leisure to repeat
and examine more than the first and easiest of them, _viz._--Wet the
ball of a thermometer by a feather dipt in spirit of wine, which
has been kept in the same room, and has, of course, the same degree
of heat or cold. The mercury sinks presently three or four degrees,
and the quicker, if, during the evaporation, you blow on the ball
with bellows; a second wetting and blowing, when the mercury is
down, carries it yet lower. I think I did not get it lower than five
or six degrees from where it naturally stood, which was, at that
time, sixty. But it is said, that a vessel of water being placed in
another somewhat larger, containing spirit, in such a manner that
the vessel of water is surrounded with the spirit, and both placed
under the receiver of an air-pump; on exhausting the air, the spirit,
evaporating, leaves such a degree of cold as to freeze the water,
though the thermometer, in the open air, stands many degrees above
the freezing point.

I know not how this phenomenon is to be accounted for, but it gives
me occasion to mention some loose notions relating to heat and cold,
which I have for some time entertained, but not yet reduced into any
form. Allowing common fire, as well as electrical, to be a fluid
capable of permeating other bodies, and seeking an equilibrium, I
imagine some bodies are better fitted by nature to be conductors of
that fluid than others; and that, generally, those which are the best
conductors of the electrical fluid, are also the best conductors of
this; and _e contra_.

Thus a body which is a good conductor of fire readily receives
it into its substance, and conducts it through the whole to all
the parts, as metals and water do; and if two bodies, both good
conductors, one heated, the other in its common state, are brought
into contact with each other, the body which has most fire readily
communicates of it to that which had least, and that which had least
readily receives it, till an equilibrium is produced. Thus, if you
take a dollar between your fingers with one hand, and a piece of
wood, of the same dimensions, with the other, and bring both at the
same time to the flame of a candle, you will find yourself obliged
to drop the dollar before you drop the wood, because it conducts the
heat of the candle sooner to your flesh. Thus, if a silver tea-pot
had a handle of the same metal, it would conduct the heat from the
water to the hand, and become too hot to be used; we therefore give
to a metal tea-pot a handle of wood, which is not so good a conductor
as metal. But a china or stone tea-pot being in some degree of the
nature of glass, which is not a good conductor of heat, may have a
handle of the same stuff. Thus, also, a damp moist air shall make a
man more sensible of cold, or chill him more, than a dry air that is
colder, because a moist air is fitter to receive and conduct away
the heat of his body. This fluid, entering bodies in great quantity,
first expands them, by separating their parts a little, afterwards,
by farther separating their parts, it renders solids fluid, and at
length dissipates their parts in air. Take this fluid from melted
lead, or from water, the parts cohere again, the first grows solid,
the latter becomes ice: and this is sooner done by the means of good
conductors.

[Illustration: (of wooden former for molten lead)]

Thus, if you take, as I have done, a square bar of lead, four inches
long, and one inch thick, together with three pieces of wood planed
to the same dimensions, and lay them, as in the margin, on a smooth
board, fixt so as not to be easily separated or moved, and pour
into the cavity they form, as much melted lead as will fill it,
you will see the melted lead chill, and become firm, on the side
next the leaden bar, some time before it chills on the other three
sides in contact with the wooden bars, though before the lead was
poured in, they might all be supposed to have the same degree of
heat or coldness, as they had been exposed in the same room to the
same air. You will likewise observe, that the leaden bar, as it has
cooled the melted lead more than the wooden bars have done, so it is
itself more heated by the melted lead. There is a certain quantity
of this fluid called fire, in every living human body, which fluid,
being in due proportion, keeps the parts of the flesh and blood at
such a just distance from each other, as that the flesh and nerves
are supple, and the blood fit for circulation. If part of this due
proportion of fire be conducted away, by means of a contact with
other bodies, as air, water, or metals, the parts of our skin and
flesh that come into such contact first draw more near together
than is agreeable, and give that sensation which we call cold; and
if too much be conveyed away, the body stiffens, the blood ceases
to flow, and death ensues. On the other hand, if too much of this
fluid be communicated to the flesh, the parts are separated too far,
and pain ensues, as when they are separated by a pin or lancet. The
sensation that the separation by fire occasions, we call heat, or
burning. My desk on which I now write, and the lock of my desk, are
both exposed to the same temperature of the air, and have therefore
the same degree of heat or cold; yet if I lay my hand successively
on the wood and on the metal, the latter feels much the coldest, not
that it is really so, but being a better conductor, it more readily
than the wood takes away and draws into itself the fire that was in
my skin. Accordingly if I lay one hand, part on the lock, and part
on the wood, and after it had lain so some time, I feel both parts
with my other hand, I find the part that has been in contact with
the lock, very sensibly colder to the touch, than the part that lay
on the wood. How a living animal obtains its quantity of this fluid
called fire, is a curious question. I have shown, that some bodies
(as metals) have a power of attracting it stronger than others; and
I have sometimes suspected, that a living body had some power of
attracting out of the air, or other bodies, the heat it wanted. Thus
metals hammered, or repeatedly bent, grow hot in the bent or hammered
part. But when I consider that air, in contact with the body, cools
it; that the surrounding air is rather heated by its contact with
the body; that every breath of cooler air drawn in, carries off part
of the body's heat when it passes out again; that therefore there
must be in the body a fund for producing it, or otherwise the animal
would soon grow cold; I have been rather inclined to think, that the
fluid _fire_, as well as the fluid _air_, is attracted by plants in
their growth, and becomes consolidated with the other materials of
which they are formed, and makes a great part of their substance:
that when they come to be digested, and to suffer in the vessels a
kind of fermentation, part of the fire, as well as part of the air,
recovers its fluid active state again, and diffuses itself in the
body digesting and separating it: that the fire so reproduced, by
digestion and separation continually leaving the body, its place is
supplied by fresh quantities, arising from the continual separation.
That whatever quickens the motion of the fluids in an animal quickens
the separation, and reproduces more of the fire; as exercise. That
all the fire emitted by wood, and other combustibles, when burning,
existed in them before, in a solid state, being only discovered when
separating. That some fossils, as sulphur, sea-coal, &c. contain a
great deal of solid fire; and that, in short, what escapes and is
dissipated in the burning of bodies, besides water and earth, is
generally the air and fire that before made parts of the solid. Thus
I imagine that animal heat arises by or from a kind of fermentation
in the juices of the body, in the same manner as heat arises in the
liquors preparing for distillation, wherein there is a separation
of the spirituous, from the watry and earthy parts. And it is
remarkable, that the liquor in a distiller's vat, when in its highest
and best state of fermentation, as I have been informed, has the same
degree of heat with the human body; that is, about 94 or 96.

Thus, as by a constant supply of fuel in a chimney, you keep a warm
room, so, by a constant supply of food in the stomach, you keep a
warm body; only where little exercise is used, the heat may possibly
be conducted away too fast; in which case such materials are to be
used for cloathing and bedding, against the effects of an immediate
contact of the air, as are, in themselves, bad conductors of heat,
and, consequently, prevent its being communicated through their
substance to the air. Hence what is called _warmth_ in wool, and
its preference on that account, to linen; wool not being so good a
conductor: and hence all the natural coverings of animals, to keep
them warm, are such as retain and confine the natural heat in the
body, by being bad conductors, such as wool, hair, feathers, and the
silk by which the silk-worm, in its tender embrio state, is first
cloathed. Cloathing, thus considered, does not make a man warm by
_giving_ warmth, but by _preventing_ the too quick dissipation of the
heat produced in his body, and so occasioning an accumulation.

There is another curious question I will just venture to touch
upon, viz. Whence arises the sudden extraordinary degree of cold,
perceptible on mixing some chemical liquors, and even on mixing salt
and snow, where the composition appears colder than the coldest of
the ingredients? I have never seen the chemical mixtures made, but
salt and snow I have often mixed myself, and am fully satisfied
that the composition feels much colder to the touch, and lowers the
mercury in the thermometer more than either ingredient would do
separately. I suppose, with others, that cold is nothing more than
the absence of heat or fire. Now if the quantity of fire before
contained or diffused in the snow and salt was expelled in the
uniting of the two matters, it must be driven away either through
the air or the vessel containing them. If it is driven off thro' the
air, it must warm the air, and a thermometer held over the mixture,
without touching it, would discover the heat, by the rising of the
mercury, as it must, and always does in warm air.

This, indeed, I have not tried, but I should guess it would rather
be driven off through the vessel, especially if the vessel be metal,
as being a better conductor than air; and so one should find the
bason warmer after such mixture. But, on the contrary, the vessel
grows cold, and even water, in which the vessel is sometimes placed
for the experiment, freezes into hard ice on the bason. Now I know
not how to account for this, otherwise than by supposing, that the
composition is a better conductor of fire than the ingredients
separately, and, like the lock compared with the wood, has a stronger
power of attracting fire, and does accordingly attract it suddenly
from the fingers, or a thermometer put into it, from the bason that
contains it, and from the water in contact with the outside of the
bason; so that the fingers have the sensation of extreme cold, by
being deprived of much of their natural fire; the thermometer sinks,
by having part of its fire drawn out of the mercury; the bason grows
colder to the touch, as, by having its fire drawn into the mixture,
it is become more capable of drawing and receiving it from the hand;
and through the bason, the water loses its fire that kept it fluid;
so it becomes ice. One would expect, that from all this attracted
acquisition of fire to the composition, it should become warmer; and,
in fact, the snow and salt dissolve at the same time into water,
without freezing.

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[14] Dr. Lining. _Editor_.




TO THE SAME ON THE SAME SUBJECT.


  _London, June 17, 1758._

  DEAR SIR,

In a former letter I mentioned the experiment for cooling bodies by
evaporation, and that I had, by repeatedly wetting the thermometer
with common spirits, brought the mercury down five or six degrees.
Being lately at Cambridge, and mentioning this in conversation with
Dr. Hadley, professor of chemistry there, he proposed repeating the
experiments with ether, instead of common spirits, as the ether is
much quicker in evaporation. We accordingly went to his chamber,
where he had both ether and a thermometer. By dipping first the
ball of the thermometer into the ether, it appeared that the ether
was precisely of the same temperament with the thermometer, which
stood then at 65; for it made no alteration in the height of the
little column of mercury. But when the thermometer was taken out
of the ether, and the ether, with which the ball was wet, began to
evaporate, the mercury sunk several degrees. The wetting was then
repeated by a feather that had been dipped into the ether, when
the mercury sunk still lower. We continued this operation, one of
us wetting the ball, and another of the company blowing on it with
the bellows, to quicken the evaporation, the mercury sinking all
the time, till it came down to 7, which is 25 degrees below the
freezing point, when we left off. Soon after it passed the freezing
point, a thin coat of ice began to cover the ball. Whether this was
water collected and condensed by the coldness of the ball, from the
moisture in the air, or from our breath; or whether the feather,
when dipped into the ether, might not sometimes go through it, and
bring up some of the water that was under it, I am not certain;
perhaps all might contribute. The ice continued increasing till we
ended the experiment, when it appeared near a quarter of an inch
thick all over the ball, with a number of small spicula, pointing
outwards. From this experiment one may see the possibility of
freezing a man to death on a warm summer's day, if he were to stand
in a passage through which the wind blew briskly, and to be wet
frequently with ether, a spirit that is more inflammable than brandy,
or common spirits of wine.

It is but within these few years, that the European philosophers seem
to have known this power in nature, of cooling bodies by evaporation.
But in the east they have long been acquainted with it. A friend
tells me, there is a passage in Bernier's Travels through Indostan,
written near one hundred years ago, that mentions it as a practice
(in travelling over dry deserts in that hot climate) to carry water
in flasks wrapt in wet woollen cloths, and hung on the shady side of
the camel, or carriage, but in the free air; whereby, as the cloths
gradually grow drier, the water contained in the flasks is made cool.
They have likewise a kind of earthen pots, unglazed, which let the
water gradually and slowly ooze through their pores, so as to keep
the outside a little wet, notwithstanding the continual evaporation,
which gives great coldness to the vessel, and the water contained
in it. Even our common sailors seem to have had some notion of this
property; for I remember, that being at sea, when I was a youth,
I observed one of the sailors, during a calm in the night, often
wetting his finger in his mouth, and then holding it up in the air,
to discover, as he said, if the air had any motion, and from which
side it came; and this he expected to do, by finding one side of his
finger grow suddenly cold, and from that side he should look for the
next wind; which I then laughed at as a fancy.

May not several phenomena, hitherto unconsidered, or unaccounted for,
be explained by this property? During the hot Sunday at Philadelphia,
in June 1750, when the thermometer was up at 100 in the shade, I
sat in my chamber without exercise, only reading or writing, with
no other cloaths on than a shirt, and a pair of long linen drawers,
the windows all open, and a brisk wind blowing through the house,
the sweat ran off the backs of my hands, and my shirt was often
so wet, as to induce me to call for dry ones to put on; in this
situation, one might have expected, that the natural heat of the body
96, added to the heat of the air 100, should jointly have created
or produced a much greater degree of heat in the body; but the fact
was, that my body never grew so hot as the air that surrounded it,
or the inanimate bodies immersed in the same air. For I remember
well, that the desk, when I laid my arm upon it; a chair, when I sat
down in it; and a dry shirt out of the drawer, when I put it on,
all felt exceeding warm to me, as if they had been warmed before a
fire. And I suppose a dead body would have acquired the temperature
of the air, though a living one, by continual sweating, and by the
evaporation of that sweat, was kept cold. May not this be a reason
why our reapers in Pensylvania, working in the open field, in the
clear hot sun-shine common in our harvest-time[15], find themselves
well able to go through that labour, without being much incommoded
by the heat, while they continue to sweat, and while they supply
matter for keeping up that sweat, by drinking frequently of a thin
evaporable liquor, water mixed with rum; but if the sweat stops,
they drop, and sometimes die suddenly, if a sweating is not again
brought on by drinking that liquor, or, as some rather chuse in that
case, a kind of hot punch, made with water, mixed with honey, and a
considerable proportion of vinegar? May there not be in negroes a
quicker evaporation of the perspirable matter from their skins and
lungs, which, by cooling them more, enables them to bear the sun's
heat better than whites do? (if that is a fact, as it is said to be;
for the alledged necessity of having negroes rather than whites, to
work in the West-India fields, is founded upon it) though the colour
of their skins would otherwise make them more sensible of the sun's
heat, since black cloth heats much sooner, and more, in the sun,
than white cloth. I am persuaded, from several instances happening
within my knowledge, that they do not bear cold weather so well as
the whites; they will perish when exposed to a less degree of it,
and are more apt to have their limbs frostbitten; and may not this
be from the same cause? Would not the earth grow much hotter under
the summer-sun, if a constant evaporation from its surface, greater
as the sun shines stronger, did not, by tending to cool it; balance,
in some degree, the warmer effects of the sun's rays? Is it not
owing to the constant evaporation from the surface of every leaf,
that trees, though shone on by the sun, are always, even the leaves
themselves, cool to our sense? at least much cooler than they would
otherwise be? May it not be owing to this, that fanning ourselves
when warm, does really cool us, though the air is itself warm that we
drive with the fan upon our faces; for the atmosphere round, and next
to our bodies, having imbibed as much of the perspired vapour as it
can well contain, receives no more, and the evaporation is therefore
checked and retarded, till we drive away that atmosphere, and bring
drier air in its place, that will receive the vapour, and thereby
facilitate and increase the evaporation? Certain it is, that mere
blowing of air on a dry body does not cool it, as any one may satisfy
himself, by blowing with a bellows on the dry ball of a thermometer;
the mercury will not fall; if it moves at all, it rather rises, as
being warmed by the friction of the air on its surface? To these
queries of imagination, I will only add one practical observation;
that wherever it is thought proper to give ease, in cases of painful
inflammation in the flesh (as from burnings, or the like) by cooling
the part; linen cloths, wet with spirit, and applied to the part
inflamed, will produce the coolness required, better than if wet with
water, and will continue it longer. For water, though cold when first
applied, will soon acquire warmth from the flesh, as it does not
evaporate fast enough; but the cloths wet with spirit, will continue
cold as long as any spirit is left to keep up the evaporation, the
parts warmed escaping as soon as they are warmed, and carrying off
the heat with them.

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[15] Pensylvania is in about lat. 40, and the sun, of course, about
12 degrees higher, and therefore much hotter than in England. Their
harvest is about the end of June, or beginning of July, when the sun
is nearly at the highest.




J. B.[16] ESQ. IN BOSTON, TO B. FRANKLIN.

  _Concerning the Light in Sea-Water._

  Read at the Royal Society, December 6, 1756.


  _November_ 12, 1753.

**** When I was at the eastward, I had an opportunity of observing
the luminous appearance of the sea when disturbed: at the head and
stern of the vessel, when under way, it appeared very bright. The
best opportunity I had to observe it was in a boat, in company with
several gentlemen going from Portsmouth, about three miles, to our
vessel lying at the mouth of Piscataqua River. Soon after we set
off (it being in the evening) we observed a luminous appearance,
where the oars dashed the water. Sometimes it was very bright, and
afterwards, as we rowed along, gradually lessened, till almost
imperceptible, and then re-illumined. This we took notice of several
times in the passage. When I got on board the vessel, I ordered a
pail to be dipped up, full of sea-water, in which, on the water's
being moved, a sparkling light appeared. I took a linen cloth,
and strained some of the water through it, and there was a like
appearance on the cloth, which soon went off; but on rubbing the
cloth with my finger, it was renewed. I then carried the cloth to the
light, but could not perceive any thing upon it which should cause
that appearance.

Several gentlemen were of opinion, that the separated particles
of putrid, animal, and other bodies, floating on the surface of
the sea, might cause that appearance; for putrid fish, &c. they
said, will cause it: and the sea-animals which have died, and
other bodies putrified therein since the creation, might afford
a sufficient quantity of these particles to cover a considerable
portion of the surface of the sea; which particles being differently
dispersed, might account for the different degrees of light in
the appearance above-mentioned. But this account seems liable to
this obvious objection, that as putrid fish, &c. make a luminous
appearance without being moved or disturbed, it might be expected
that the supposed putrid particles on the surface of the sea, should
always appear luminous, where there is not a greater light; and,
consequently, that the whole surface of the sea, covered with those
particles, should always, in dark nights, appear luminous, without
being disturbed. But this is not fact.

Among the rest, I threw out my conjecture, that the said appearance
might be caused by a great number of little animals, floating on the
surface of the sea, which, on being disturbed, might, by expanding
their finns, or otherwise moving themselves, expose such a part
of their bodies as exhibits a luminous appearance, somewhat in
the manner of a glow-worm, or fire-fly: that these animals may be
more numerous in some places than others; and, therefore, that the
appearance above-mentioned being fainter and stronger in different
places, might be owing to that: that certain circumstances of
weather, &c. might invite them to the surface, on which, in a calm,
they might sport themselves and glow; or in storms, being forced up,
make the same appearance.

There is no difficulty in conceiving that the sea may be stocked with
animalcula for this purpose, as we find all nature crowded with
life. But it seems difficult to conceive that such small portions
of matter, even if they were wholly luminous, should affect our
sight; much more so, when it is supposed that only a part of them is
luminous. But, if we consider some other appearances, we may find
the same difficulty to conceive of them; and yet we know they take
place. For instance, the flame of a candle, which, it is said, may
be seen four miles round. The light which fills this circle of eight
miles diameter, was contained, when it first left the candle, within
a circle of half an inch diameter. If the density of light, in these
circumstances, be as those circles to each other, that is, as the
squares of their diameters, the candle-light, when come to the eye,
will be 1027709337600 times rarer than when it quitted the half inch
circle. Now the aperture of the eye, through which the light passes,
does not exceed one-tenth of an inch diameter, and the portion of
the lesser circle, which corresponds to this small portion of the
greater circle, must be proportionably, that is, 1027709337600 times
less than one-tenth of an inch; and yet this infinitely small point
(if you will allow the expression) affords light enough to make it
visible four miles; or, rather, affords light sufficient to affect
the sight at that distance.

The smallness of the animalcula is no objection then to this
conjecture; for supposing them to be ten thousand times less than the
_minimum visibile_, they may, notwithstanding, emit light enough to
affect the eyes, and so to cause the luminous appearance aforesaid.
This conjecture I send you for want of something better ****.

FOOTNOTE:

[16] I. Badoin. _Editor._




TO MR. P. F.[17] IN NEWPORT.

  _On the Saltness of Sea-Water._


  _London, May 7, 1760._

  SIR,

**** It has, indeed, as you observe, been the opinion of some very
great naturalists, that the sea is salt only from the dissolution
of mineral or rock-salt, which its waters happened to meet with.
But this opinion takes it for granted that all water was originally
fresh, of which we can have no proof. I own I am inclined to a
different opinion, and rather think all the water on this globe was
originally salt, and that the fresh water we find in springs and
rivers, is the produce of distillation. The sun raises the vapours
from the sea, which form clouds, and fall in rain upon the land, and
springs and rivers are formed of that rain. As to the rock-salt found
in mines, I conceive, that instead of communicating its saltness to
the sea, it is itself drawn from the sea, and that of course the sea
is now fresher than it was originally. This is only another effect of
nature's distillery, and might be performed various ways.

It is evident from the quantities of sea-shells, and the bones and
teeth of fishes found in high lands, that the sea has formerly
covered them. Then, either the sea has been higher than it now is,
and has fallen away from those high lands, or they have been lower
than they are, and were lifted up out of the water to their present
height, by some internal mighty force, such as we still feel some
remains of, when whole continents are moved by earthquakes. In
either case it may be supposed that large hollows or valleys among
hills, might be left filled with sea-water, which evaporating, and
the fluid part drying away in a course of years, would leave the salt
covering the bottom; and that salt coming afterwards to be covered
with earth, from the neighbouring hills, could only be found by
digging through that earth. Or, as we know from their effects, that
there are deep fiery caverns under the earth, and even under the
sea, if at any time the sea leaks into any of them, the fluid parts
of the water must evaporate from that heat, and pass off through
some volcano, while the salt remains, and by degrees, and continual
acretion, becomes a great mass. Thus the cavern may at length be
filled, and the volcano connected with it cease burning, as many
it is said have done; and future miners, penetrating such cavern,
find what we call a salt-mine. This is a fancy I had on visiting
the salt-mines at Northwich, with my son. I send you a piece of the
rock-salt which he brought up with him out of the mine. ****

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[17] Peter Franklin. _Editor._




TO MISS STEPHENSON.

  _On the Effect of Air on the Barometer, and the Benefits derived
  from the Study of Insects._


  _Craven Street, June 11, 1760._

'Tis a very sensible question you ask, how the air can affect the
barometer, when its opening appears covered with wood? If indeed it
was so closely covered as to admit of no communication of the outward
air to the surface of the mercury, the change of weight in the air
could not possibly affect it. But the least crevice is sufficient
for the purpose; a pinhole will do the business. And if you could
look behind the frame to which your barometer is fixed, you would
certainly find some small opening.

There are indeed some barometers in which the body of mercury at the
lower end is contained in a close leather bag, and so the air cannot
come into immediate contact with the mercury; yet the same effect is
produced. For the leather being flexible, when the bag is pressed by
any additional weight of air it contracts, and the mercury is forced
up into the tube; when the air becomes lighter, and its pressure
less, the weight of the mercury prevails, and it descends again into
the bag.

Your observation on what you have lately read concerning insects is
very just and solid. Superficial minds are apt to despise those who
make that part of the creation their study, as mere triflers; but
certainly the world has been much obliged to them. Under the care
and management of man, the labours of the little silkworm afford
employment and subsistence to thousands of families, and become an
immense article of commerce. The bee, too, yields us its delicious
honey, and its wax useful to a multitude of purposes. Another insect,
it is said, produces the cochineal, from whence we have our rich
scarlet dye. The usefulness of the cantharides or Spanish flies, in
medicine, is known to all, and thousands owe their lives to that
knowledge. By human industry and observation, other properties of
other insects may possibly be hereafter discovered, and of equal
utility. A thorough acquaintance with the nature of these little
creatures may also enable mankind to prevent the increase of such
as are noxious, or secure us against the mischiefs they occasion.
These things doubtless your books make mention of: I can only add
a particular late instance which I had from a Swedish gentleman of
good credit. In the green timber, intended for ship-building at the
king's yards in that country, a kind of worms were found, which every
year became more numerous and more pernicious, so that the ships were
greatly damaged before they came into use. The king sent Linnæus, the
great naturalist, from Stockholm, to enquire into the affair, and see
if the mischief was capable of any remedy. He found, on examination,
that the worm was produced from a small egg, deposited in the little
roughnesses on the surface of the wood, by a particular kind of fly
or beetle; from whence the worm, as soon as it was hatched, began
to eat into the substance of the wood, and after some time came out
again a fly of the parent kind, and so the species increased. The
season in which the fly laid its eggs, Linnæus knew to be about a
fortnight (I think) in the month of May, and at no other time in the
year. He therefore advised, that some days before that season, all
the green timber should be thrown into the water, and kept under
water till the season was over. Which being done by the king's order,
the flies missing their usual nests, could not increase; and the
species was either destroyed or went elsewhere; and the wood was
effectually preserved, for after the first year, it became too dry
and hard for their purpose.

There is, however, a prudent moderation to be used in studies of
this kind. The knowledge of nature may be ornamental, and it may
be useful, but if to attain an eminence in that, we neglect the
knowledge and practice of essential duties, we deserve reprehension.
For there is no rank in natural knowledge of equal dignity and
importance with that of being a good parent, a good child, a good
husband, or wife, a good neighbour or friend, a good subject or
citizen, that is, in short, a good christian. Nicholas Gimcrack,
therefore, who neglected the care of his family, to pursue
butterflies, was a just object of ridicule, and we must give him up
as fair game to the satyrist.

  Adieu, my dear friend, and believe me ever

  Yours affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THE SAME.

  _On the Bristol Waters, and the Tide in Rivers._


  _London, Sept. 13, 1760._

  MY DEAR FRIEND,

I have your agreeable letter from Bristol, which I take this first
leisure hour to answer, having for some time been much engaged in
business.

Your first question, _What is the reason the water at this place,
though cold at the spring, becomes warm by pumping?_ It will be
most prudent in me to forbear attempting to answer, till, by a more
circumstantial account, you assure me of the fact. I own I should
expect that operation to warm, not so much the water pumped, as the
person pumping.--The rubbing of dry solids together has been long
observed to produce heat; but the like effect has never yet, that
I have heard, been produced by the mere agitation of fluids, or
friction of fluids with solids. Water in a bottle shook for hours
by a mill-hopper, it is said, discovered no sensible addition of
heat. The production of animal heat by exercise is therefore to be
accounted for in another manner, which I may hereafter endeavour to
make you acquainted with.

This prudence of not attempting to give reasons before one is sure of
facts, I learnt from one of your sex, who, as Selden tells us, being
in company with some gentlemen that were viewing, and considering
something which they called a Chinese shoe, and disputing earnestly
about the manner of wearing it, and how it could possibly be put on;
put in her word, and said modestly, _Gentlemen, are you sure it is a
shoe?--Should not that be settled first?_

But I shall now endeavour to explain what I said to you about the
tide in rivers, and to that end shall make a figure, which though
not very like a river, may serve to convey my meaning.--Suppose a
canal one hundred and forty miles long, communicating at one end with
the sea, and filled therefore with sea water. I chuse a canal at
first, rather than a river, to throw out of consideration the effects
produced by the streams of fresh water from the land, the inequality
in breadth, and the crookedness of courses.

[Illustration: (showing tidal wave effects)]

Let A, C, be the head of the canal; C, D, the bottom of it; D, F,
the open mouth of it next the sea. Let the strait pricked line, B,
G, represent low water mark the whole length of the canal, A, F,
high water mark:--Now if a person standing at E, and observing at
the time of high water there, that the canal is quite full at that
place up to the line E, should conclude that the canal is equally
full to the same height from end to end, and therefore there was as
much more water come into the canal since it was down at low water
mark, as would be included in the oblong space A, B, G, F, he would
be greatly mistaken. For the tide is _a wave_, and the top of the
wave, which makes high water, as well as every other lower part, is
progressive; and it is high water successively, but not at the same
time, in all the several points between G, F, and A, B.--And in such
a length as I have mentioned it is low water at F, G, and also at A,
B, at or near the same time with its being high water at E; so that
the surface of the water in the canal, during that situation, is
properly represented by the curve pricked line B, E, G. And on the
other hand, when it is low water at E, H, it is high water both at F,
G, and at A, B, at or near the same time: and the surface would then
be described by the inverted curve line, A, H, F.

In this view of the case, you will easily see, that there must be
very little more water in the canal at what we call high water, than
there is at low water, those terms not relating to the whole canal at
the same time, but successively to its parts. And if you suppose the
canal six times as long, the case would not vary as to the quantity
of water at different times of the tide; there would only be six
waves in the canal at the same time, instead of one, and the hollows
in the water would be equal to the hills.

That this is not mere theory, but conformable to fact, we know by
our long rivers in America. The Delaware, on which Philadelphia
stands, is in this particular similar to the canal I have supposed
of one wave: for when it is high water at the Capes or mouth of the
river, it is also high water at Philadelphia, which stands about one
hundred and forty miles from the sea; and there is at the same time
a low water in the middle between the two high waters; where, when
it comes to be high water, it is at the same time low water at the
Capes and at Philadelphia. And the longer rivers have some a wave
and half, some two, three, or four waves, according to their length.
In the shorter rivers of this island, one may see the same thing in
part: for instance, it is high water at Gravesend an hour before it
is high water at London Bridge; and twenty miles below Gravesend an
hour before it is high water at Gravesend. Therefore at the time of
high water at Gravesend the top of the wave is there, and the water
is then not so high by some feet where the top of the wave was an
hour before, or where it will be an hour after, as it is just then at
Gravesend.

Now we are not to suppose, that because the swell or top of the
wave runs at the rate of twenty miles an hour, that therefore the
current, or water itself of which the wave is composed, runs at that
rate. Far from it. To conceive this motion of a wave, make a small
experiment or two. Fasten one end of a cord in a window near the top
of a house, and let the other end come down to the ground; take this
end in your hand, and you may, by a sudden motion, occasion a wave in
the cord that will run quite up to the window; but though the wave
is progressive from your hand to the window, the parts of the rope do
not proceed with the wave, but remain where they were, except only
that kind of motion that produces the wave. So if you throw a stone
into a pond of water when the surface is still and smooth, you will
see a circular wave proceed from the stone as its centre, quite to
the sides of the pond; but the water does not proceed with the wave,
it only rises and falls to form it in the different parts of its
course; and the waves that follow the first, all make use of the same
water with their predecessors.

But a wave in water is not indeed in all circumstances exactly like
that in a cord; for water being a fluid, and gravitating to the
earth, it naturally runs from a higher place to a lower; therefore
the parts of the wave in water do actually run a little both ways
from its top towards its lower sides, which the parts of the wave
in the cord cannot do. Thus, when it is high and standing water at
Gravesend, the water twenty miles below has been running ebb, or
towards the sea for an hour, or ever since it was high water there;
but the water at London Bridge will run flood, or from the sea yet
another hour, till it is high water, or the top of the wave arrives
at that bridge, and then it will have run ebb an hour at Gravesend,
&c. &c. Now this motion of the water, occasioned only by its gravity,
or tendency to run from a higher place to a lower, is by no means so
swift as the motion of the wave. It scarce exceeds perhaps two miles
in an hour.

If it went as the wave does twenty miles an hour, no ships could
ride at anchor in such a stream, nor boats row against it.

In common speech, indeed, this current of the water both ways from
the top of the wave is called _the tide_; thus we say, _the tide runs
strong_, _the tide runs at the rate of one, two, or three miles an
hour, &c._ and when we are at a part of the river behind the top of
the wave, and find the water lower than high-water mark, and running
towards the sea, we say, _the tide runs ebb_; and when we are before
the top of the wave, and find the water higher than low-water mark,
and running from the sea, we say, _the tide runs flood_; but these
expressions are only locally proper; for a tide, strictly speaking,
is _one whole wave_, including all its parts higher and lower, and
these waves succeed one another about twice in twenty-four hours.

This motion of the water, occasioned by its gravity, will explain to
you why the water near the mouths of rivers may be salter at high
water than at low. Some of the salt-water, as the tide wave enters
the river, runs from its top and fore side, and mixes with the fresh,
and also pushes it back up the river.

Supposing that the water commonly runs during the flood at the rate
of two miles in an hour, and that the flood runs five hours, you see
that it can bring at most into our canal only a quantity of water
equal to the space included in the breadth of the canal, ten miles
of its length, and the depth between low and high-water mark; which
is but a fourteenth part of what would be necessary to fill all the
space between low and high-water mark, for one hundred and forty
miles, the whole length of the canal.

And indeed such a quantity of water as would fill that whole space,
to run in and out every tide, must create so outrageous a current, as
would do infinite damage to the shores, shipping, &c. and make the
navigation of a river almost impracticable.

I have made this letter longer than I intended, and therefore
reserve for another what I have further to say on the subject of
tides and rivers. I shall now only add, that I have not been exact
in the numbers, because I would avoid perplexing you with minute
calculations, my design at present being chiefly to give you distinct
and clear ideas of the first principles.

After writing six folio pages of philosophy to a young girl, is it
necessary to finish such a letter with a compliment?--Is not such
a letter of itself a compliment?--Does it not say, she has a mind
thirsty after knowledge, and capable of receiving it; and that the
most agreeable things one can write to her are those that tend to
the improvement of her understanding?--It does indeed say all this,
but then it is still no compliment; it is no more than plain honest
truth, which is not the character of a compliment. So if I would
finish my letter in the _mode_, I should yet add some thing that
means nothing, and is _merely_ civil and polite. But being naturally
aukward at every circumstance of ceremony, I shall not attempt it.
I had rather conclude abruptly with what pleases me more than any
compliment can please you, that I am allowed to subscribe myself

  Your affectionate friend,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THE SAME.

  _On the same Subject._


  _Craven-street, Monday, March 30, 1761._

  MY DEAR FRIEND,

Supposing the fact, that the water of the well at Bristol is warmer
after sometime pumping, I think your manner of accounting for that
increased warmth very ingenious and probable. It did not occur to me,
and therefore I doubted of the fact.

You are, I think quite right in your opinion, that the rising of the
tides in rivers is not owing to the immediate influence of the moon
on the rivers. It is rather a subsequent effect of the influence
of the moon on the sea, and does not make its appearance in some
rivers till the moon has long passed by. I have not expressed myself
clearly if you have understood me to mean otherwise. You know I
have mentioned it as a fact, that there are in some rivers several
tides all existing at the same time; that is, two, three, or more,
high-waters, and as many low-waters, in different parts of the same
river, which cannot possibly be all effects of the moon's immediate
action on that river; but they may be subsequent effects of her
action on the sea.

In the enclosed paper you will find my sentiments on several points
relating to the air, and the evaporation of water. It is Mr.
Collinson's copy, who took it from one I sent through his hands to a
correspondent in France some years since; I have, as he desired me,
corrected the mistakes he made in transcribing, and must return it to
him; but if you think it worth while, you may take a copy of it: I
would have saved you any trouble of that kind, but had not time.

Some day in the next or the following week, I purpose to have the
pleasure of seeing you at Wanstead: I shall accompany your good mamma
thither, and stay till the next morning, if it may be done without
incommoding your family too much.--We may then discourse any points
in that paper that do not seem clear to you; and taking a walk to
lord Tilney's ponds, make a few experiments there to explain the
nature of the tides more fully. In the mean time, believe me to be,
with the highest esteem and regard, your sincerely affectionate
friend,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THE SAME.

  _Salt-Water rendered fresh by Distillation.--Method of relieving
  Thirst by Sea-Water._


  _Craven-street, August 10, 1761._

We are to set out this week for Holland, where we may possibly spend
a month, but purpose to be at home again before the coronation. I
could not go without taking leave of you by a line at least, when I
am so many letters in your debt.

In yours of May 19, which I have before me, you speak of the ease
with which salt water may be made fresh by distillation, supposing it
to be, as I had said, that in evaporation the air would take up water
but not the salt that was mixed with it. It is true that distilled
sea water will not be salt, but there are other disagreeable
qualities that rise with the water in distillation; which indeed
several besides Dr. Hales have endeavoured by some means to prevent;
but as yet their methods have not been brought much into use.

I have a singular opinion on this subject, which I will venture to
communicate to you, though I doubt you will rank it among my whims.
It is certain that the skin has _imbibing_ as well as _discharging_
pores; witness the effects of a blistering plaister, &c. I have read
that a man, hired by a physician to stand by way of experiment in
the open air naked during a moist night, weighed near three pounds
heavier in the morning. I have often observed myself, that however
thirsty I may have been before going into the water to swim, I am
never long so in the water. These imbibing pores, however, are very
fine, perhaps fine enough in filtering to separate salt from water;
for though I have soaked (by swimming, when a boy) several hours in
the day for several days successively in salt-water, I never found
my blood and juices salted by that means, so as to make me thirsty
or feel a salt taste in my mouth: and it is remarkable, that the
flesh of sea fish, though bred in salt-water, is not salt.--Hence I
imagine, that if people at sea, distressed by thirst when their fresh
water is unfortunately spent, would make bathing-tubs of their empty
water-casks, and, filling them with sea-water, sit in them an hour or
two each day, they might be greatly relieved. Perhaps keeping their
clothes constantly wet might have an almost equal effect; and this
without danger of catching cold. Men do not catch cold by wet cloaths
at sea. Damp, but not wet linen may possibly give colds; but no one
catches cold by bathing, and no clothes can be wetter than water
itself. Why damp clothes should then occasion colds, is a curious
question, the discussion of which I reserve for a future letter, or
some future conversation.

Adieu, my little philosopher. Present my respectful compliments to
the good ladies your aunts, and to miss Pitt; and believe me ever

  Your affectionate friend,

  And humble Servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THE SAME.

  _Tendency of Rivers to the Sea.--Effect of the Sun's Rays on Cloths
  of different Colours._


  _Sept. 20, 1761._

  MY DEAR FRIEND,

It is, as you observed in our late conversation, a very general
opinion, that _all rivers run into the sea_, or deposite their
waters there. 'Tis a kind of audacity to call such general opinions
in question, and may subject one to censure. But we must hazard
something in what we think the cause of truth: and if we propose our
objections modestly, we shall, though mistaken, deserve a censure
less severe, than when we are both mistaken and insolent.

That some rivers run into the sea is beyond a doubt: such, for
instance, are the Amazons, and I think the Oronoko and the
Mississippi. The proof is, that their waters are fresh quite to the
sea, and out to some distance from the land. Our question is, whether
the fresh waters of those rivers whose beds are filled with salt
water to a considerable distance up from the sea (as the Thames,
the Delaware, and the rivers that communicate with Chesapeak-bay in
Virginia) do ever arrive at the sea? And as I suspect they do not, I
am now to acquaint you with my reasons; or, if they are not allowed
to be reasons, my conceptions at least, of this matter.

The common supply of rivers is from springs, which draw their origin
from rain that has soaked into the earth. The union of a number of
springs forms a river. The waters as they run, exposed to the sun,
air, and wind, are continually evaporating. Hence in travelling one
may often see where a river runs, by a long blueish mist over it,
though we are at such a distance as not to see the river itself. The
quantity of this evaporation is greater or less, in proportion to
the surface exposed by the same quantity of water to those causes of
evaporation. While the river runs in a narrow confined channel in the
upper hilly country, only a small surface is exposed; a greater as
the river widens. Now if a river ends in a lake, as some do, whereby
its waters are spread so wide as that the evaporation is equal to
the sum of all its springs, that lake will never overflow:--And if
instead of ending in a lake, it was drawn into greater length as a
river, so as to expose a surface equal in the whole to that lake, the
evaporation would be equal, and such river would end as a canal; when
the ignorant might suppose, as they actually do in such cases, that
the river loses itself by running under ground, whereas in truth it
has run up into the air.

Now, many rivers that are open to the sea widen much before they
arrive at it, not merely by the additional waters they receive,
but by having their course stopped by the opposing flood-tide; by
being turned back twice in twenty-four hours, and by finding broader
beds in the low flat countries to dilate themselves in; hence the
evaporation of the fresh water is proportionably increased; so that
in some rivers it may equal the springs of supply. In such cases,
the salt water comes up the river, and meets the fresh in that part
where, if there were a wall or bank of earth across from side to
side, the river would form a lake, fuller indeed at some times than
at others, according to the seasons, but whose evaporation would, one
time with another, be equal to its supply.

When the communication between the two kinds of water is open, this
supposed wall of separation may be conceived as a moveable one, which
is not only pushed some miles higher up the river by every flood tide
from the sea, and carried down again as far by every tide of ebb,
but which has even this space of vibration removed nearer to the sea
in wet seasons, when the springs and brooks in the upper country are
augmented by the falling rains, so as to swell the river, and farther
from the sea in dry seasons.

Within a few miles above and below this moveable line of separation,
the different waters mix a little, partly by their motion to and fro,
and partly from the greater specific gravity of the salt water, which
inclines it to run under the fresh, while the fresh water, being
lighter, runs over the salt.

Cast your eye on the map of North America, and observe the bay of
Chesapeak in Virginia, mentioned above; you will see, communicating
with it by their mouths, the great rivers Sasquehanah, Potowmack,
Rappahanock, York, and James, besides a number of smaller streams,
each as big as the Thames. It has been proposed by philosophical
writers, that to compute how much water any river discharges into the
sea in a given time, we should measure its depth and swiftness at any
part above the tide; as, for the Thames, at Kingston or Windsor. But
can one imagine, that if all the water of those vast rivers went to
the sea, it would not first have pushed the salt water out of that
narrow-mouthed bay, and filled it with fresh?--The Sasquehanah alone
would seem to be sufficient for this, if it were not for the loss by
evaporation. And yet that bay is salt quite up to Annapolis.

As to our other subject, the different degrees of heat imbibed from
the sun's rays by cloths of different colours, since I cannot find
the notes of my experiment to send you, I must give it as well as I
can from memory.

But first let me mention an experiment you may easily make yourself.
Walk but a quarter of an hour in your garden when the sun shines,
with a part of your dress white, and a part black; then apply your
hand to them alternately, and you will find a very great difference
in their warmth. The black will be quite hot to the touch, the white
still cool.

Another. Try to fire the paper with a burning glass. If it is white,
you will not easily burn it;--but if you bring the focus to a black
spot, or upon letters, written or printed, the paper will immediately
be on fire under the letters.

Thus fullers and dyers find black cloths, of equal thickness with
white ones, and hung out equally wet, dry in the sun much sooner
than the white, being more readily heated by the sun's rays. It is
the same before a fire; the heat of which sooner penetrates black
stockings than white ones, and so is apt sooner to burn a man's
shins. Also beer much sooner warms in a black mug set before the
fire, than in a white one, or in a bright silver tankard.

My experiment was this. I took a number of little square pieces of
broad cloth from a taylor's pattern-card, of various colours. There
were black, deep blue, lighter blue, green, purple, red, yellow,
white, and other colours, or shades of colours. I laid them all out
upon the snow in a bright sun-shiny morning. In a few hours (I cannot
now be exact as to the time) the black, being warmed most by the sun,
was sunk so low as to be below the stroke of the sun's rays; the dark
blue almost as low, the lighter blue not quite so much as the dark,
the other colours less as they were lighter; and the quite white
remained on the surface of the snow, not having entered it at all.

What signifies philosophy that does not apply to some use?---May we
not learn from hence, that black clothes are not so fit to wear in a
hot sunny climate or season, as white ones; because in such clothes
the body is more heated by the sun when we walk abroad, and are at
the same time heated by the exercise, which double heat is apt to
bring on putrid dangerous fevers? That soldiers and seamen, who must
march and labour in the sun, should in the East or West Indies have
an uniform of white? That summer hats, for men or women, should be
white, as repelling that heat which gives head-achs to many, and to
some the fatal stroke that the French call the _coup de soleil?_ That
the ladies summer hats, however, should be lined with black, as not
reverberating on their faces those rays which are reflected upwards
from the earth or water? That the putting a white cap of paper or
linen _within_ the crown of a black hat, as some do, will not keep
out the heat, though it would if placed _without_. That fruit-walls
being blacked may receive so much heat from the sun in the day-time,
as to continue warm in some degree through the night, and thereby
preserve the fruit from frosts, or forward its growth?--with sundry
other particulars of less or greater importance, that will occur from
time to time to attentive minds?--I am,

  Yours affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MR. HOPKINSON.

  _On the Vis Inertiæ of Matter._


  _Philadelphia, 1748._

  SIR,

According to my promise, I send you _in writing_ my observations on
your book[18]: you will be the better able to consider them; which
I desire you to do at your leisure, and to set me right where I am
wrong.

I stumble at the threshold of the building, and therefore have not
read farther. The author's _vis inertiæ essential to matter_, upon
which the whole work is founded, I have not been able to comprehend.
And I do not think he demonstrates at all clearly (at least to me he
does not) that there is really _such a property in matter_.

He says, No. 2. "Let a given body or mass of matter be called
_a_, and let any given celerity be called c. That _celerity_
doubled, tripled, &c. or halved, thirded, &c. will be 2 _c_, 3 _c_,
&c. or ½ _c_, ⅓ _c_, &c. respectively: also the _body_ doubled,
tripled, or halved, thirded, will be 2 _a_, 3 _a_, or ½ _a_, ⅓ _a_,
respectively." Thus far is clear.--But he adds, "Now to move the body
_a_ with the celerity _c_, requires a certain force to be impressed
upon it; and to move it with a celerity as 2 _c_, requires _twice
that force_ to be impressed upon it, &c." Here I suspect some mistake
creeps in by the author's not distinguishing between a great force
applied at once, or a small one continually applied, to a mass of
matter, in order to move it. I think it is generally allowed by
the philosophers, and, for aught we know, is certainly true, that
there is no mass of matter, how great soever, but may be moved by
any force how small soever (taking friction out of the question)
and this small force continued, will in time bring the mass to move
with any velocity whatsoever.--Our author himself seems to allow
this towards the end of the same No. 2. when he is subdividing his
celerities and forces: for as in continuing the division to eternity
by his method of ½ _c_, ⅓ _c_, ¼ _c_, ⅕ _c_, &c. you can never come
to a fraction of velocity that is equal to 0 _c_, or no celerity at
all; so dividing the force in the same manner, you can never come
to a fraction of force that will not produce an equal fraction of
celerity.--Where then is the mighty vis inertiæ, and what is its
strength; when the greatest assignable mass of matter will give way
to, or be moved by the _least_ assignable force? Suppose two globes,
equal to the sun and to one another, exactly equipoised in Jove's
balance; suppose no friction in the centre of motion, in the beam or
elsewhere: if a musketo then were to light on one of them, would he
not give motion to them both, causing one to descend and the other
to rise? If it is objected, that the force of gravity helps one globe
to descend, I answer, the same force opposes the other's rising: here
is an equality that leaves the whole motion to be produced by the
musketo, without whom those globes would not be moved at all.--What
then does vis inertiæ do in this case? and what other effect could
we expect _if there were no such thing_? Surely if it were any thing
more than a phantom, there might be enough of it in such _vast_
bodies to annihilate, by its opposition to motion, so trifling a
force?

Our author would have reasoned more clearly, I think, if, as he has
used the letter _a_ for a certain quantity of matter, and _c_ for a
certain quantity of celerity, he had employed one letter more, and
put _f_ perhaps, for a certain quantity of force. This let us suppose
to be done; and then as it is a maxim that the force of bodies in
motion is equal to the quantity of matter multiplied by the celerity,
(or _f_ = _c_ X _a_); and as the force received by and subsisting in
matter, when it is put in motion, can never exceed the force given;
so if, _f_ moves _a_ with _c_, there must needs be required 2 _f_ to
move _a_ with 2 _c_; for _a_ moving with 2 _c_ would have a force
equal to 2 _f_, which it could not receive from 1 _f_; and this, not
because there is such a thing as vis inertiæ, for the case would be
the same _if that had no existence_; but because nothing _can_ give
more than it has, if 1 _f_ can to 1 _a_ give 1 _c_, which is the
same thing as giving it 1 _f_; (i. e. if force applied to matter at
rest, can put it in motion, and give it _equal_ force) where then is
vis inertiæ? If it existed at all in matter, should we not find the
quantity of its resistance subtracted from the force given?

In No. 4. our author goes on and says, "the body _a_ requires a
certain force to be impressed on it to be moved with a celerity as
_c_, or such a force is necessary; and therefore makes a certain
resistance, &c. A body as 2 _a_ requires _twice_ that force to be
moved with the _same celerity_, or it makes twice that resistance;
and so on."--This I think is not true; but that the body 2 _a_ moved
by the force 1 _f_ (though the eye may judge otherwise of it) does
really move with the same celerity as it did when impelled by the
same force; for 2 _a_ is compounded of 1 _a_ + 1 _a_: and if each of
the 1 _a_'s or each part of the compound were made to move with 1 _c_
(as they might be by 2 _f_) then the whole would move with 2 _c_, and
not with 1 _c_, as our author supposes. But 1 _f_ applied to 2 _a_,
makes each _a_ move with ½ _c_; and so the whole moves with 1 _c_;
exactly the same as 1 _a_ was made to do by 1 _f_ before. What is
equal celerity but a _measuring the same space by moving bodies in
the same time_?--Now if 1 _a_ impelled by 1 _f_ measures 100 yards
in a minute; and in 2 _a_ impelled by 1 _f_, each _a_ measures 50
yards in a minute, which added make 100; are not the celerities as
the forces equal? and since force and celerity in the same quantity
of matter are always in _proportion_ to each other, why should we,
when the quantity of matter is doubled, allow the force to continue
unimpaired, and yet suppose one half of the celerity to be lost?--I
wonder the more at our author's mistake in this point, since in the
same number I find him observing: "We may easily conceive that a body
as 3 _a_, 4 _a_, &c. would make 3 or 4 bodies equal to once _a_, each
of which would require once the first force to be moved with the
celerity _c_." If then in 3 _a_, each _a_ requires once the first
force _f_ to be moved with the celerity _c_, would not each move
with the force _f_ and celerity _c_; and consequently the whole be 3
_a_ moving with 3 _f_ and 3 _c?_ After so distinct an observation,
how could he miss of the consequence, and imagine that 1 _c_ and 3
_c_ were the same? Thus as our author's abatement of celerity in the
case of 2 _a_ moved by 1 _f_ is imaginary, so must be his additional
resistance.--And here again, I am at a loss to discover any effect of
the vis inertiæ.

In No. 6, he tells us, "that all this is likewise certain when taken
the contrary way, viz. _from motion to rest_; for the body _a_ moving
with a certain velocity, as _c_, requires a certain degree of force
or resistance to stop that motion, &c. &c." that is, in other words,
equal force is necessary to destroy force. It may be so. But how
does that discover a vis inertiæ? would not the effect be the same
_if there were no such thing_? A force 1 _f_ strikes a body 1 _a_,
and moves it with the celerity 1 _c_, i. e. with the force 1 _f_: It
requires, even according to our author, only an opposing 1 _f_ to
stop it. But ought it not (if there were a vis inertiæ) to have not
only the force 1 _f_, but an additional force equal to the force of
vis inertiæ, that _obstinate power by which a body endeavours with_
all its might _to continue in its present state, whether of motion
or rest_? I say, ought there not to be an opposing force equal to
the sum of these?--The truth however is, that there is no body, how
large soever, moving with any velocity, how great soever, but may be
stopped by any opposing force, how small soever, continually applied.
At least all our modern philosophers agree to tell us so.

Let me turn the thing in what light I please, I cannot discover the
vis inertiæ, nor any effect of it. It is allowed by all, that a body
1 _a_ moving with a velocity 1 _c_, and a force 1 _f_ _striking
another_ body 1 _a_ at rest, they will afterwards _move on together_,
each with ½ _c_ and ½ _f_; which, as I said before, is equal in the
whole to 1 _c_ and 1 _f_. If vis inertiæ, as in this case, neither
abates the force nor the velocity of bodies, what does it, or how
does it discover itself?

I imagine I may venture to conclude my observations on this piece,
almost in the words of the author; that if the doctrines of the
immateriality of the soul and the existence of God and of divine
providence are demonstrable from no plainer principles, the _deist_
[i.e. _theist_] has a desperate cause in hand. I oppose _my theist_
to his atheist, because I think they are diametrically opposite;
and not near of kin, as Mr. Whitfield seems to suppose; where (in
his journal) he tells us, "_M. B. was a deist, I had almost said an
atheist_;" that is, _chalk_, I had almost said _charcoal_.

The din of the market[19] increases upon me; and that, with frequent
interruptions, has, I find, made me say some things twice over; and,
I suppose, forget some others I intended to say. It has, however, one
good effect, as it obliges me to come to the relief of your patience
with

  Your humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[18] Baxter's Inquiry into the Nature of the Human Soul. B. V.

[19] Philadelphia market, in which Dr. Franklin lived. B. V.




TO JOHN PRINGLE, M. D. AND F. R. S.

  _On the different Strata of the Earth._


  _Craven-Street, Jan. 6, 1758._

  SIR,

I return you Mr. Mitchell's paper on the strata of the earth[20] with
thanks. The reading of it, and perusal of the draft that accompanies
it, have reconciled me to those convulsions which all naturalists
agree this globe has suffered. Had the different strata of clay,
gravel, marble, coals, lime-stone, sand, minerals, &c. continued to
lie level, one under the other, as they may be supposed to have done
before those convulsions, we should have had the use only of a few
of the uppermost of the strata, the others lying too deep and too
difficult to be come at; but the shell of the earth being broke,
and the fragments thrown into this oblique position, the disjointed
ends of a great number of strata of different kinds are brought up
to day, and a great variety of useful materials put into our power,
which would otherwise have remained eternally concealed from us. So
that what has been usually looked upon as a _ruin_ suffered by this
part of the universe, was, in reality, only a preparation, or means
of rendering the earth more fit for use, more capable of being to
mankind a convenient and comfortable habitation.

  I am, Sir, with great esteem, yours, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[20] See this paper afterwards printed in the _Philosophical
Transactions_.




TO THE ABBE SOULAVIE.

  Occasioned by his sending me some notes he had taken of what I had
  said to him in conversation on the Theory of the Earth. I wrote
  it to set him right in some points wherein he had mistaken my
  meaning.[21]


  _Passy, September 22, 1782._

  SIR,

I return the papers with some corrections. I did not find coal mines
under the calcareous rock in Derbyshire. I only remarked, that at
the lowest part of that rocky mountain which was in sight, there
were oyster shells mixed in the stone; and part of the high county
of Derby being probably as much above the level of the sea, as the
coal mines of Whitehaven were below it, seemed a proof, that there
had been a great _bouleversement_ in the surface of that island, some
part of it having been depressed under the sea, and other parts,
which had been under it, being raised above it. Such changes in the
superficial parts of the globe, seemed to me unlikely to happen,
if the earth were solid to the centre. I therefore imagined, that
the internal parts might be a fluid more dense, and of greater
specific gravity than any of the solids we are acquainted with, which
therefore might swim in or upon that fluid. Thus the surface of the
globe would be a shell, capable of being broken and disordered by
the violent movements of the fluid on which it rested. And as air
has been compressed by art so as to be twice as dense as water, in
which case, if such air and water could be contained in a strong
glass vessel, the air would be seen to take the lowest place, and
the water to float above and upon it; and as we know not yet the
degree of density to which air may be compressed, and M. Amontons
calculated, that its density increasing as it approached the centre,
in the same proportion as above the surface, it would at the depth of
[___] leagues, be heavier than gold, possibly the dense fluid occupying
the internal parts of the globe might be air compressed. And as the
force of expansion in dense air when heated is in proportion to its
density, this central air might afford another agent to move the
surface, as well as be of use in keeping alive the subterraneous
fires; though, as you observe, the sudden rarefaction of water coming
into contact without those fires, may also be an agent sufficiently
strong for that purpose, when acting between the incumbent earth and
the fluid on which it rests.

If one might indulge imagination in supposing how such a globe
was formed, I should conceive, that all the elements in separate
particles being originally mixed in confusion, and occupying a great
space, they would (as soon as the almighty fiat ordained gravity,
or the mutual attraction of certain parts, and the mutual repulsion
of others, to exist) all move to their common centre: that the air
being a fluid whose parts repel each other, though drawn to the
common centre by their gravity, would be densest towards the centre,
and rarer as more remote; consequently all matters lighter than the
central parts of that air, and immersed in it, would recede from
the centre, and rise till they arrived at that region of the air
which was of the same specific gravity with themselves, where they
would rest; while other matter, mixed with the lighter air, would
descend, and the two meeting would form the shell of the first earth,
leaving the upper atmosphere nearly clear. The original movement of
the parts towards their common centre would naturally form a whirl
there; which would continue upon the turning of the new-formed globe
upon its axis, and the greatest diameter of the shell would be in its
equator. If by any accident afterwards the axis should be changed,
the dense internal fluid, by altering its form, must burst the shell,
and throw all its substance into the confusion in which we find it. I
will not trouble you at present with my fancies concerning the manner
of forming the rest of our system. Superior beings smile at our
theories, and at our presumption in making them. I will just mention,
that your observation of the ferruginous nature of the lava which is
thrown out from the depths of our volcanoes, gave me great pleasure.
It has long been a supposition of mine, that the iron contained in
the surface of the globe has made it capable of becoming, as it is,
a great magnet; that the fluid of magnetism perhaps exists in all
space; so that there is a magnetical north and south of the universe,
as well as of this globe, and that if it were possible for a man to
fly from star to star, he might govern his course by the compass;
that it was by the power of this general magnetism this globe became
a particular magnet. In soft or hot iron the fluid of magnetism is
naturally diffused equally; when within the influence of the magnet
it is drawn to one end of the iron, made denser there and rarer
at the other. While the iron continues soft and hot, it is only a
temporary magnet; if it cools or grows hard in that situation, it
becomes a permanent one, the magnetic fluid not easily resuming its
equilibrium. Perhaps it may be owing to the permanent magnetism of
this globe, which it had not at first, that its axis is at present
kept parallel to itself, and not liable to the changes it formerly
suffered, which occasioned the rupture of its shell, the submersions
and emersions of its lands and the confusion of its seasons. The
present polar and equatorial diameters differing from each other
near ten leagues, it is easy to conceive, in case some power should
shift the axis gradually, and place it in the present equator, and
make the new equator pass through the present poles, what a sinking
of the waters would happen in the present equatorial regions, and
what a rising in the present polar regions; so that vast tracts would
be discovered, that now are under water, and others covered, that
are now dry, the water rising and sinking in the different extremes
near five leagues. Such an operation as this possibly occasioned
much of Europe, and among the rest this Mountain of Passy on which I
live, and which is composed of limestone, rock and sea-shells, to be
abandoned by the sea, and to change its ancient climate, which seems
to have been a hot one. The globe being now become a perfect magnet,
we are, perhaps, safe from any change of its axis. But we are still
subject to the accidents on the surface, which are occasioned by a
wave in the internal ponderous fluid; and such a wave is producible
by the sudden violent explosion you mention, happening from the
junction of water and fire under the earth, which not only lifts
the incumbent earth that is over the explosion, but impressing with
the same force the fluid under it, creates a wave, that may run a
thousand leagues, lifting, and thereby shaking, successively, all
the countries under which it passes. I know not, whether I have
expressed myself so clearly, as not to get out of your sight in
these reveries. It they occasion any new enquiries, and produce a
better hypothesis, they will not be quite useless. You see I have
given a loose to imagination; but I approve much more your method
of philosophising, which proceeds upon actual observation, makes
a collection of facts, and concludes no farther than those facts
will warrant. In my present circumstances, that mode of studying
the nature of the globe is out of my power, and therefore I have
permitted myself to wander a little in the wilds of fancy. With great
esteem,

  I have the honour to be, Sir, &c.

  BENJ. FRANKLIN.

_P. S._ I have heard, that chymists can by their art decompose stone
and wood, extracting a considerable quantity of water from the one,
and air from the other. It seems natural to conclude from this, that
water and air were ingredients in their original composition: for
men cannot make new matter of any kind. In the same manner may we
not suppose, that when we consume combustibles of all kinds, and
produce heat or light, we do not create that heat or light; but only
decompose a substance, which received it originally as a part of its
composition? Heat may be thus considered as originally in a fluid
state; but, attracted by organized bodies in their growth, becomes a
part of the solid. Besides this, I can conceive, that in the first
assemblage of the particles of which this earth is composed, each
brought its portion of the loose heat that had been connected with
it, and the whole, when pressed together, produced the internal fire
that still subsists.

FOOTNOTE:

[21] In an American periodical publication, this paper is said to
have been so endorsed in Dr. Franklin's hand. We extract the paper
itself, from the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society,
where it was read Nov. 21, 1788. The two papers that follow it are
from the same work, and were read in the Society the preceding day,
and the other Jan. 15, 1790. _Editor._




TO DAVID RITTENHOUSE, ESQ.

  _New and curious Theory of Light and Heat._


  [No date.]

Universal space, as far as we know of it, seems to be filled with a
subtle fluid, whose motion, or vibration, is called light.

This fluid may possibly be the same with that, which, being attracted
by, and entering into other more solid matter, dilates the substance
by separating the constituent particles, and so rendering some solids
fluid, and maintaining the fluidity of others; of which fluid, when
our bodies are totally deprived, they are said to be frozen; when
they have a proper quantity, they are in health, and fit to perform
all their functions; it is then called natural heat; when too much,
it is called fever; and when forced into the body in too great a
quantity from without, it gives pain, by separating and destroying
the flesh, and is then called burning, and the fluid so entering and
acting is called fire.

While organised bodies, animal or vegetable, are augmenting in
growth, or are supplying their continual waste, is not this done by
attracting and consolidating this fluid called fire, so as to form
of it a part of their substance? And is it not a separation of the
parts of such substance, which, dissolving its solid state, sets that
subtle fluid at liberty, when it again makes its appearance as fire?

For the power of man relative to matter, seems limited to the
separating or mixing the various kinds of it, or changing its form
and appearance by different compositions of it; but does not extend
to the making or creating new matter, or annihilating the old. Thus,
if fire be an original element or kind of matter, its quantity is
fixed and permanent in the universe. We cannot destroy any part of
it, or make addition to it; we can only separate it from that which
confines it, and so set it at liberty; as when we put wood in a
situation to be burnt, or transfer it from one solid to another, as
when we make lime by burning stone, a part of the fire dislodged
in the fuel being left in the stone. May not this fluid, when at
liberty, be capable of penetrating and entering into all bodies,
organised or not, quitting easily in totality those not organised,
and quitting easily in part those which are; the part assumed and
fixed remaining till the body is dissolved?

Is it not this fluid which keeps asunder the particles of air,
permitting them to approach, or separating them more, in proportion
as its quantity is diminished or augmented?

Is it not the greater gravity of the particles of air, which forces
the particles of this fluid to mount with the matters to which it is
attached, as smoke or vapour?

Does it not seem to have a greater affinity with water, since it will
quit a solid to unite with that fluid, and go off with it in vapour,
leaving the solid cold to the touch, and the degree measurable by the
thermometer?

The vapour rises attached to this fluid, but at a certain height they
separate, and the vapour descends in rain, retaining but little of
it, in snow or hail less. What becomes of that fluid? Does it rise
above our atmosphere, and mix with the universal mass of the same
kind?

Or does a spherical stratum of it, denser, as less mixed with air,
attracted by this globe, and repelled or pushed up only to a certain
height from its surface, by the greater weight of air, remain there
surrounding the globe, and proceeding with it round the sun?

In such case, as there may be a continuity or communication of this
fluid through the air quite down to the earth, is it not by the
vibrations given to it, by the sun, that light appears to us? And
may it not be, that every one of the infinitely small vibrations,
striking common matter with a certain force, enters its substance,
is held there by attraction, and augmented by succeeding vibrations,
till the matter has received as much as their force can drive into it?

Is it not thus, that the surface of this globe is continually heated
by such repeated vibrations in the day, and cooled by the escape of
the heat when those vibrations are discontinued in the night, or
intercepted and reflected by clouds?

Is it not thus, that fire is amassed and makes the greatest part of
the substance of combustible bodies?

Perhaps, when this globe was first formed, and its original particles
took their place at certain distances from the centre, in proportion
to their greater or less gravity, the fluid fire, attracted towards
that centre, might in great part be obliged, as lightest, to take
place above the rest, and thus form the sphere of fire above
supposed, which would afterwards be continually diminishing by the
substance it afforded to organised bodies, and the quantity restored
to it again, by the burning or other separating of the parts of those
bodies.

Is not the natural heat of animals thus produced, by separating in
digestion the parts of food, and setting their fire at liberty?

Is it not this sphere of fire which kindles the wandering globes that
sometimes pass through it in our course round the sun, have their
surface kindled by it, and burst when their included air is greatly
rarefied by the heat on their burning surfaces?

May it not have been from such considerations that the ancient
philosophers supposed a sphere of fire to exist above the air of our
atmosphere?

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MR. BODOIN.

  _Queries and Conjectures relating to Magnetism and the Theory of
  the Earth._


  [No date.]

  DEAR SIR,

I received your favours by Messrs. Gore, Hilliard, and Lee, with
whose conversation I was much pleased, and wished for more of it; but
their stay with us was too short. Whenever you recommend any of your
friends to me, you oblige me.

I want to know whether your Philosophical Society received the
second volume of our Transactions. I sent it, but never heard of its
arriving. If it miscarried, I will send another. Has your Society
among its books the French work _Sur les Arts, et les Metiers_? It
is voluminous, well executed, and may be useful in our country. I
have bequeathed it them in my will; but if they have it already, I
will substitute something else.

Our ancient correspondence used to have something philosophical in
it. As you are now more free from public cares, and I expect to be so
in a few months, why may we not resume that kind of correspondence?
Our much regretted friend Winthrop once made me the compliment, that
I was good at starting game for philosophers, let me try if I can
start a little for you.

Has the question, how came the earth by its magnetism, ever been
considered?

Is it likely that _iron ore_ immediately existed when this globe was
first formed; or may it not rather be supposed a gradual production
of time?

If the earth is at present magnetical, in virtue of the masses of
iron ore contained in it, might not some ages pass before it had
magnetic polarity?

Since iron ore may exist without that polarity, and by being placed
in certain circumstances may obtain it, from an external cause, is
it not possible that the earth received its magnetism from some such
cause?

In short, may not a magnetic power exist throughout our system,
perhaps through all systems, so that if men could make a voyage in
the starry regions, a compass might be of use? And may not such
universal magnetism, with its uniform direction, be serviceable in
keeping the diurnal revolution of a planet more steady to the same
axis?

Lastly, as the poles of magnets may be changed by the presence of
stronger magnets, might not, in ancient times, the near passing of
some large comet of greater magnetic power than this globe of ours
have been a means of changing its poles, and thereby wrecking and
deranging its surface, placing in different regions the effect of
centrifugal force, so as to raise the waters of the sea in some,
while they were depressed in others?

Let me add another question or two, not relating indeed to magnetism,
but, however, to the theory of the earth.

Is not the finding of great quantities of shells and bones of animals
(natural to hot climates) in the cold ones of our present world,
some proof that its poles have been changed? Is not the supposition
that the poles have been changed, the easiest way of accounting for
the deluge, by getting rid of the old difficulty how to dispose of
its waters after it was over? Since if the poles were again to be
changed, and placed in the present equator, the sea would fall there
about fifteen miles in height, and rise as much in the present polar
regions; and the effect would be proportionable if the new poles were
placed any where between the present and the equator.

Does not the apparent wreck of the surface of this globe, thrown up
into long ridges of mountains, with strata in various positions, make
it probable, that its internal mass is a fluid; but a fluid so dense
as to float the heaviest of our substances? Do we know the limit of
condensation air is capable of? Supposing it to grow denser _within_
the surface, in the same proportion nearly as it does _without_, at
what depth may it be equal in density with gold?

Can we easily conceive how the strata of the earth could have been
so deranged, if it had not been a mere shell supported by a heavier
fluid? Would not such a supposed internal fluid globe be immediately
sensible of a change in the situation of the earth's axis, alter its
form, and thereby burst the shell, and throw up parts of it above
the rest? As, if we would alter the position of the fluid contained
in the shell of an egg, and place its longest diameter where the
shortest now is, the shell must break; but would be much harder to
break; if the whole internal substance were as solid and hard as the
shell.

Might not a wave, by any means raised in this supposed internal ocean
of extremely dense fluid, raise in some degree, as it passes, the
present shell of incumbent earth, and break it in some places, as in
earthquakes? And may not the progress of such wave, and the disorders
it occasions among the solids of the shell, account for the rumbling
sound being first heard at a distance, augmenting as it approaches,
and gradually dying away as it proceeds? A circumstance observed by
the inhabitants of South America in their last great earthquake, that
noise coming from a place, some degrees north of Lima, and being
traced by enquiry quite down to Buenos Ayres, proceeded regularly
from north to south at the rate of [___] leagues per minute, as I was
informed by a very ingenious Peruvian whom I met with at Paris.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO M. DUBOURG.

  _On the Nature of Sea Coal[22]._


**** I am persuaded, as well as you, that the sea coal has a
vegetable origin, and that it has been formed near the surface of
the earth; but as preceding convulsions of nature had served to bring
it very deep in many places, and covered it with many different
strata, we are indebted to subsequent convulsions for having brought
within our view the extremities of its veins, so as to lead us to
penetrate the earth in search of it. I visited last summer a large
coal-mine at Whitehaven, in Cumberland; and in following the vein
and descending by degrees towards the sea, I penetrated below the
ocean, where the level of its surface was more than eight hundred
fathom above my head, and the miners assured me, that their works
extended some miles beyond the place where I then was, continually
and gradually descending under the sea. The slate, which forms the
roof of this coal mine, is impressed in many places with the figures
of leaves and branches of fern, which undoubtedly grew at the surface
when the slate was in the state of sand on the banks of the sea.
Thus it appears that this vein of coal has suffered a prodigious
settlement. ****

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[22] Retranslated from the French edition of Dr. Franklin's works.
_Editor._




TO DR. PRIESTLEY[23].

  _Effect of Vegetation on noxious Air._


**** That the vegetable creation should restore the air which is
spoiled by the animal part of it, looks like a rational system, and
seems to be of a piece with the rest. Thus fire purifies water all
the world over. It purifies it by distillation, when it raises it in
vapours, and lets it fall in rain; and farther still by filtration,
when, keeping it fluid, it suffers that rain to percolate the
earth. We knew before, that putrid animal substances were converted
into sweet vegetables, when mixed with the earth, and applied as
manure; and now, it seems, that the same putrid substances, mixed
with the air, have a similar effect. The strong thriving state of
your mint, in putrid air, seems to shew, that the air is mended
by taking something from it, and not by adding to it. I hope this
will give some check to the rage of destroying trees that grow near
houses, which has accompanied our late improvements in gardening,
from an opinion of their being unwholesome. I am certain, from long
observation, that there is nothing unhealthy in the air of woods; for
we Americans have every where our country habitations in the midst
of woods, and no people on earth enjoy better health, or are more
prolific. ****

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[23] This extract is taken from Dr. Priestley's Experiments on
Air, Vol. I. page 94. It was written in answer to a note from Dr.
Priestley, informing our author of the result of certain experiments
on some plants which he had seen at Dr. Priestley's house in a very
flourishing state, in jars of highly noxious air. _Editor._




TO THE SAME[24].

  _On the Inflammability of the Surface of certain Rivers in America._


  _Craven-street, April 10, 1774._

  DEAR SIR,

In compliance with your request, I have endeavoured to recollect the
circumstances of the American experiments I formerly mentioned to
you, of raising a flame on the surface of some waters there.

When I passed through New Jersey in 1764, I heard it several times
mentioned, that by applying a lighted candle near the surface of
some of their rivers, a sudden flame would catch and spread on the
water, continuing to burn for near half a minute. But the accounts I
received were so imperfect, that I could form no guess at the cause
of such an effect, and rather doubted the truth of it. I had no
opportunity of seeing the experiment; but calling to see a friend who
happened to be just returning home from making it himself, I learned
from him the manner of it; which was to choose a shallow place,
where the bottom could be reached by a walking-stick, and was muddy;
the mud was first to be stirred with the stick, and when a number
of small bubbles began to arise from it, the candle was applied.
The flame was so sudden and so strong, that it catched his ruffle
and spoiled it, as I saw. New Jersey having many pine-trees in many
parts of it, I then imagined that something like a volatile oil of
turpentine might be mixed with the waters from a pine-swamp, but this
supposition did not quite satisfy me. I mentioned the fact to some
philosophical friends on my return to England, but it was not much
attended to. I suppose I was thought a little too credulous.

In 1765, the Reverend Dr. Chandler received a letter from Dr.
Finley, President of the College in that province, relating the
same experiment. It was read at the Royal Society, November 21 of
that year, but not printed in the Transactions; perhaps because
it was thought too strange to be true, and some ridicule might be
apprehended, if any member should attempt to repeat it, in order to
ascertain, or refute it. The following is a copy of that account.

"A worthy gentleman, who lives at a few miles distance, informed
me, that in a certain small cove of a mill-pond, near his house, he
was surprized to see the surface of the water blaze like inflamed
spirits. I soon after went to the place, and made the experiment with
the same success. The bottom of the creek was muddy, and when stirred
up, so as to cause a considerable curl on the surface, and a lighted
candle held within two or three inches of it, the whole surface was
in a blaze, as instantly as the vapour of warm inflammable spirits,
and continued, when strongly agitated, for the space of several
seconds. It was at first imagined to be peculiar to that place; but
upon trial it was soon found, that such a bottom in other places
exhibited the same phenomenon. The discovery was accidentally made by
one belonging to the mill."

I have tried the experiment twice here in England, but without
success. The first was in a slow running water with a muddy bottom.
The second in a stagnant water at the bottom of a deep ditch. Being
some time employed in stirring this water, I ascribed an intermitting
fever, which seized me a few days after, to my breathing too much of
that foul air, which I stirred up from the bottom, and which I could
not avoid while I stooped, endeavouring to kindle it. The discoveries
you have lately made, of the manner in which inflammable air is in
some cases produced, may throw light on this experiment, and explain
its succeeding in some cases, and not in others. With the highest
esteem and respect,

I am, dear Sir, your most obedient humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[24] From his Experiments on Air, Vol. I. page 321. _Editor._




TO DR. PERCIVAL[25].

  _On the different Quantities of Rain which fall at different
  Heights over the same Ground._


  [No date.]

On my return to London I found your favour of the 16th of May (1771).
I wish I could, as you desire, give you a better explanation of the
phenomenon in question, since you seem not quite satisfied with your
own; but I think we want more and a greater variety of experiments,
in different circumstances, to enable us to form a thoroughly
satisfactory hypothesis. Not that I make the least doubt of the facts
already related, as I know both Lord Charles Cavendish, and Dr.
Heberden to be very accurate experimenters: but I wish to know the
event of the trials proposed in your six queries; and also, whether
in the same place where the lower vessel receives nearly twice the
quantity of water that is received by the upper, a third vessel
placed at half the height will receive a quantity proportionable. I
will however endeavour to explain to you what occurred to me, when I
first heard of the fact.

I suppose it will be generally allowed, on a little consideration
of the subject, that scarce any drop of water was, when it began to
fall from the clouds, of a magnitude equal to that it has acquired,
when it arrives at the earth; the same of the several pieces of
hail; because they are often so large and so weighty, that we
cannot conceive a possibility of their being suspended in the air,
and remaining at rest there, for any time, how small soever; nor do
we conceive any means of forming them so large, before they set out
to fall. It seems then, that each beginning drop, and particle of
hail, receives continual addition in its progress downwards. This
may be several ways: by the union of numbers in their course, so
that what was at first only descending mist, becomes a shower; or
by each particle, in its descent through air that contains a great
quantity of dissolved water, striking against, attaching to itself,
and carrying down with it such particles of that dissolved water, as
happen to be in its way; or attracting to itself such as do not lie
directly in its course by its different state with regard either to
common or electric fire; or by all these causes united.

In the first case, by the uniting of numbers, larger drops might be
made, but the quantity falling in the same place would be the same at
all heights; unless, as you mention, the whole should be contracted
in falling, the lines described by all the drops converging, so
that what set out to fall from a cloud of many thousand acres,
should reach the earth in perhaps a third of that extent, of which I
somewhat doubt. In the other cases we have two experiments.

1. A dry glass bottle filled with very cold water, in a warm day,
will presently collect from the seemingly dry air that surrounds
it a quantity of water, that shall cover its surface and run down
its sides, which perhaps is done by the power wherewith the cold
water attracts the fluid, common fire that had been united with the
dissolved water in the air, and drawing the fire through the glass
into itself, leaves the water on the outside.

2. An electrified body left in a room for some time, will be more
covered with dust than other bodies in the same room not electrified,
which dust seems to be attracted from the circumambient air.

Now we know that the rain, even in our hottest days, comes from a
very cold region. Its falling sometimes in the form of ice, shows
this clearly; and perhaps even the rain is snow or ice, when it first
moves downwards, though thawed in falling: and we know that the
drops of rain are often electrified: but those causes of addition to
each drop of water, or piece of hail, one would think could not long
continue to produce the same effect; since the air, through which the
drops fall, must soon be stripped of its previously dissolved water,
so as to be no longer capable of augmenting them. Indeed very heavy
showers, of either, are never of long continuance; but moderate rains
often continue so long as to puzzle this hypothesis: so that upon the
whole I think, as I intimated before, that we are yet hardly ripe for
making one. ****

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[25] This letter is taken from the Memoirs of the Literary and
Philosophical Society of Manchester, Vol. II. page 126. It was
communicated by the person to whom it is addressed, and was read
in the Society, January 21, 1784, as an appendix to a paper by Dr.
Percival on the same subject. _Editor._




TO MR. NAIRNE, OF LONDON[26].

  _Proposing a slowly sensible Hygrometer for certain Purposes._


  _Passy, near Paris, Nov. 13, 1780._

  SIR,

The qualities hitherto sought in a hygrometer, or instrument to
discover the degrees of moisture and dryness in the air, seem to
have been, an aptitude to receive humidity readily from a moist
air, and to part with it is as readily to a dry air. Different
substances have been found to possess more or less of this quality;
but when we shall have found the substance that has it in the
greatest perfection, there will still remain some uncertainty in the
conclusions to be drawn from the degree shown by the instrument,
arising from the actual state of the instrument itself as to heat and
cold. Thus, if two bottles or vessels of glass or metal being filled,
the one with cold and the other with hot water, are brought into
a room, the moisture of the air in the room will attach itself in
quantities to the surface of the cold vessel, while if you actually
wet the surface of the hot vessel, the moisture will immediately quit
it, and be absorbed by the same air. And thus, in a sudden change of
the air from cold to warm, the instrument remaining longer cold may
condense and absorb more moisture, and mark the air as having become
more humid than it is in reality, and the contrary in a change from
warm to cold.

But if such a suddenly changing instrument could be freed from
these imperfections, yet when the design is to discover the
different degrees of humidity in the air of different countries,
I apprehend the quick sensibility of the instrument to be rather
a disadvantage; since, to draw the desired conclusions from it, a
constant and frequent observation day and night in each country will
be necessary for a year or years, and the mean of each different
set of observations is to be found and determined. After all which
some uncertainty will remain respecting the different degrees of
exactitude with which different persons may have made and taken
notes of their observations.

For these reasons, I apprehend that a substance which, though capable
of being distended by moisture and contracted by dryness, is so
slow in receiving and parting with its humidity, that the frequent
changes in the atmosphere have not time to affect it sensibly, and
which therefore should gradually take nearly the medium of all
those changes and preserve it constantly, would be the most proper
substance of which to make such an hygrometer.

Such an instrument, you, my dear sir, though without intending it,
have made for me; and I, without desiring or expecting it, have
received from you. It is therefore with propriety that I address to
you the following account of it; and the more, as you have both a
head to contrive and a hand to execute the means of perfecting it.
And I do this with greater pleasure, as it affords me the opportunity
of renewing that antient correspondence and acquaintance with you,
which to me was always so pleasing and so instructive.

You may possibly remember, that in or about the year 1758, you made
for me a set of artificial magnets, six in number, each five and
a half inches long, half an inch broad, and one eighth of an inch
thick. These, with two pieces of soft iron, which together equalled
one of the magnets, were inclosed in a little box of mahogany wood,
the grain of which ran with, and not across, the length of the box:
and the box was closed by a little shutter of the same wood, the
grain of which ran across the box; and the ends of this shutting
piece were bevelled so as to fit and slide in a kind of dovetail
groove when the box was to be shut or opened.

I had been of opinion, that good mahogany wood was not affected by
moisture so as to change its dimensions, and that it was always to
be found as the tools of the workman left it. Indeed the difference
at different times in the same country is so small as to be scarcely
in a common way observable. Hence the box, which was made so as to
allow sufficient room for the magnets to slide out and in freely,
and, when in, afforded them so much play that by shaking the box one
could make them strike the opposite sides alternately, continued in
the same state all the time I remained in England, which was four
years, without any apparent alteration. I left England in August
1762, and arrived at Philadelphia in October the same year. In a few
weeks after my arrival, being desirous of showing your magnets to a
philosophical friend, I found them so tight in the box, that it was
with difficulty I got them out; and constantly during the two years I
remained there, viz. till November 1764, this difficulty of getting
them out and in continued. The little shutter too, as wood does not
shrink lengthways of the grain, was found too long to enter its
grooves, and, not being used, was mislaid and lost; and I afterwards
had another made that fitted.

In December 1764 I returned to England, and after some time I
observed that my box was become full big enough for my magnets, and
too wide for my new shutter; which was so much too short for its
grooves, that it was apt to fall out; and to make it keep in, I
lengthened it by adding to each end a little coat of sealing-wax.

I continued in England more than ten years, and during all that time,
after the first change, I perceived no alteration. The magnets had
the same freedom in their box, and the little shutter continued with
the added sealing-wax to fit its grooves, till some weeks after my
second return to America.

As I could not imagine any other cause for this change of dimensions
in the box, when in the different countries, I concluded, first
generally that the air of England was moister than that of America.
And this I supposed an effect of its being an island, where every
wind that blew must necessarily pass over some sea before it arrived,
and of course lick up some vapour. I afterwards indeed doubted
whether it might be just only so far as related to the city of
London, where I resided; because there are many causes of moisture in
the city air, which do not exist to the same degree in the country;
such as the brewers' and dyers' boiling caldrons, and the great
number of pots and tea-kettles continually on the fire, sending forth
abundance of vapour; and also the number of animals who by their
breath continually increase it; to which may be added, that even the
vast quantity of sea coals burnt there, do in kindling discharge a
great deal of moisture.

When I was in England, the last time, you also made for me a little
achromatic pocket telescope, the body was brass, and it had a round
case (I think of thin wood) covered with shagrin. All the while
I remained in England, though possibly there might be some small
changes in the dimensions of this case, I neither perceived nor
suspected any. There was always comfortable room for the telescope
to slip in and out. But soon after I arrived in America, which was
in May 1775, the case became too small for the instrument, it was
with much difficulty and various contrivances that I got it out, and
I could never after get it in again, during my stay there, which
was eighteen months. I brought it with me to Europe, but left the
case as useless, imagining that I should find the continental air of
France as dry as that of Pennsylvania, where my magnet box had also
returned a second time to its narrowness, and pinched the pieces, as
heretofore, obliging me too, to scrape the sealing-wax off the ends
of the shutter.

I had not been long in France, before I was surprised to find, that
my box was become as large as it had always been in England, the
magnets entered and came out with the same freedom, and, when in,
I could rattle them against its sides; this has continued to be
the case without sensible variation. My habitation is out of Paris
distant almost a league, so that the moist air of the city cannot be
supposed to have much effect upon the box. I am on a high dry hill,
in a free air, as likely to be dry as any air in France. Whence it
seems probable that the air of England in general may, as well as
that of London, be moister than the air of America, since that of
France is so, and in a part so distant from the sea.

The greater dryness of the air in America appears from some other
observations. The cabinet work formerly sent us from London, which
consisted in thin plates of fine wood glued upon fir, never would
stand with us; the vaneering, as those plates are called, would get
loose and come off; both woods shrinking, and their grains often
crossing, they were forever cracking and flying. And in my electrical
experiments there, it was remarkable, that a mahogany table, on which
my jars stood under the prime conductor to be charged, would often be
so dry, particularly when the wind had been some time at north-west,
which with us is a very drying wind, as to isolate the jars, and
prevent their being charged till I had formed a communication between
their coatings and the earth. I had a like table in London, which I
used for the same purpose all the time I resided there; but it was
never so dry as to refuse conducting the electricity.

Now what I would beg leave to recommend to you, is, that you would
recollect, if you can, the species of mahogany of which you made
my box, for you know there is a good deal of difference in woods
that go under that name; or if that cannot be, that you would take
a number of pieces of the closest and finest grained mahogany that
you can meet with, plane them to the thinness of about a line, and
the width of about two inches across the grain, and fix each of the
pieces in some instrument that you can contrive, which will permit
them to contract and dilate, and will show, in sensible degrees, by
a moveable hand upon a marked scale, the otherwise less sensible
quantities of such contraction and dilatation. If these instruments
are all kept in the same place while making, and are graduated
together while subject to the same degrees of moisture or dryness,
I apprehend you will have so many comparable hygrometers, which,
being sent into different countries, and continued there for some
time, will find and show there the mean of the different dryness
and moisture of the air of those countries, and that with much less
trouble than by any hygrometer hitherto in use.

  With great esteem, I am,

  Dear Sir, your most obedient,

  And most humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[26] This letter is taken from the Transactions of the American
Philosophical Society, in which it was read, January 26, 1786.
_Editor._




TO DR. P.[27] IN LONDON.

  _Relating a curious Instance of the Effect of Oil on Water._


  _Philadelphia, Dec. 1, 1762._

  SIR,

During our passage to Madeira, the weather being warm, and the cabin
windows constantly open for the benefit of the air, the candles
at night flared and run very much, which was an inconvenience. At
Madeira, we got oil to burn, and with a common glass tumbler or
beaker, slung in wire, and suspended to the cieling of the cabin, and
a little wire hoop for the wick, furnished with corks to float on the
oil, I made an Italian lamp, that gave us very good light all over
the table.--The glass at bottom contained water to about one third of
its height; another third was taken up with oil; the rest was left
empty that the sides of the glass might protect the flame from the
wind. There is nothing remarkable in all this; but what follows is
particular. At supper, looking on the lamp, I remarked, that though
the surface of the oil was perfectly tranquil, and duly preserved
its position and distance with regard to the brim of the glass, the
water under the oil was in great commotion, rising and falling in
irregular waves, which continued during the whole evening. The lamp
was kept burning as a watch light all night, till the oil was spent,
and the water only remained. In the morning I observed, that though
the motion of the ship continued the same, the water was now quiet,
and its surface as tranquil as that of the oil had been the evening
before.

At night again, when oil was put upon it, the water resumed its
irregular motions, rising in high waves almost to the surface of the
oil, but without disturbing the smooth level of that surface. And
this was repeated every day during the voyage.

Since my arrival in America, I have repeated the experiment
frequently thus. I have put a pack-thread round a tumbler, with
strings of the same, from each side, meeting above it in a knot at
about a foot distance from the top of the tumbler. Then putting in
as much water as would fill about one third part of the tumbler, I
lifted it up by the knot, and swung it to and fro in the air; when
the water appeared to keep its place in the tumbler as steadily as if
it had been ice. But pouring gently in upon the water about as much
oil, and then again swinging it in the air as before, the tranquility
before possessed by the water, was transferred to the surface of the
oil, and the water under it was agitated with the same commotions as
at sea.

I have shewn this experiment to a number of ingenious persons. Those
who are but slightly acquainted with the principles of hydrostatics,
&c. are apt to fancy immediately that they understand it, and readily
attempt to explain it; but their explanations have been different,
and to me not very intelligible. Others, more deeply skilled in those
principles, seem to wonder at it, and promise to consider it. And I
think it is worth considering: for a new appearance, if it cannot
be explained by our old principles, may afford us new ones, of use
perhaps in explaining some other obscure parts of natural knowledge.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[27] Dr. Pringle. _Editor._




  _Of the Stilling of Waves by Means of Oil. Extracted from Sundry
  Letters between Benjamin Franklin, L. L. D. F. R. S. William
  Brownrigg, M. D. F. R. S. and the Rev. Mr. Farish._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 2, 1774.


_Extract of a Letter from Dr. Brownrigg to Dr. Franklin, dated
Ormathwait, January 27, 1773._

By the enclosed from an old friend, a worthy clergyman at Carlisle,
whose great learning and extensive knowledge in most sciences would
have more distinguished him, had he been placed in a more conspicuous
point of view, you will find, that he had heard of your experiment on
Derwent Lake, and has thrown together what he could collect on that
subject; to which I have subjoined one experiment from the relation
of another gentleman.


_Extract of a Letter from the Rev. Mr. Farish, to Dr. Brownrigg._

I some time ago met with Mr. Dun, who surprised me with an account of
an experiment you had tried upon the Derwent Water, in company with
Sir John Pringle and Dr. Franklin. According to his representation,
the water, which had been in great agitation before, was instantly
calmed upon pouring in only a very small quantity of oil, and that
to so great a distance round the boat as seemed incredible. I have
since had the same accounts from others, but I suspect all of a
little exaggeration. Pliny mentions this property of oil as known
particularly to the divers, who made use of it in his days, in order
to have a more steady light at the bottom.[28] The sailors, I have
been told, have observed something of the same kind in our days, that
the water is always remarkably smoother, in the wake of a ship that
has been newly tallowed, than it is in one that is foul. Mr. Pennant
also mentions an observation of the like nature made by the seal
catchers in Scotland. _Brit. Zool._ Vol. IV. _Article_ Seal. When
these animals are devouring a very oily fish, which they always do
under water, the waves alone are observed to be remarkably smooth,
and by this mark the fishermen know where to look for them. Old Pliny
does not usually meet with all the credit I am inclined to think he
deserves. I shall be glad to have an authentic account of the Keswick
experiment, and if it comes up to the representations that have been
made of it, I shall not much hesitate to believe the old gentleman in
another more wonderful phenomenon he relates of stilling a tempest
only by throwing up a little vinegar into the air.


_Extract of a Letter to Dr. Brownrigg from Dr. Franklin._

  _London Nov. 7, 1773._

  DEAR SIR,

I thank you for the remarks of your learned friend at Carlisle. I
had, when a youth, read and smiled at Pliny's account of a practice
among the seamen of his time, to still the waves in a storm by
pouring oil into the sea; which he mentions, as well as the use
made of oil by the divers; but the stilling a tempest by throwing
vinegar into the air had escaped me. I think with your friend, that
it has been of late too much the mode to slight the learning of the
ancients. The learned, too, are apt to slight too much the knowledge
of the vulgar. The cooling by evaporation was long an instance of the
latter. This art of smoothing the waves by oil is an instance of both.

Perhaps you may not dislike to have an account of all I have heard,
and learnt, and done in this way. Take it if you please as follows.

In 1757, being at sea in a fleet of 96 sail bound against Louisbourg,
I observed the wakes of two of the ships to be remarkably smooth,
while all the others were ruffled by the wind, which blew fresh.
Being puzzled with the differing appearance, I at last pointed it out
to our captain, and asked him the meaning of it. "The cooks," says
he, "have, I suppose, been just emptying their greasy water through
the scuppers, which has greased the sides of those ships a little;"
and this answer he gave me with an air of some little contempt, as
to a person ignorant of what every body else knew. In my own mind
I at first slighted his solution, though I was not able to think
of another, but recollecting what I had formerly read in Pliny, I
resolved to make some experiment of the effect of oil on water, when
I should have opportunity.

Afterwards being again at sea in 1762, I first observed the wonderful
quietness of oil on agitated water, in the swinging glass lamp I made
to hang up in the cabin, as described in my printed papers[29]. This
I was continually looking at and considering, as an appearance to me
inexplicable. An old sea captain, then a passenger with me, thought
little of it, supposing it an effect of the same kind with that of
oil put on water to smooth it, which he said was a practice of the
Bermudians when they would strike fish, which they could not see, if
the surface of the water was ruffled by the wind. This practice I had
never before heard of, and was obliged to him for the information;
though I thought him mistaken as to the sameness of the experiment,
the operations being different as well as the effects. In one
case, the water is smooth till the oil is put on, and then becomes
agitated. In the other it is agitated before the oil is applied, and
then becomes smooth. The same gentleman told me, he had heard it was
a practice with the fisherman of Lisbon when about to return into the
river (if they saw before them too great a surf upon the bar, which
they apprehended might fill their boats in passing) to empty a bottle
or two of oil into the sea, which would suppress the breakers, and
allow them to pass safely. A confirmation of this I have not since
had an opportunity of obtaining: but discoursing of it with another
person, who had often been in the Mediterranean, I was informed,
that the divers there, who, when under water in their business, need
light, which the curling of the surface interrupts by the refractions
of so many little waves, let a small quantity of oil now and then out
of their mouths, which rising to the surface smooths it, and permits
the light to come down to them. All these informations I at times
revolved in my mind, and wondered to find no mention of them in our
books of experimental philosophy.

At length being at Clapham, where there is, on the common, a large
pond, which I observed one day to be very rough with the wind, I
fetched out a cruet of oil, and dropt a little of it on the water.
I saw it spread itself with surprising swiftness upon the surface;
but the effect of smoothing the waves was not produced; for I had
applied it first on the leeward side of the pond, where the waves
were largest, and the wind drove my oil back upon the shore. I
then went to the windward side where they began to form; and there
the oil, though not more than a tea spoonful, produced an instant
calm over a space several yards square, which spread amazingly,
and extended itself gradually till it reached the lee side, making
all that quarter of the pond, perhaps half an acre, as smooth as a
looking-glass.

After this I contrived to take with me, whenever I went into the
country, a little oil in the upper hollow joint of my bamboo cane,
with which I might repeat the experiment as opportunity should offer,
and I found it constantly to succeed.

In these experiments, one circumstance struck me with particular
surprise. This was the sudden, wide and forcible spreading of a drop
of oil on the face of the water, which I do not know that any body
has hitherto considered. If a drop of oil is put on a highly polished
marble table, or on a looking-glass that lies horizontally, the drop
remains in its place, spreading very little. But when put on water,
it spreads instantly many feet round, becoming so thin as to produce
the prismatic colours, for a considerable space, and beyond them so
much thinner as to be invisible, except in its effect of smoothing
the waves at a much greater distance. It seems as if a mutual
repulsion between its particles took place as soon as it touched the
water, and a repulsion so strong as to act on other bodies swimming
on the surface, as straw, leaves, chips, &c. forcing them to recede
every way from the drop, as from a centre, leaving a large clear
space. The quantity of this force, and the distance to which it
will operate, I have not yet ascertained; but I think it a curious
enquiry, and I wish to understand whence it arises.

In our journey to the north, when we had the pleasure of seeing you
at Ormathwaite, we visited the celebrated Mr. Smeaton, near Leeds.
Being about to show him the smoothing experiment on a little pond
near his house, an ingenious pupil of his, Mr. Jessop, then present,
told us of an odd appearance on that pond, which had lately occurred
to him. He was about to clean a little cup in which he kept oil, and
he threw upon the water some flies that had been drowned in the oil.
These flies presently began to move, and turned round on the water
very rapidly, as if they were vigorously alive, though on examination
he found they were not so. I immediately concluded that the motion
was occasioned by the power of the repulsion above mentioned, and
that the oil issuing gradually from the spungy body of the fly
continued the motion. He found some more flies drowned in oil, with
which the experiment was repeated before us. To show that it was not
any effect of life recovered by the flies, I imitated it by little
bits of oiled chips and paper cut in the form of a comma, of the size
of a common fly; when the stream of repelling particles issuing from
the point made the comma turn round the contrary way. This is not a
chamber experiment; for it cannot be well repeated in a bowl or dish
of water on a table. A considerable surface of water is necessary to
give room for the expansion of a small quantity of oil. In a dish of
water, if the smallest drop of oil be let fall in the middle, the
whole surface is presently covered with a thin greasy film proceeding
from the drop; but as soon as that film has reached the sides of the
dish, no more will issue from the drop, but it remains in the form
of oil, the sides of the dish putting a stop to its dissipation by
prohibiting the farther expansion of the film.

Our friend Sir John Pringle, being soon after in Scotland, learned
there, that those employed in the herring-fishery could at a distance
see where the shoals of herrings were, by the smoothness of the water
over them, which might possibly be occasioned, he thought, by some
oiliness proceeding from their bodies.

A gentleman from Rhode-island told me, it had been remarked, that the
harbour of Newport was ever smooth while any whaling vessels were
in it; which probably arose from hence, that the blubber which they
sometimes bring loose in the hold, or the leakage of their barrels,
might afford some oil, to mix with that water, which from time to
time they pump out to keep their vessel free, and that some oil might
spread over the surface of the water in the harbour, and prevent the
forming of any waves.

This prevention I would thus endeavour to explain.

There seems to be no natural repulsion between water and air, such as
to keep them from coming into contact with each other. Hence we find
a quantity of air in water; and if we extract it by means of the
air-pump, the same water, again exposed to the air, will soon imbibe
an equal quantity.

Therefore air in motion, which is wind, in passing over the smooth
surface of water, may rub, as it were, upon that surface, and raise
it into wrinkles, which, if the wind continues, are the elements of
future waves.

The smallest wave once raised does not immediately subside, and leave
the neighbouring water quiet: but in subsiding raises nearly as much
of the water next to it, the friction of the parts making little
difference. Thus a stone dropped in a pool raises first a single wave
round itself; and leaves it, by sinking to the bottom; but that first
wave subsiding raises a second, the second a third, and so on in
circles to a great extent.

A small power continually operating will produce a great action. A
finger applied to a weighty suspended bell can at first move it but
little; if repeatedly applied, though with no greater strength, the
motion increases till the bell swings to its utmost height, and with
a force that cannot be resisted by the whole strength of the arm and
body. Thus the small first-raised waves, being continually acted upon
by the wind, are, though the wind does not increase in strength,
continually increased in magnitude, rising higher and extending their
bases, so as to include a vast mass of water in each wave, which in
its motion acts with great violence.

But if there be a mutual repulsion between the particles of oil, and
no attraction between oil and water, oil dropped on water will not be
held together by adhesion to the spot whereon it falls; it will not
be imbibed by the water; it will be at liberty to expand itself; and
it will spread on a surface that, besides being smooth to the most
perfect degree of polish, prevents, perhaps by repelling the oil,
all immediate contact, keeping it at a minute distance from itself;
and the expansion will continue till the mutual repulsion between
the particles of the oil is weakened and reduced to nothing by their
distance.

Now I imagine that the wind, blowing over water thus covered with
a film of oil, cannot easily _catch_ upon it, so as to raise the
first wrinkles, but slides over it, and leaves it smooth as it finds
it. It moves a little the oil indeed, which being between it and
the water, serves it to slide with, and prevents friction, as oil
does between those parts of a machine, that would otherwise rub
hard together. Hence the oil dropped on the windward side of a pond
proceeds gradually to leeward, as may be seen by the smoothness it
carries with it, quite to the opposite side. For the wind being thus
prevented from raising the first wrinkles, that I call the elements
of waves, cannot produce waves, which are to be made by continually
acting upon, and enlarging those elements, and thus the whole pond is
calmed.

Totally therefore we might suppress the waves in any required place,
if we could come at the windward place where they take their rise.
This in the ocean can seldom if ever be done. But perhaps something
may be done on particular occasions, to moderate the violence of the
waves when we are in the midst of them, and prevent their breaking
where that would be inconvenient.

For when the wind blows fresh, there are continually rising on the
back of every great wave a number of small ones, which roughen its
surface, and give the wind hold, as it were, to push it with greater
force. This hold is diminished, by preventing the generation of
those small ones. And possibly too, when a wave's surface is oiled,
the wind, in passing over it, may rather in some degree press
it down, and contribute to prevent it, rising again, instead of
promoting it.

This as mere conjecture would have little weight, if the apparent
effects of pouring oil into the midst of waves were not considerable,
and as yet not otherwise accounted for.

When the wind blows so fresh, as that the waves are not sufficiently
quick in obeying its impulse, their tops being thinner and lighter
are pushed forward, broken, and turned over in a white foam. Common
waves lift a vessel without entering it; but these when large
sometimes break above and pour over it, doing great damage.

That this effect might in any degree be prevented, or the height
and violence of waves in the sea moderated, we had no certain
account; Pliny's authority for the practice of seamen in his time
being slighted. But discoursing lately on this subject with his
excellency Count Bentinck, of Holland, his son the honourable Captain
Bentinck, and the learned professor Allemand (to all whom I showed
the experiment of smoothing in a windy day the large piece of water
at the head of the Green Park) a letter was mentioned, which had
been received by the Count from Batavia, relative to the saving of a
Dutch ship in a storm by pouring oil into the sea. I much desired to
see that letter, and a copy of it was promised me, which I afterward
received.

FOOTNOTES:

[28] Note by Dr. Brownrigg.

Sir Gilfred Lawson, who served long in the army at Gibraltar,
assures me, that the fishermen in that place are accustomed to pour
a little oil on the sea, in order to still its motion, that they may
be enabled to see the oysters lying at its bottom; which are there
very large, and which they take up with a proper instrument. This
Sir Gilfred had often seen there performed, and said the same was
practised on other parts of the Spanish coast.

[29] See the preceding paper. _Editor._




_Extract of a Letter from Mr. Tengnagel to Count Bentinck, dated at
Batavia, the 5th of January, 1770._

"Near the islands Paul and Amsterdam, we met with a storm, which had
nothing particular in it worthy of being communicated to you, except
that the captain found himself obliged for greater safety in wearing
the ship, to pour oil into the sea, to prevent the waves breaking
over her, which had an excellent effect, and succeeded in preserving
us. As he poured out but a little at a time, the East India Company
owes perhaps its ship to only six demi-ames of oil-olive. I was
present upon deck when this was done; and I should not have mentioned
this circumstance to you, but that we have found people here so
prejudiced against the experiment, as to make it necessary for the
officers on board and myself to give a certificate of the truth on
this head, of which we made no difficulty."

On this occasion, I mentioned to Captain Bentinck, a thought
which had occurred to me in reading the voyages of our late
circumnavigators, particularly where accounts are given of pleasant
and fertile islands which they much desired to land upon, when
sickness made it more necessary, but could not effect a landing
through a violent surf breaking on the shore, which rendered it
impracticable. My idea was, that possibly by sailing to and fro at
some distance from such lee-shore, continually pouring oil into the
sea, the waves might be so much depressed, and lessened before they
reached the shore, as to abate the height and violence of the surf,
and permit a landing; which, in such circumstances, was a point of
sufficient importance to justify the expense of the oil that might
be requisite for the purpose. That gentleman, who is ever ready
to promote what may be of public utility, though his own ingenious
inventions have not always met with the countenance they merited, was
so obliging as to invite me to Portsmouth, where an opportunity would
probably offer, in the course of a few days, of making the experiment
on some of the shores about Spithead, in which he kindly proposed
to accompany me, and to give assistance with such boats as might be
necessary. Accordingly, about the middle of October last, I went with
some friends to Portsmouth; and a day of wind happening, which made
a lee-shore between Haslar-hospital and the point near Jillkecker,
we went from the Centaur with the long-boat and barge towards that
shore. Our disposition was this: the long-boat was anchored about a
quarter of a mile from the shore; part of the company were landed
behind the point (a place more sheltered from the sea) who came
round and placed themselves opposite to the long-boat, where they
might observe the surf, and note if any change occurred in it upon
using the oil. Another party, in the barge, plied to windward of the
long-boat, as far from her as she was from the shore, making trips
of about half a mile each, pouring oil continually out of a large
stone-bottle, through a hole in the cork, somewhat bigger than a
goose-quill. The experiment had not, in the main point, the success
we wished, for no material difference was observed in the height or
force of the surf upon the shore; but those who were in the long-boat
could observe a tract of smoothed water, the whole of the distance in
which the barge poured the oil, and gradually spreading in breadth
towards the long-boat. I call it smoothed, not that it was laid
level; but because, though the swell continued, its surface was not
roughened by the wrinkles, or smaller waves, before-mentioned; and
none or very few white caps (or waves whose tops turn over in foam)
appeared in that whole space, though to windward and leeward of it
there were plenty; and a wherry, that came round the point under
sail, in her way to Portsmouth, seemed to turn into that tract of
choice, and to use it from end to end, as a piece of turnpike-road.

It may be of use to relate the circumstances of an experiment that
does not succeed, since they may give hints of amendment in future
trials: it is therefore I have been thus particular. I shall only add
what I apprehend may have been the reason of our disappointment.

I conceive, that the operation of oil on water is, first, to prevent
the raising of new waves by the wind; and, secondly, to prevent its
pushing those before raised with such force, and consequently their
continuance of the same repeated height, as they would have done, if
their surface were not oiled. But oil will not prevent waves being
raised by another power, by a stone, for instance, falling into a
still pool; for they then rise by the mechanical impulse of the
stone, which the greasiness on the surrounding water cannot lessen
or prevent, as it can prevent the winds catching the surface and
raising it into waves. Now waves once raised, whether by the wind or
any other power, have the same mechanical operation, by which they
continue to rise and fall, as a _pendulum_ will continue to swing,
a long time after the force ceases to act by which the motion was
first produced: that motion will, however, cease in time; but time
is necessary. Therefore, though oil spread on an agitated sea may
weaken the push of the wind on those waves whose surfaces are covered
by it, and so, by receiving less fresh impulse, they may gradually
subside; yet a considerable time, or a distance through which they
will take time to move, may be necessary to make the effect sensible
on any shore in a diminution of the surf: for we know, that when
wind ceases suddenly, the waves it has raised do not as suddenly
subside, but settle gradually, and are not quite down till after the
wind has ceased. So though we should, by oiling them, take off the
effect of wind on waves already raised, it is not to be expected
that those waves should be instantly levelled. The motion they have
received will, for some time, continue; and if the shore is not far
distant, they arrive there so soon, that their effect upon it will
not be visibly diminished. Possibly, therefore, if we had begun our
operations at a greater distance, the effect might have been more
sensible. And perhaps we did not pour oil in sufficient quantity.
Future experiments may determine this.

I was, however, greatly obliged to Captain Bentinck, for the chearful
and ready aids he gave me: and I ought not to omit mentioning Mr.
Banks, Dr. Solander, General Carnoc, and Dr. Blagden, who all
assisted at the experiment, during that blustering unpleasant day,
with a patience and activity that could only be inspired by a zeal
for the improvement of knowledge, such especially as might possibly
be of use to men in situations of distress.

I would wish you to communicate this to your ingenious friend, Mr.
Farish, with my respects; and believe me to be, with sincere esteem,

  Dear Sir,

  Your most obedient, humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO SIR JOHN PRINGLE, BART.

  _On the Difference of Navigation in shoal and deep Water._


  _Craven-street, May 10, 1768._

  SIR,

You may remember, that when, we were travelling together in Holland,
you remarked, that the trackschuyt in one of the stages went slower
than usual, and enquired of the boatman, what might be the reason;
who answered, that it had been a dry season, and the water in the
canal was low. On being again asked if it was so low as that the boat
touched the muddy bottom; he said, no, not so low as that, but so
low as to make it harder for the horse to draw the boat. We neither
of us at first could conceive that if there was water enough for
the boat to swim clear of the bottom, its being deeper would make
any difference; but as the man affirmed it seriously as a thing
well known among them; and as the punctuality required in their
stages was likely to make such difference, if any there were, more
readily observed by them, than by other watermen who did not pass so
regularly and constantly backwards and forwards in the same track; I
began to apprehend there might be something in it, and attempted to
account for it from this consideration, that the boat in proceeding
along the canal, must in every boat's length of her course, move out
of her way a body of water, equal in bulk to the room her bottom took
up in the water; that the water so moved must pass on each side of
her and under her bottom to get behind her; that if the passage under
her bottom was straitened by the shallows, more of that water must
pass by her sides, and with a swifter motion, which would retard her,
as moving the contrary way; or that the water becoming lower behind
the boat than before, she was pressed back by the weight of its
difference in height, and her motion retarded by having that weight
constantly to overcome. But as it is often lost time to attempt
accounting for uncertain facts, I determined to make an experiment of
this when I should have convenient time and opportunity.

After our return to England, as often as I happened to be on the
Thames, I enquired of our watermen whether they were sensible of any
difference in rowing over shallow or deep water. I found them all
agreeing in the fact, that there was a very great difference, but
they differed widely in expressing the quantity of the difference;
some supposing it was equal to a mile in six, others to a mile in
three, &c. As I did not recollect to have met with any mention of
this matter in our philosophical books, and conceiving that if
the difference should really be great, it might be an object of
consideration in the many projects now on foot for digging new
navigable canals in this island, I lately put my design of making
the experiment in execution, in the following manner.

I provided a trough of plained boards fourteen feet long, six inches
wide and six inches deep, in the clear, filled with water within half
an inch of the edge, to represent a canal. I had a loose board of
nearly the same length and breadth, that, being put into the water,
might be sunk to any depth, and fixed by little wedges where I would
chuse to have it stay, in order to make different depths of water,
leaving the surface at the same height with regard to the sides of
the trough. I had a little boat in form of a lighter or boat of
burthen, six inches long, two inches and a quarter wide, and one inch
and a quarter deep. When swimming, it drew one inch water. To give
motion to the boat, I fixed one end of a long silk thread to its
bow, just even with the water's edge, the other end passed over a
well-made brass pully, of about an inch diameter, turning freely on a
small axis; and a shilling was the weight. Then placing the boat at
one end of the trough, the weight would draw it through the water to
the other.

Not having a watch that shows seconds, in order to measure the time
taken up by the boat in passing from end to end, I counted as fast
as I could count to ten repeatedly, keeping an account of the number
of tens on my fingers. And as much as possible to correct any little
inequalities in my counting, I repeated the experiment a number of
times at each depth of water, that I might take the medium. And the
following are the results.

        Water 1½ inches deep.      2 inches.         4½ inches.
  1st exp.       100                  94                 79
  2              104                  93                 78
  3              104                  91                 77
  4              106                  87                 79
  5              100                  88                 79
  6               99                  86                 80
  7              100                  90                 79
  8              100                  88                 81
                ----                ----               ----
                 813                 717                632
                ----                ----               ----
          Medium 101           Medium 89          Medium 79

I made many other experiments, but the above are those in which I was
most exact; and they serve sufficiently to show that the difference
is considerable. Between the deepest and shallowest it appears to
be somewhat more than one fifth. So that supposing large canals and
boats and depths of water to bear the same proportions, and that four
men or horses would draw a boat in deep water four leagues in four
hours, it would require five to draw the same boat in the same time
as far in shallow water; or four would require five hours.

Whether this difference is of consequence enough to justify a greater
expence in deepening canals, is a matter of calculation, which our
ingenious engineers in that way will readily determine. I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MR. ALPHONSUS LE ROY, MEMBER OF SEVERAL ACADEMIES AT PARIS.[30]

  _Containing sundry Maritime Observations._

  At Sea, on board the London Packet, Capt. Truxton.


  _Aug. 1785._

  SIR,

Your learned writings on the navigation of the antients, which
contain a great deal of curious information, and your very ingenious
contrivances for improving the modern sails (_voilure_) of which
I saw with great pleasure a successful trial on the river Seine,
have induced me to submit to your consideration and judgment, some
thoughts I have had on the latter subject.

Those mathematicians, who have endeavoured to improve the swiftness
of vessels, by calculating to find the form of least resistance, seem
to have considered a ship as a body moving through one fluid only,
the water; and to have given little attention to the circumstance
of her moving through another fluid, the air. It is true that when
a vessel sails right before the wind, this circumstance is of no
importance, because the wind goes with her; but in every deviation
from that course, the resistance of the air is something, and becomes
greater in proportion as that deviation increases. I wave at present
the consideration of those different degrees of resistance given by
the air to that part of the hull which is above water, and confine
myself to that given to the sails; for their motion through the air
is resisted by the air, as the motion of the hull through the
water is resisted by the water, though with less force as the air is
a lighter fluid. And to simplify the discussion as much as possible,
I would state one situation only, to wit, that of the wind upon the
beam, the ship's course being directly across the wind; and I would
suppose the sail set in an angle of 45 degrees with the keel, as in
the following figure; wherein (Plate VI, Fig. 1.)

[Illustration:

  _Plate VI._      MARITIME OBSERVATIONS.      _Vol. II. page 163._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

A B represents the body of the vessel, C D the position of the sail,
EEE the direction of the wind, MM the line of motion. In observing
this figure it will appear, that so much of the body of the vessel
as is immersed in the water must, to go forward, remove out of its
way what water it meets with between the pricked lines FF. And the
sail, to go forward, must move out of its way all the air its whole
dimension meets with between the pricked lines CG and DG. Thus both
the fluids give resistance to the motion, each in proportion to the
quantity of matter contained in the dimension to be removed. And
though the air is vastly lighter than the water, and therefore more
easily removed, yet the dimension being much greater its effect is
very considerable.

It is true that in the case stated, the resistance given by the air
between those lines to the motion of the sail is not apparent to the
eye, because the greater force of the wind, which strikes it in the
direction EEE, overpowers its effect, and keeps the sail full in the
curve a, a, a, a, a. But suppose the wind to cease, and the vessel in
a calm to be impelled with the same swiftness by oars, the sail would
then appear filled in the contrary curve b, b, b, b, b, when prudent
men would immediately perceive, that the air resisted its motion,
and would order it to be taken in.

Is there any possible means of diminishing this resistance, while
the same quantity of sail is exposed to the action of the wind, and
therefore the same force obtained from it? I think there is, and
that it may be done by dividing the sail into a number of parts, and
placing those parts in a line one behind the other; thus instead of
one sail extending from C to D, figure 2, if four sails containing
together the same quantity of canvas, were placed as in figure 3,
each having one quarter of the dimensions of the great sail, and
exposing a quarter of its surface to the wind, would give a quarter
of the force; so that the whole force obtained from the wind would be
the same, while the resistance from the air would be nearly reduced
to the space between the pricked lines _a b_ and _c d_, before the
foremost sail.

It may perhaps be doubted whether the resistance from the air would
be so diminished; since possibly each of the following small sails
having also air before it, which must be removed, the resistance on
the whole would be the same.

This is then a matter to be determined by experiment. I will mention
one that I many years since made with success for another purpose;
and I will propose another small one easily made. If that too
succeeds, I should think it worth while to make a larger, though at
some expense, on a river boat; and perhaps time, and the improvements
experience will afford, may make it applicable with advantage to
larger vessels.

Having near my kitchen chimney a round hole of eight inches diameter,
through which was a constant steady current of air, increasing or
diminishing only as the fire increased or diminished, I contrived
to place my jack so as to receive that current; and taking off the
flyers, I fixed in their stead on the same pivot a round tin plate of
nearly the same diameter with the hole; and having cut it in radial
lines almost to the centre, so as to have six equal vanes, I gave to
each of them the obliquity of forty-five degrees. They moved round,
without the weight, by the impression only of the current of air,
but too slowly for the purpose of roasting. I suspected that the air
struck by the back of each vane might possibly by its resistance
retard the motion; and to try this, I cut each of them into two, and
I placed the twelve, each having the same obliquity, in a line behind
each other, when I perceived a great augmentation in its velocity,
which encouraged me to divide them once more, and, continuing the
same obliquity, I placed the twenty-four behind each other in a line,
when the force of the wind being the same, and the surface of vane
the same, they moved round with much greater rapidity, and perfectly
answered my purpose.

The second experiment that I propose, is, to take two playing cards
of the same dimensions, and cut one of them transversely into eight
equal pieces; then with a needle string them upon two threads one
near each end, and place them so upon the threads that, when hung up,
they may be one exactly over the other, at a distance equal to their
breadth, each in a horizontal position; and let a small weight, such
as a bird-shot, be hung under them, to make them fall in a straight
line when let loose. Suspend also the whole card by threads from
its four corners, and hang to it an equal weight, so as to draw
it downwards when let fall, its whole breadth pressing against the
air. Let those two bodies be attached, one of them to one end of a
thread a yard long, the other to the other end. Extend a twine under
the ceiling of a room, and put through it at thirty inches distance
two pins bent in the form of fish-hooks. On these two hooks hang
the two bodies, the thread that connects them extending parallel to
the twine, which thread being cut, they must begin to fall at the
same instant. If they take equal time in falling to the floor, it
is a proof that the resistance of the air is in both cases equal.
If the whole card requires a longer time, it shows that the sum of
the resistances to the pieces of the cut card is not equal to the
resistance of the whole one[31].

This principle so far confirmed, I would proceed to make a larger
experiment, with a shallop, which I would rig in this manner. (Plate
VI. Fig. 4.)

A B is a long boom, from which are hoisted seven jibs, a, b, c, d,
e, f, g, each a seventh part of the whole dimensions, and as much
more as will fill the whole space when set in an angle of forty-five
degrees, so that they may lap when going before the wind, and hold
more wind when going large. Thus rigged, when going right before the
wind, the boom should be brought at right angles with the keel, by
means of the sheet ropes C D, and all the sails hauled flat to the
boom.

These positions of boom and sails to be varied as the wind quarters.
But when the wind is on the beam, or when you would turn to
windward, the boom is to be hauled right fore and aft, and the sails
trimmed according as the wind is more or less against your course.

It seems to me, that the management of a shallop so rigged would be
very easy, the sails being run up and down separately, so that more
or less sail may be made at pleasure; and I imagine, that there being
full as much sail exposed to the force of the wind which impels the
vessel in its course, as if the whole were in one piece, and the
resistance of the dead air against the foreside of the sail being
diminished, the advantage of swiftness would be very considerable;
besides that the vessel would lie nearer the wind.

Since we are on the subject of improvements in navigation, permit
me to detain you a little longer with a small relative observation.
Being, in one of my voyages, with ten merchant-ships under convoy
of a frigate at anchor in Torbay, waiting for a wind to go to the
westward; it came fair, but brought in with it a considerable swell.
A signal was given for weighing, and we put to sea all together; but
three of the ships left their anchors, their cables parting just as
the anchors came a-peak. Our cable held, and we got up our anchor;
but the shocks the ship felt before the anchor got loose from the
ground, made me reflect on what might possibly have caused the
breaking of the other cables; and I imagined it might be the short
bending of the cable just without the hause-hole, from a horizontal
to an almost vertical position, and the sudden violent jerk it
receives by the rising of the head of the ship on the swell of a wave
while in that position. For example, suppose a vessel hove up so as
to have her head nearly over her anchor, which still keeps its hold,
perhaps in a tough bottom; if it were calm, the cable still out would
form nearly a perpendicular line, measuring the distance between the
hause-hole and the anchor; but if there is a swell, her head in the
trough of the sea will fall below the level, and when lifted on the
wave will be much above it. In the first case the cable will hang
loose and bend perhaps as in figure 5. In the second case, figure 6,
the cable will be drawn straight with a jerk, must sustain the whole
force of the rising ship, and must either loosen the anchor, resist
the rising force of the ship, or break. But why does it break at the
hause-hole?

Let us suppose it a cable of three inches diameter, and represented
by figure 7. If this cable is to be bent round the corner A, it is
evident that either the part of the triangle contained between the
letters a, b, c, must stretch considerably, and those most that are
nearest the surface; or that the parts between d, e, f, must be
compressed; or both, which most probably happens. In this case the
lower half of the thickness affords no strength against the jerk, it
not being strained, the upper half bears the whole, and the yarns
near the upper surface being first and most strained, break first,
and the next yarns follow; for in this bent situation they cannot
bear the strain all together, and each contributes its strength to
the whole, as they do when the cable is strained in a straight line.

To remedy this, methinks it would be well to have a kind of large
pulley wheel, fixed in the hause-hole, suppose of two feet diameter,
over which the cable might pass; and being there bent gradually to
the round of the wheel, would thereby be more equally strained, and
better able to bear the jerk, which may save the anchor, and by that
means in the course of the voyage may happen to save the ship.

One maritime observation more shall finish this letter. I have been a
reader of news-papers now near seventy years, and I think few years
pass without an account of some vessel met with at sea, with no
living soul on board, and so many feet of water in her hold, which
vessel has nevertheless been saved and brought into port: and when
not met with at sea, such forsaken vessels have often come ashore
on some coast. The crews, who have taken to their boats and thus
abandoned such vessels, are sometimes met with and taken up at sea by
other ships, sometimes reach a coast, and are sometimes never heard
of. Those that give an account of quitting their vessels generally
say, that she sprung a leak, that they pumped for some time, that
the water continued to rise upon them, and that, despairing to save
her, they had quitted her lest they should go down with her. It
seems by the event that this fear was not always well founded, and
I have endeavoured to guess at the reason of the people's too hasty
discouragement.

When a vessel springs a leak near her bottom, the water enters with
all the force given by the weight of the column of water, without,
which force is in proportion to the difference of level between the
water without and that within. It enters therefore with more force
at first and in greater quantity, than it can afterwards when the
water within is higher. The bottom of the vessel too is narrower,
so that the same quantity of water coming into that narrow part,
rises faster than when the space for it to flow in is larger. This
helps to terrify. But as the quantity entering is less and less as
the surfaces without and within become more nearly equal in height,
the pumps that could not keep the water from rising at first, might
afterwards be able to prevent its rising higher, and the people might
have remained on board in safety, without hazarding themselves in an
open boat on the wide ocean.(Fig. 8.)

Besides the greater equality in the height of the two surfaces, there
may sometimes be other causes that retard the farther sinking of a
leaky vessel. The rising water within may arrive at quantities of
light wooden work, empty chests, and particularly empty water-casks,
which if fixed so as not to float themselves may help to sustain her.
Many bodies which compose a ship's cargo may be specifically lighter
than water, all these when out of water are an additional weight to
that of the ship, and she is in proportion pressed deeper into the
water; but as soon as these bodies are immersed, they weigh no longer
on the ship, but on the contrary, if fixed, they help to support her,
in proportion as they are specifically lighter than the water. And
it should be remembered, that the largest body of a ship may be so
balanced in the water, that an ounce less or more of weight may leave
her at the surface or sink her to the bottom. There are also certain
heavy cargoes, that, when the water gets at them, are continually
dissolving, and thereby lightening the vessel, such as salt and
sugar. And as to water-casks mentioned above, since the quantity of
them must be great in ships of war where the number of men consume a
great deal of water every day, if it had been made a constant rule to
bung them up as fast as they were emptied, and to dispose the empty
casks in proper situations, I am persuaded that many ships which
have been sunk in engagements, or have gone down afterwards, might
with the unhappy people have been saved; as well as many of those
which in the last war foundered, and were never heard of. While on
this topic of sinking, one cannot help recollecting the well known
practice of the Chinese, to divide the hold of a great ship into a
number of separate chambers by partitions tight caulked (of which you
gave a model in your boat upon the Seine) so that if a leak should
spring in one of them the others are not affected by it; and though
that chamber should fill to a level with the sea, it would not be
sufficient to sink the vessel. We have not imitated this practice.
Some little disadvantage it might occasion in the stowage is perhaps
one reason, though that I think might be more than compensated by an
abatement in the insurance that would be reasonable, and by a higher
price taken of passengers, who would rather prefer going in such
a vessel. But our seafaring people are brave, despise danger, and
reject such precautions of safety, being cowards only in one sense,
that of _fearing_ to be _thought afraid_.

I promised to finish my letter with the last observation, but the
garrulity of the old man has got hold of me, and as I may never have
another occasion of writing on this subject, I think I may as well
now, once for all, empty my nautical budget, and give you all the
thoughts that have in my various long voyages occurred to me relating
to navigation. I am sure that in you they will meet with a candid
judge, who will excuse my mistakes on account of my good intention.

There are six accidents that may occasion the loss of ships at
sea. We have considered one of them, that of foundering by a
leak. The other five are, 1. Oversetting by sudden flaws of wind,
or by carrying sail beyond the bearing. 2. Fire by accident or
carelessness. 3. A heavy stroke of lightning, making a breach in the
ship, or firing the powder. 4. Meeting and shocking with other ships
in the night. 5. Meeting in the night with islands of ice.

To that of oversetting, privateers in their first cruize have, as
far as has fallen within my knowledge or information, been more
subject than any other kind of vessels. The double desire of being
able to overtake a weaker flying enemy, or to escape when pursued
by a stronger, has induced the owners to overmast their cruizers,
and to spread too much canvass; and the great number of men, many
of them not seamen, who being upon deck when a ship heels suddenly
are huddled down to leeward, and increase by their weight the effect
of the wind. This therefore should be more attended to and guarded
against, especially as the advantage of lofty masts is problematical.
For the upper sails have greater power to lay a vessel more on her
side, which is not the most advantageous position for going swiftly
through the water. And hence it is that vessels, which have lost
their lofty masts, and been able to make little more sail afterwards
than permitted the ship to sail upon an even keel, have made so much
way, even under jury masts, as to surprize the mariners themselves.
But there is besides, something in the modern form of our ships
that seems as if calculated expressly to allow their oversetting
more easily. The sides of a ship, instead of spreading out as they
formerly did in the upper works, are of late years turned in, so as
to make the body nearly round, and more resembling a cask. I do not
know what the advantages of this construction are, except that such
ships are not easily boarded. To me it seems a contrivance to have
less room in a ship at nearly the same expense. For it is evident
that the same timber and plank consumed in raising the sides from a
to b, and from d to c, would have raised them from a to e, and from
d to f, fig. 9. In this form all the spaces between e, a, b, and c,
d, f, would have been gained, the deck would have been larger, the
men would have had more room to act, and not have stood so thick in
the way of the enemy's shot; and the vessel, the more she was laid
down on her side, the more bearing she would meet with, and more
effectual to support her, as being farther from the centre. Whereas
in the present form, her ballast makes the chief part of her bearing,
without which she would turn in the sea almost as easily as a barrel.
More ballast by this means becomes necessary, and that sinking a
vessel deeper in the water occasions more resistance to her going
through it. The Bermudian sloops still keep with advantage to the old
spreading form. The islanders in the great Pacific ocean, though they
have no large ships, are the most expert boat-sailors in the world,
navigating that sea safely with their proas, which they prevent
oversetting by various means. Their sailing proas for this purpose
have outriggers generally to windward, above the water, on which, one
or more men are placed, to move occasionally further from or nearer
to the vessel as the wind freshens or slackens. But some have their
outriggers to leeward, which, resting on the water, support the boat
so as to keep her upright when pressed down by the wind. Their boats
moved by oars or rather by paddles are, for long voyages, fixed two
together by cross bars of wood that keep them at some distance from
each other, and so render their oversetting next to impossible.
How far this may be practicable in larger vessels, we have not yet
sufficient experience. I know of but one trial made in Europe, which
was about one hundred years since, by Sir William Petty. He built a
double vessel, to serve as a packet boat between England and Ireland.
Her model still exists in the museum of the Royal Society, where
I have seen it. By the accounts we have of her, she answered well
the purpose of her construction, making several voyages; and though
wrecked at last by a storm, the misfortune did not appear owing to
her particular construction, since many other vessels of the common
form were wrecked at the same time. The advantage of such a vessel
is, that she needs no ballast, therefore swims either lighter or will
carry more goods; and that passengers are not so much incommoded by
her rolling: to which may be added, that if she is to defend herself
by her cannon, they will probably have more effect, being kept more
generally in a horizontal position, than those in common vessels. I
think, however, that it would be an improvement of that model, to
make the sides which are opposed to each other perfectly parallel,
though the other sides are formed as in common thus, figure 10.

The building of a double ship would indeed be more expensive in
proportion to her burthen; and that perhaps is sufficient to
discourage the method.

The accident of fire is generally well guarded against by the prudent
captain's strict orders against smoking between decks, or carrying a
candle there out of a lanthorn. But there is one dangerous practice
which frequent terrible accidents have not yet been sufficient to
abolish; that of carrying store-spirits to sea in casks. Two large
ships, the Seraphis and the Duke of Athol, one an East-Indiaman, the
other a frigate, have been burnt within these two last years, and
many lives miserably destroyed, by drawing spirits out of a cask near
a candle. It is high time to make it a general rule, that all the
ship's store of spirits should be carried in bottles.

The misfortune by a stroke of lightning I have in my former writings
endeavoured to show a method of guarding against, by a chain and
pointed rod, extending, when run up, from above the top of the mast
to the sea. These instruments are now made and sold at a reasonable
price by Nairne & Co. in London, and there are several instances of
success attending the use of them. They are kept in a box, and may be
ran up and fixed in about five minutes, on the apparent approach of a
thunder gust.

Of the meeting and shocking with other ships in the night, I have
known two instances in voyages between London and America. In one
both ships arrived though much damaged, each reporting their belief
that the other must have gone to the bottom. In the other, only one
got to port; the other was never afterwards heard of. These instances
happened many years ago, when the commerce between Europe and America
was not a tenth part of what it is at present, ships of course
thinner scattered, and the chance of meeting proportionably less.
It has long been the practice to keep a _look-out before_ in the
channel, but at sea it has been neglected. If it is not at present
thought worth while to take that precaution, it will in time become
of more consequence; since the number of ships at sea is continually
augmenting. A drum frequently beat, or a bell rung in a dark night,
might help to prevent such accidents.

Islands of ice are frequently seen off the banks of Newfoundland,
by ships going between North-America and Europe. In the day time
they are easily avoided, unless in a very thick fog. I remember two
instances of ship's running against them in the night. The first lost
her bowsprit, but received little other damage. The other struck
where the warmth of the sea had wasted the ice next to it, and a part
hung over above. This perhaps saved her, for she was under great way;
but the upper part of the cliff taking her foretopmast, broke the
shock, though it carried away the mast. She disengaged herself with
some difficulty, and got safe into port; but the accident shows the
possibility of other ships being wrecked and sunk by striking those
vast masses of ice, of which I have seen one that we judged to be
seventy feet high above the water, consequently eight times as much
under water; and it is another reason for keeping a good _look-out
before_, though far from any coast that may threaten danger.

It is remarkable, that the people we consider as savages have
improved the art of sailing and rowing-boats in several points beyond
what we can pretend to. We have no sailing-boats equal to the flying
proas of of the South Seas, no rowing or paddling-boat equal to that
of the Greenlanders for swiftness and safety. The birch canoes of the
North-American Indians have also some advantageous properties. They
are so light that two men may carry one of them over land, which is
capable of carrying a dozen upon the water; and in heeling they are
not so subject to take in water as our boats, the sides of which are
lowest in the middle where it is most likely to enter, this being
highest in that part, as in figure 11.

The Chinese are an enlightened people, the most antiently civilized
of any existing, and their arts are antient, a presumption in their
favour: their method of rowing their boats differs from ours, the
oars being worked either two a-stern as we scull, or on the sides
with the same kind of motion, being hung parallel to the keel on a
rail and always acting in the water, not perpendicular to the side as
ours are, nor lifted out at every stroke, which is a loss of time,
and the boat in the interval loses motion. They see our manner, and
we theirs, but neither are disposed to learn of or copy the other.

To the several means of moving boats mentioned above, may be added
the singular one lately exhibited at Javelle, on the Seine below
Paris, where a clumsy boat was moved across that river in three
minutes by rowing, not in the water, but in the air, that is, by
whirling round a set of windmill vanes fixed to a horizontal axis,
parallel to the keel, and placed at the head of the boat. The axis
was bent into an elbow at the end, by the help of which it was turned
by one man at a time. I saw the operation at a distance. The four
vanes appeared to be about five feet long, and perhaps two and a
half wide. The weather was calm. The labour appeared to be great
for one man, as the two several times relieved each other. But the
action upon the air by the oblique surfaces of the vanes must have
been considerable, as the motion of the boat appeared tolerably quick
going and returning; and she returned to the same place from whence
she first set out, notwithstanding the current. This machine is since
applied to the moving of air-balloons: an instrument similar may be
contrived to move a boat by turning under water.

Several mechanical projectors have at different times proposed
to give motion to boats, and even to ships, by means of circular
rowing, or paddles placed on the circumference of wheels to be turned
constantly on each side of the vessel; but this method, though
frequently tried, has never been found so effectual as to encourage
a continuance of the practice. I do not know that the reason has
hitherto been given. Perhaps it may be this, that great part of the
force employed contributes little to the motion. For instance, (fig.
12) of the four paddles a, b, c, d, all under water, and turning to
move a boat from X to Y, c has the most power, b nearly though not
quite as much, their motion being nearly horizontal; but the force
employed in moving a, is consumed in pressing almost downright upon
the water till it comes to the place of b; and the force employed
in moving d is consumed in lifting the water till d arrives at the
surface; by which means much of the labour is lost. It is true, that
by placing the wheels higher out of the water, this waste labour
will be diminished in a calm, but where a sea runs, the wheels must
unavoidably be often dipt deep in the waves, and the turning of them
thereby rendered very laborious to little purpose.

Among the various means of giving motion to a boat, that of M.
Bernoulli appears one of the most singular, which was to have fixed
in the boat a tube in the form of an L, the upright part to have a
funnel-kind of opening at top, convenient for filling the tube with
water; which, descending and passing through the lower horizontal
part, and issuing in the middle of the stern, but under the surface
of the river, should push the boat forward. There is no doubt that
the force of the descending water would have a considerable effect,
greater in proportion to the height from which it descended; but
then it is to be considered, that every bucket-full pumped or dipped
up into the boat, from its side or through its bottom, must have
its _vis inertiæ_ overcome so as to receive the motion of the boat,
before it can come to give motion by its descent; and that will be a
deduction from the moving power. To remedy this, I would propose the
addition of another such L pipe, and that they should stand back to
back in the boat thus, figure 13, the forward one being worked as a
pump, and sucking in the water at the head of the boat, would draw it
forward while pushed in the same direction by the force at the stern.
And after all it should be calculated whether the labour of pumping
would be less than that of rowing. A fire-engine might possibly in
some cases be applied in this operation with advantage.

Perhaps this labour of raising water might be spared, and the whole
force of a man applied to the moving of a boat by the use of air
instead of water; suppose the boat constructed in this form, figure
14. A, a tube round or square of two feet diameter, in which a piston
may move up and down. The piston to have valves in it, opening
inwards to admit air when the piston rises; and shutting, when it
is forced down by means of the lever B turning on the centre C. The
tube to have a valve D, to open when the piston is forced down, and
let the air pass out at E, which striking forcibly against the water
abaft must push the boat forward. If there is added an air-vessel
F properly valved and placed, the force would continue to act while
a fresh stroke is taken with the lever. The boat-man might stand
with his back to the stern, and putting his hands behind him, work
the motion by taking hold of the cross bar at B, while another
should steer; or if he had two such pumps, one on each side of the
stern, with a lever for each hand, he might steer himself by working
occasionally more or harder with either hand, as watermen now do
with a pair of sculls. There is no position in which the body of a
man can exert more strength than in pulling right upwards. To obtain
more swiftness, greasing the bottom of a vessel is sometimes used,
and with good effect. I do not know that any writer has hitherto
attempted to explain this. At first sight one would imagine, that
though the friction of a hard body, sliding on another hard body,
and the resistance occasioned by that friction, might be diminished
by putting grease between them, yet that a body sliding on a fluid,
such as water, should have no need of, nor receive any advantage
from such greasing. But the fact is not disputed. And the reason
perhaps may be this--The particles of water have a mutual attraction,
called the attraction of adhesion. Water also adheres to wood, and
to many other substances, but not to grease: on the contrary they
have a mutual repulsion, so that it is a question whether when oil
is poured on water, they ever actually touch each other; for a drop
of oil upon water, instead of sticking to the spot where it falls,
as it would if it fell on a looking-glass, spreads instantly to an
immense distance in a film extremely thin, which it could not easily
do if it touched and rubbed or adhered even in a small degree to the
surface of the water. Now the adhesive force of water to itself, and
to other substances, may be estimated from the weight of it necessary
to separate a drop, which adheres, while growing, till it has weight
enough to force the separation and break the drop off. Let us suppose
the drop to be the size of a pea, then there will be as many of these
adhesions as there are drops of that size touching the bottom of a
vessel, and these must be broken by the moving power, every step
of her motion that amounts to a drop's breadth: and there being no
such adhesions to break between the water and a greased bottom, may
occasion the difference.

So much respecting the motion of vessels. But we have sometimes
occasion to stop their motion; and if a bottom is near enough we can
cast anchor: where there are no soundings, we have as yet no means
to prevent driving in a storm, but by lying-to, which still permits
driving at the rate of about two miles an hour; so that in a storm
continuing fifty hours, which is not an uncommon case, the ship may
drive one hundred miles out of her course; and should she in that
distance meet with a lee shore, she may be lost.

To prevent this driving to leeward in deep water, a swimming anchor
is wanting, which ought to have these properties.

1. It should have a surface so large as, being at the end of a hauser
in the water, and placed perpendicularly, should hold so much of it,
as to bring the ship's head to the wind, in which situation the wind
has least power to drive her.

2. It should be able by its resistance to prevent the ship's
receiving way.

3. It should be capable of being situated below the heave of the sea,
but not below the undertow.

4. It should not take up much room in the ship.

5. It should be easily thrown out, and put into its proper situation.

6. It should be easy to take in again, and stow away.

An ingenious old mariner, whom I formerly knew, proposed, as a
swimming anchor for a large ship, to have a stem of wood twenty-five
feet long and four inches square, with four boards of 18, 16, 14, and
12, feet long, and one foot wide, the boards to have their substance
thickened several inches in the middle by additional wood, and to
have each a four inch square hole through its middle, to permit its
being slipt on occasionally upon the stem, and at right angles with
it; where all being placed and fixed at four feet distance from
each other, it would have the appearance of the old mathematical
instrument called a forestaff. This thrown into the sea, and held by
a hauser veered out to some length, he conceived would bring a vessel
up, and prevent her driving, and when taken in might be stowed away
by separating the boards from the stem. Figure 15. Probably such a
swimming anchor would have some good effect, but it is subject to
this objection, that lying on the surface of the sea, it is liable to
be hove forward by every wave, and thereby give so much leave for the
ship to drive.

Two machines for this purpose have occurred to me, which, though not
so simple as the above, I imagine would be more effectual, and more
easily manageable. I will endeavour to describe them, that they may
be submitted to your judgment, whether either would be serviceable;
and if they would, to which we should give the preference.

The first is to be formed, and to be used in the water on almost the
same principles with those of a paper kite used in the air. Only as
the paper kite rises in the air, this is to descend in the water. Its
dimensions will be different for ships of different size.

To make one of suppose fifteen feet high; take a small spar of that
length for the back-bone, AB, figure 16, a smaller of half that
length CD, for the cross piece. Let these be united by a bolt at E,
yet so as that by turning on the bolt they may be laid parallel to
each other. Then make a sail of strong canvas, in the shape of figure
17. To form this, without waste of sail-cloth, sew together pieces of
the proper length, and for half the breadth, as in figure 18, then
cut the whole in the diagonal lines a, b, c, and turn the piece F so
as to place its broad part opposite to that of the piece G, and the
piece H in like manner opposite to I, which when all sewed together
will appear as in fig. 17. This sail is to be extended on the cross
of figure 16, the top and bottom points well secured to the ends of
the long spar; the two side points d, e, fastened to the ends of
two cords, which coming from the angle of the loop (which must be
similar to the loop of a kite) pass through two rings at the ends of
the short spar, so as that on pulling upon the loop the sail will be
drawn to its extent. The whole may, when aboard, be furled up, as in
figure 19, having a rope from its broad end, to which is tied a bag
of ballast for keeping that end downwards when in the water, and at
the other end another rope with an empty keg at its end to float on
the surface; this rope long enough to permit the kite's descending
into the undertow, or if you please lower into still water. It should
be held by a hauser. To get it home easily, a small loose rope may be
veered out with it, fixed to the keg. Hauling on that rope will bring
the kite home with small force, the resistance being small as it will
then come end ways.

It seems probable that such a kite at the end of a long hauser would
keep a ship with her head to the wind, and, resisting every tug,
would prevent her driving so fast as when her side is exposed to it,
and nothing to hold her back. If only half the driving is prevented,
so as that she moves but fifty miles instead of the hundred during a
storm, it may be some advantage, both in holding so much distance as
is saved, and in keeping from a lee-shore. If single canvas should
not be found strong enough to bear the tug without splitting, it may
be doubled, or strengthened by a netting behind it, represented by
figure 20.

The other machine for the same purpose, is to be made more in the
form of an umbrella, as represented, figure 21. The stem of the
umbrella a square spar of proper length, with four moveable arms, of
which two are represented C, C, figure 22. These arms to be fixed in
four joint cleats, as D, D, &c. one on each side of the spar, but so
as that the four arms may open by turning on a pin in the joint. When
open they form a cross, on which a four-square canvas sail is to be
extended, its corners fastened to the ends of the four arms. Those
ends are also to be stayed by ropes fastened to the stem or spar, so
as to keep them short of being at right angles with it: and to the
end of one of the arms should be hung the small bag of ballast, and
to the end of the opposite arm the empty keg. This, on being thrown
into the sea, would immediately open; and when it had performed its
function, and the storm over, a small rope from its other end being
pulled on, would turn it, close it, and draw it easily home to the
ship. This machine seems more simple in its operation, and more
easily manageable than the first, and perhaps may be as effectual[32].

Vessels are sometimes retarded, and sometimes forwarded in their
voyages, by currents at sea, which are often not perceived. About
the year 1769 or 70, there was an application made by the board
of customs at Boston, to the lords of the treasury in London,
complaining that the packets between Falmouth and New-York, were
generally a fortnight longer in their passages, than merchant-ships
from London to Rhode-Island, and proposing that for the future
they should be ordered to Rhode-Island instead of New-York. Being
then concerned in the management of the American post-office, I
happened to be consulted on the occasion; and it appearing strange
to me that there should be such a difference between two places,
scarce a day's run asunder, especially when the merchant-ships are
generally deeper laden, and more weakly manned than the packets, and
had from London the whole length of the river and channel to run
before they left the land of England, while the packets had only to
go from Falmouth, I could not but think the fact misunderstood or
misrepresented. There happened then to be in London a Nantucket
sea-captain of my acquaintance, to whom I communicated the affair. He
told me he believed the fact might be true; but the difference was
owing to this, that the Rhode-Island captains were acquainted with
the gulf-stream, which those of the English packets were not. We are
well acquainted with that stream, says he, because in our pursuit
of whales, which keep near the sides of it, but are not to be met
with in it, we run down along the sides, and frequently cross it to
change our side: and in crossing it have sometimes met and spoke with
those packets, who were in the middle of it, and stemming it. We have
informed them that they were stemming a current, that was against
them to the value of three miles an hour; and advised them to cross
it and get out of it; but they were too wise to be counselled by
simple American fishermen. When the winds are but light, he added,
they are carried back by the current more than they are forwarded
by the wind: and if the wind be good, the subtraction of 70 miles
a day from their course is of some importance. I then observed it
was a pity no notice was taken of this current upon the charts,
and requested him to mark it out for me, which he readily complied
with, adding directions for avoiding it in sailing from Europe to
North-America. I procured it to be engraved by order from the general
post-office, on the old chart of the Atlantic, at Mount and Page's,
Tower-hill; and copies were sent down to Falmouth for the captains
of the packets, who slighted it however; but it is since printed in
France, of which edition I hereto annex a copy.

This stream is probably generated by the great accumulation of
water on the eastern coast of America between the tropics, by the
trade-winds which constantly blow there. It is known that a large
piece of water ten miles broad and generally only three feet deep,
has by a strong wind had its waters driven to one side and sustained
so as to become six feet deep, while the windward side was laid dry.
This may give some idea of the quantity heaped up on the American
coast, and the reason of its running down in a strong current through
the islands into the bay of Mexico, and from thence issuing through
the gulph of Florida, and proceeding along the coast to the banks of
Newfoundland, where it turns off towards and runs down through the
Western Islands. Having since crossed this stream several times in
passing between America and Europe, I have been attentive to sundry
circumstances relating to it, by which to know when one is in it; and
besides the gulph weed with which it is interspersed, I find that it
is always warmer than the sea on each side of it, and that it does
not sparkle in the night: I annex hereto the observations made with
the thermometer in two voyages, and possibly may add a third. It will
appear from them, that the thermometer may be an useful instrument to
a navigator, since currents coming from the northward into southern
seas, will probably be found colder than the water of those seas,
as the currents from southern seas into northern are found warmer.
And it is not to be wondered that so vast a body of deep warm water,
several leagues wide, coming from between the tropics and issuing
out of the gulph into the northern seas, should retain its warmth
longer than the twenty or thirty days required to its passing the
banks of Newfoundland. The quantity is too great, and it is too
deep to be suddenly cooled by passing under a cooler air. The air
immediately over it, however, may receive so much warmth from it as
to be rarefied and rise, being rendered lighter than the air on each
side of the stream; hence those airs must flow in to supply the place
of the rising warm air, and, meeting with each other, form those
tornados and water-spouts frequently met with, and seen near and over
the stream; and as the vapour from a cup of tea in a warm room, and
the breath of an animal in the same room, are hardly visible, but
become sensible immediately when out in the cold air, so the vapour
from the gulph stream, in warm latitudes is scarcely visible, but
when it comes into the cool air from Newfoundland, it is condensed
into the fogs, for which those parts are so remarkable.

The power of wind to raise water above its common level in the sea
is known to us in America, by the high tides occasioned in all our
sea-ports when a strong north-easter blows against the gulph stream.

The conclusion from these remarks is, that a vessel from Europe to
North-America may shorten her passage by avoiding to stem the stream,
in which the thermometer will be very useful; and a vessel from
America to Europe may do the same by the same means of keeping in
it. It may have often happened accidentally, that voyages have been
shortened by these circumstances. It is well to have the command of
them.

But may there not be another cause, independent of winds and
currents, why passages are generally shorter from America to Europe
than from Europe to America? This question I formerly considered in
the following short paper.


On board the Pennsylvania Packet, Capt. Osborne.

  _At Sea_, _April 5, 1775._

"Suppose a ship to make a voyage eastward from a place in lat. 40°
north, to a place in lat. 50° north, distance in longitude 75 degrees.

"In sailing from 40 to 50, she goes from a place where a degree of
longitude is about eight miles greater than in the place she is going
to. A degree is equal to four minutes of time; consequently the ship
in the harbour she leaves, partaking of the diurnal motion of the
earth, moves two miles in a minute faster, than when in the port she
is going to; which is 120 miles in an hour.

"This motion in a ship and cargo is of great force; and if she could
be lifted up suddenly from the harbour in which she lay quiet, and
set down instantly in the latitude of the port she was bound to,
though in a calm, that force contained in her would make her run a
great way at a prodigious rate. This force must be lost gradually in
her voyage, by gradual impulse against the water, and probably thence
shorten the voyage. Query, In returning does the contrary happen, and
is her voyage thereby retarded and lengthened?"[33]

Would it not be a more secure method of planking ships, if, instead
of thick single planks laid horizontally, we were to use planks of
half the thickness, and lay them double and across each other as
in figure 23? To me it seems that the difference of expence would
not be considerable, and that the ship would be both tighter and
stronger.

The securing of the ship is not the only necessary thing; securing
the health of the sailors, a brave and valuable order of men,
is likewise of great importance. With this view the methods so
successfully practised by Captain Cook in his long voyages cannot be
too closely studied or carefully imitated. A full account of those
methods is found in Sir John Pringle's speech, when the medal of the
Royal Society was given to that illustrious navigator. I am glad to
see in his last voyage that he found the means effectual which I had
proposed for preserving flour, bread, &c. from moisture and damage.
They were found dry and good after being at sea four years. The
method is described in my printed works, page 452, fifth edition[34].
In the same, page 469, 470[35], is proposed a means of allaying
thirst in case of want of fresh water. This has since been practised
in two instances with success. Happy if their hunger, when the other
provisions are consumed, could be relieved as commodiously; and
perhaps in time this may be found not impossible. An addition might
be made to their present vegetable provision, by drying various roots
in slices by the means of an oven. The sweet potatoe of America and
Spain is excellent for this purpose. Other potatoes, with carrots,
parsnips and turnips, might be prepared and preserved in the same
manner.

With regard to make-shifts in cases of necessity, seamen are
generally very ingenious themselves. They will excuse however the
mention of two or three. If they happen in any circumstance, such
as after shipwreck, taking to their boat, or the like, to want a
compass, a fine sewing-needle laid on clear water in a cup will
generally point to the north, most of them being a little magnetical,
or may be made so by being strongly rubbed or hammered, lying in a
north and south direction. If their needle is too heavy to float by
itself, it may be supported by little pieces of cork or wood. A man
who can swim, may be aided in a long traverse by his handkerchief
formed into a kite, by two cross sticks extending to the four
corners; which, being raised in the air when the wind is fair and
fresh, will tow him along while lying on his back. Where force is
wanted to move a heavy body, and there are but few hands and no
machines, a long and strong rope may make a powerful instrument.
Suppose a boat is to be drawn up on a beach, that she may be out of
the surf; a stake drove into the beach where you would have the boat
drawn, and another to fasten the end of the rope to, which comes
from the boat, and then applying what force you have to pull upon
the middle of the rope at right angles with it, the power will be
augmented in proportion to the length of rope between the posts. The
rope being fastened to the stake A, and drawn upon in the direction
C D, will slide over the stake B; and when the rope is bent to the
angle A D B, represented by the pricked line in figure 24, the boat
will be at B.

Some sailors may think the writer has given himself unnecessary
trouble in pretending to advise them; for they have a little
repugnance to the advice of landmen, whom they esteem ignorant and
incapable of giving any worth notice; though it is certain that most
of their instruments were the invention of landmen. At least the
first vessel ever made to go on the water was certainly such. I will
therefore add only a few words more, and they shall be addressed to
passengers.

When you intend a long voyage, you may do well to keep your intention
as much as possible a secret, or at least the time of your departure;
otherwise you will be continually interrupted in your preparations
by the visits of friends and acquaintance, who will not only rob
you of the time you want, but put things out of your mind, so that
when you come to sea, you have the mortification to recollect points
of business that ought to have been done, accounts you intended to
settle, and conveniencies you had proposed to bring with you, &c. &c.
all which have been omitted through the effect of these officious
friendly visits. Would it not be well if this custom could be
changed; if the voyager after having, without interruption, made all
his preparations, should use some of the time he has left, in going
himself to take leave of his friends at their own houses, and let
them come to congratulate him on his happy return.

It is not always in your power to make a choice in your captain,
though much of your comfort in the passage may depend on his personal
character, as you must for so long a time be confined to his company,
and under his direction; if he be a sensible, sociable, good-natured,
obliging man, you will be so much the happier. Such there are; but if
he happens to be otherwise, and is only skilful, careful, watchful
and active in the conduct of his ship, excuse the rest, for these are
the essentials.

Whatever right you may have by agreement in the mass of stores laid
in by him for the passengers, it is good to have some particular
things in your own possession, so as to be always at your own
command.

1. Good water, that of the ship being often bad. You can be sure of
having it good only by bottling it from a clear spring or well and
in clean bottles. 2. Good tea. 3. Coffee ground. 4. Chocolate. 5.
Wine of the sort you particularly like, and cyder. 6. Raisins. 7.
Almonds. 8. Sugar. 9. Capillaire. 10. Lemons. 11. Jamaica spirits.
12. Eggs greased. 13. Diet bread 14. Portable soup. 15. Rusks. As to
fowls, it is not worth while to have any called yours, unless you
could have the feeding and managing of them according to your own
judgment under your own eye. As they are generally treated at present
in ships, they are for the most part sick, and their flesh tough and
hard as whit-leather. All seamen have an opinion, broached I supposed
at first prudently, for saving of water when short, that fowls do not
know when they have drank enough, and will kill themselves if you
give them too much, so they are served with a little only once in two
days. This is poured into troughs that lie sloping, and therefore
immediately runs down to the lower end. There the fowls ride upon one
another's backs to get at it, and some are not happy enough to reach
and once dip their bills in it. Thus tantalized, and tormented with
thirst, they cannot digest their dry food, they fret, pine, sicken
and die. Some are found dead, and thrown overboard every morning, and
those killed for the table are not eatable. Their troughs should be
in little divisions, like cups, to hold the water separately, figure
25. But this is never done. The sheep and hogs are therefore your
best dependance for fresh meat at sea, the mutton being generally
tolerable and the pork excellent.

It is possible your captain may have provided so well in the general
stores, as to render some of the particulars above recommended of
little or no use to you. But there are frequently in the ship poorer
passengers, who are taken at a lower price, lodge in the steerage,
and have no claim to any of the cabin provisions, or to any but
those kinds that are allowed the sailors. These people are sometimes
dejected, sometimes sick, there may be women and children among
them. In a situation where there is no going to market, to purchase
such necessaries, a few of these your superfluities distributed
occasionally may be of great service, restore health, save life, make
the miserable happy, and thereby afford you infinite pleasure.

The worst thing in ordinary merchant ships is the cookery. They have
no professed cook, and the worst hand as a seaman is appointed to
that office, in which he is not only very ignorant but very dirty.
The sailors have therefore a saying, that _God sends meat and the
devil cooks_. Passengers more piously disposed, and willing to
believe heaven orders all things for the best, may suppose, that,
knowing the sea-air and constant exercise by the motion of the vessel
would give us extraordinary appetites, bad cooks were kindly sent to
prevent our eating too much; or that, foreseeing we should have bad
cooks, good appetites were furnished to prevent our starving. If you
cannot trust to these circumstances, a spirit-lamp, with a blaze-pan,
may enable you to cook some little things for yourself; such as a
hash, a soup, &c. And it might be well also to have among your stores
some potted meats, which if well put up will keep long good. A small
tin oven, to place with the open side before the fire, may be another
good utensil, in which your own servant may roast for you a bit of
pork or mutton. You will sometimes be induced to eat of the ship's
salt beef, as it is often good. You will find cyder the best quencher
of that thirst which salt meat or fish occasions. The ship biscuit
is too hard for some sets of teeth. It may be softened by toasting.
But rusk is better; for being made of good fermented bread, sliced
and baked a second time, the pieces imbibe the water easily, soften
immediately, digest more kindly, and are therefore more wholesome
than the unfermented biscuit. By the way, rusk is the true original
biscuit, so prepared to keep for sea, biscuit in French signifying
twice baked. If your dry peas boil hard, a two-pound iron shot put
with them into the pot, will by the motion of the ship grind them as
fine as mustard.

The accidents I have seen at sea with large dishes of soup upon a
table, from the motion of the ship, have made me wish, that our
potters or pewterers would make soup-dishes in divisions, like a set
of small bowls united together, each containing about sufficient for
one person, in some such form as fig. 26; for then when the ship
should make a sudden heel, the soup would not in a body flow over one
side, and fall into people's laps and scald them, as is sometimes the
case, but would be retained in the separate divisions, as in figure
27.

After these trifles, permit the addition of a few general
reflections. Navigation, when employed in supplying necessary
provisions to a country in want, and thereby preventing famines,
which were more frequent and destructive before the invention of that
art, is undoubtedly a blessing to mankind. When employed merely in
transporting superfluities, it is a question whether the advantage of
the employment it affords is equal to the mischief of hazarding so
many lives on the ocean. But when employed in pillaging merchants
and transporting slaves, it is clearly the means of augmenting the
mass of human misery. It is amazing to think of the ships and lives
risqued in fetching tea from China, coffee from Arabia, sugar and
tobacco from America, all which our ancestors did well without.
Sugar employs near one thousand ships, tobacco almost as many. For
the utility of tobacco there is little to be said; and for that of
sugar, how much more commendable would it be if we could give up the
few minutes gratification afforded once or twice a day by the taste
of sugar in our tea, rather than encourage the cruelties exercised
in producing it. An eminent French moralist says, that when he
considers the wars we excite in Africa to obtain slaves, the numbers
necessarily slain in those wars, the many prisoners who perish at sea
by sickness, bad provisions, foul air, &c. &c. in the transportation,
and how many afterwards die from the hardships of slavery, he cannot
look on a piece of sugar without conceiving it stained with spots of
human blood! Had he added the consideration of the wars we make to
take and retake the sugar islands from one another, and the fleets
and armies that perish in those expeditions, he might have seen his
sugar not merely spotted, but thoroughly dyed scarlet in grain. It is
these wars that make the maritime powers of Europe, the inhabitants
of London and Paris, pay dearer for sugar than those of Vienna, a
thousand miles from the sea; because their sugar costs not only the
price they pay for it by the pound, but all they pay in taxes to
maintain the fleets and armies that fight for it.

  With great esteem, I am, Sir,

  Your most obedient humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[30] This letter and the annexed paper on the Gulph stream, are taken
from the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, in which
they were read December 2, 1785. _Editor._

[31] The motion of the vessel made it inconvenient to try this simple
experiment at sea, when the proposal of it was written. But it has
been tried since we came on shore, and succeeded as the other.

[32] Captain Truxton, on board whose ship this was written, has
executed this proposed machine; he has given six arms to the
umbrella, they are joined to the stem by iron hinges, and the canvas
is double. He has taken it with him to China. February, 1786.

[33] Since this paper was read at the Society, an ingenious member,
Mr. Patterson, has convinced the writer that the returning voyage
would not, from this cause, be retarded.

[34] See the Paper referred to, Vol. I. p. 376. _Editor._

[35] See Vol. II. p. 104. _Editor._


[Illustration:

  _Plate VII.      Vol. II. page 197._

  A
  CHART
  of The
  _GULPH STREAM_.

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]


  _Remarks upon the Navigation from Newfoundland to New-York, in
  order to avoid the Gulph Stream on one hand, and on the other the
  Shoals that lie to the Southward of Nantucket and of St. George's
  Banks._


After you have passed the banks of Newfoundland in about the 44th
degree of latitude, you will meet with nothing, till you draw near
the Isle of Sables, which we commonly pass in latitude 43. Southward
of this isle, the current is found to extend itself as far north as
41° 20′ or 30′, then it turns towards the E. S. E. or S. E. ¼ E.

Having passed the Isle of Sables, shape your course for the St.
George's Banks, so as to pass them in about latitude 40°, because the
current southward of those banks reaches as far north as 39°. The
shoals of those banks lie in 41° 35′.

After having passed St. George's Banks, you must, to clear Nantucket,
form your course so as to pass between the latitudes 38° 30′ and 40°
45′.

The most southern part of the shoals of Nantucket lie in about 40°
45′. The northern part of the current directly to the south of
Nantucket is felt in about latitude 38° 30′.

By observing these directions and keeping between the stream and
the shoals, the passage from the Banks of Newfoundland to New-York,
Delaware, or Virginia, may be considerably shortened; for so you will
have the advantage of the eddy current, which moves contrary to the
Gulph Stream. Whereas if to avoid the shoals you keep too far to the
southward, and get into that stream, you will be retarded by it at
the rate of 60 or 70 miles a day.

The Nantucket whale-men being extremely well acquainted with the
Gulph Stream, its course, strength, and extent, by their constant
practice of whaling on the edges of it, from their island quite down
to the Bahamas, this draft of that stream was obtained from one of
them, Captain Folges, and caused to be engraved on the old chart in
London, for the benefit of navigators, by

  B. FRANKLIN.

_Note_, The Nantucket captains who are acquainted with this stream,
make their voyages from England to Boston in as short a time
generally as others take in going from Boston to England, viz. from
twenty to thirty days.

A stranger may know when he is in the Gulph Stream, by the warmth
of the water, which is much greater than that of the water on each
side of it. If then he is bound to the westward, he should cross the
stream to get out of it as soon as possible.

  B. FRANKLIN.




  OBSERVATIONS _of the Warmth of the_ SEA-WATER, &c. _by Fahrenheit's
  Thermometer, in crossing the Gulph Stream; with other Remarks made
  on board the Pennsylvania Packet, Capt. Osborne, bound from London
  to Philadelphia, in April and May, 1775_.


   ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  |Date|  Hour |Temp|Temp |Wind|Course|Dist-| Lat |Long |  Remarks.        |
  |    |       | of | of  |    |      |ance |  N. |  W. |                  |
  |    |       | Air|Water|    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |----+-------+----+-----+----+------+-----+-----+-----+------------------|
  | Apr|       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |  10|       |    |  62 |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |  11|       |    |  61 |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |  12|       |    |  64 |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |  13|       |    |  65 |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |  14|       |    |  65 |    |      |     | °  ′| °  ′|                  |
  |  26|       | 60 |  70 |    |      |     |37 39|60 38|Much gulph weed;  |
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | saw a whale.     |
  |  27|       | 60 |  70 | SSE|  WbS |     |37 13|62 29|Colour of water   |
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | changed.         |
  |  28| 8 A.M.| 70 |  64 | SW |  WNW |     |37 48|64 35|No gulph weed.    |
  |  --| 6 P.M.| 67 |  60 |    |      |  34 |     |     |Sounded, no bottom|
  |  29| 8 A.M.| 63 |  71 |  N |   W  |  44 |37 26|66  0|Much light in the |
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | water last night.|
  |  --| 5 P.M.| 65 |  72 | NE |      |  57 |     |     |Water again of the|
  |  --|11 dit.| 66 |  66 |NWbN|  WbS |  57 |     |     | usual deep sea   |
  |  30| 8 A.M.| 64 |  70 | NE |  WbN |  69 |     |     | colour, little or|
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | no light in it at|
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | night.           |
  |  --|12     | 62 |  70 |    |  EbS |  24 |37 20|68 53|Freq. gulph weed, |
  |  --| 6 P.M.| 64 |  72 | ESE|  WbN |  43 |     |     | water continues of
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | sea colour, little
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | light.           |
  |  --|10 dit.| 65 |  65 |  S |      |  25 |     |     |Much light.       |
  | May|       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     |                  |
  |   1| 7 A.M.| 68 |  63 |    |      |  60 |     |     |Much light all    |
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | last night.      |
  |  --|12     | 65 |  56 | SSW|  WNW |  44 |38 13|72 2 |Colour of water   |
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | changed.         |
  |  --| 4 P.M.| 64 |  56 |    |  WbN |  21 |     |     |                  |
  |  --|10 dit.| 64 |  57 | SW |  WNW |  31 |     |     |Much light.       |
  |   2| 8 A.M.| 62 |  53 |    |      |  18 |38 43|74  3|Much light. Thunder
  |    |       |    |     |    |      |     |     |     | -gust.           |
  |  --|12     | 60 |  53 | WSW|   NW |  18 |     |     |                  |
  |  --| 6 P.M.| 64 |  55 |  NW|  WSW |  15 |     |     |                  |
  |  --|10     | 65 |  55 | NbW|  WbN |  10 |     |     |                  |
  |   3| 7 A.M.| 62 |  54 |    |      |  30 |38 30|75  0|                  |
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------




  OBSERVATIONS _of the Warmth of the_ SEA-WATER, &c. _by Fahrenheit's
  Thermometer; with other Remarks made on board the Reprisal, Capt.
  Wycks, bound from Philadelphia to France, in October and November,
  1776_.

   ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  |Date |Hour|Hour|Temp|Temp |Wind|Course|Dist-| Lat |Long |  Remarks      |
  |     |A.M.|P.M.| of | of  |    |      |ance |  N. |  W. |               |
  |     |    |    | Air|Water|    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |-----+----+----+----+-----+----+------+-----+-----+-----+---------------
  | Oct |    |    |    |     |    |      |     |     |     |Left the capes |
  |   31| 10 |    | 76 |  70 |SSE | EbS  | 135 |38 12|70 30|Thursday night,|
  |   --|    |  4 |    |  71 |    |      |     |     |     |Oct 29, 1776   |
  | Nov |    |    |    |     |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    1| 10 |    |    |  78 |WSW | E½N  | 109 |No ob|68 12|               |
  |   --|    |  4 | 71 |  81 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    2|  8 |    | 71 |  75 |  N |      |     |     |     |Some sparks in |
  |   --| 12 |    |    |  78 |    |      | 141 |ditto|65 23|the water these|
  |   --|    |  4 | 67 |  76 |    |      |     |     |     |two last nights|
  |    3|  8 |    |    |  76 | NW | ESE½E|     |     |     |               |
  |   --| 12 |    |    |  76 |    | EbS  | 160 |37  0|62  7|               |
  |   --|    |  4 | 70 |  76 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    4|  9 |    | 68 |  76 |    | NbE  |     |     |     |Ditto.         |
  |   --|    |  1 |    |  76 |    |      | 194 |36 26|58  8|               |
  |   --|    |  4 | 68 |  76 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |   --|    |  8 |    |  78 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    5|  8 |    | 68 |  76 |    |  NE  |     |     |     |Ditto.         |
  |   --| 12 |    | 70 |  75 |    |      | 163 |35 21|55  3|               |
  |   --|    |  4 |    |  75 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |   --|    |  8 |    |  75 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    6|  8 |    |    |  76 |EbN | S50E |     |     |     |               |
  |   --| 12 |    |    |  77 |    |      |  7  |35 33|53 52|               |
  |    7|  8 |    |    |  78 |SEbE| N30W |     |     |     |               |
  |   --| 12 |    |    |  77 |    |      | 108 |36  6|52 46|               |
  |   --|    |  4 |    |  77 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    8|  9 |    | 75 |  77 |SbE | N49E |     |     |     |               |
  |   --| 12 |    |    |  77 |    |      | 175 |38  2|50  1|               |
  |   --|    |  4 |    |  77 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |    9|  9 |    | 75 |  77 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |   --| 12 |    | 75 |  70 | SW | N33E | 175 |39 39|46 55|               |
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------


  OBSERVATIONS MADE ON BOARD THE REPRISAL, CONTINUED.

   ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  |Date.|Hour|Hour|Temp|Temp |Wind|Course|Dist-| Lat |Long |Remarks.       |
  |     |A.M.|P.M.| of | of  |    |      |ance |  N. |  W. |               |
  |     |    |    | Air|Water|    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |-----+----+----+----+-----+----+------+-----+-----+-----+---------------
  | Nov |    |    |    |     |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |   9 |    | 4  |    |  71 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  10 |  8 |    | 70 |  68 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  -- | 12 |    |    |  64 | E  |N 17 E|  64 |40 39|46 27|               |
  |  11 |  8 |    |    |  63 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  -- | 12 |    |    |  61 |S E |N 8 E |  41 |41 19|46 19|               |
  |  12 |  8 |    | 56 |  59 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  -- |    |  4 |    |  69 |NNW |N 80 E| 120 |41 39|43 42|               |
  |  13 | all day |    |  68 | E  |S 82 E|  69 |41 29|42 10|               |
  |  14 |  8 |    | 70 |  70 |    |N 74 E| 111 |42  0|39 57|               |
  |  -- |    |Noon|    |  72 |ESE |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  -- |    |  4 |    |  71 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  15 |  8 |    | 61 |  69 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  -- |    |Noon|    |  68 |WSW |N 70 E| 186 |43  3|35 51|               |
  |  -- |    |  4 |    |  67 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  16 |    |Noon| 65 |  67 |S W |N 67 W|  48 |43 22|34 50|               |
  |  -- |    |  4 |    |  63 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  17 |  8 |    |    |  63 |ESE |N 19 E|  56 |44 15|34 25|               |
  |  18 | all day |    |  65 |SbW |N 75 E| 210 |45  6|29 43|Some gulph weed|
  |  19 |    |Noon| 65 |  64 |S W |N 80 E| 238 |45 46|24  2|               |
  |  20 |  8 |    |    |  62 | N  |S 80 E| 155 |45 19|20 30|               |
  |  -- |    | 4  |    |  60 |    |      |     |     |     |               |
  |  21 |  9 |    |    |  62 | S  |N 88 E|  94 |45 22|18 17|               |
  |  22 | 10 |    | 60 |  62 |SSW |S 89 E| 133 |45 19|15 19|               |
  |  23 |    |Noon|    |  61 |WSW |S 86 E| 194 |45  6|10 35|               |
  |  24 |    | do.|    |  60 |NNE |N 78 E| 191 |45 46| 6 10|               |
  |  25 |    | do.|    |  60 |N E |S 76 E| 125 |45  4| 3 23|               |
  |  26 |    | do.| 56 |  60 | E  |N 73 E|  31 |45 13| 2 20|               |
  |  27 |    | do.|    |  58 |    |      |     |     |     |Soundings off  |
  |  28 |    | do.| 54 |  56 |    |      |     |     |     |  Bellisle.    |
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------




  _A Journal of a Voyage from the Channel between France and England
  towards America._

   -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  |    |      |     |Therm. AM|Therm. PM|     |      |      |Varia-|        |
  |    |      |     |---------|---------|     |      |Dis-  |tion  |        |
  |Date|Latit.|Long.|Air|Water|Air|Water|Winds|Course|tance |of the|        |
  |    |  N.  |  W. |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |Needle|        |
  |    |      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |Miles.| West.|        |
  |----|------|-----|---|-----|---|-----|-----|------|------|------|        |
  |July|      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |      |        |
  | 29 |      |     | 62|  57 |   |     | {These are taken on an}  |        |
  | 30 |      |     | 62|  58 | 63|  58 | {average of 24 hours. }  |        |
  | 31 |      |     | 60|  58 | 62|  62 |     |      |      |      |        |
  |Aug |      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |      |        |
  |  1 |49 15 | 4 15| 63|  62 | 60|  64 |East |SW ½W |   60 |22° 0 |        |
  |  2 |48 28 | 8 58| 64|  64 | 64|  63 |E S E|WbS ½S|  174 |      |        |
  |  3 |47  0 |12 13| 60|  67 | omitted |N E  |SW bW |  160 |      |        |
  |  4 |45  0 |15 43| 66|  66 |do.|  66 |NW bW|SW ½W |  190 |      |        |
  |  5 |43  5 |17 25| 67|  65 | 65|  68 |N E  |SW bS |  131 |20  0 |        |
  |  6 |41  3 |19 44| 70|  68 | 71|  69 |N E  |SW ½S |  166 |16 30 |        |
  |  7 |38 45 |21 34| 70|  70 | 68|  70 |N E  |SSW ¾W|  165 |11 30 |        |
  |  8 |36 42 |23 10| 72|  71 | 73|  72 |N E  |SSW ¾W|  149 |11 15 |        |
  |  9 |35 40 |25 40| 73|  73 | 73|  74 |N E  |WSW ¼S|  137 |    --|--------|
  | 10 |35  0 |27  0| 71|  73 | 77|  75 |N W  |WSW ¾S|   76 |    |Therm|Noon|
  | 11 |33 51 |28 42| 74|  74 | 76|  77 |North|SW ¾W |  112 |    |-----|----|
  | 12 |33 30 |31 30| 76|  75 | 76|  76 |North|W ¾S  |  143 |    |  A. | W. |
  | 13 |33 17 |33 32| 76|  76 | 78|  77 |N E  |W ½ S |  103 |    |  77 | 78 |
  | 14 |33 22 |34 31| 76|  76 | 81|  79 |S S E|W ½ N |   50 |    |  81 | 79 |
  | 15 |33 45 |35  0| 78|  79 | 79|  78 |W N W|SW ¼W |   35 |    |  79 | 79 |
  | 16 |34 14 |35 30| 79|  78 | 81|  80 |West |NW ½N |   38 |    |  81 | 80 |
  | 17 |35 37 |36  4| 80|  79 | 80|  78 |W S W|N N W |   75 |    |  80 | 78 |
  | 18 |36  7 |37 16| 80|  78 | omitted |NW bW|WNW ½N|   65 |    |  80 | 79 |
  | 19 |36 38 |38  0| 78|  77 | 78|  77 |W S W|NW ½W |   49 |    |  79 | 77 |
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------


  _Journal of a Voyage, &c. continued._


   -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  |    |      |     |Therm. AM|Therm. PM|     |      |      |Varia-|Therm.  |
  |    |      |     |---------|---------|     |      |Dis-  |tion  |at Noon.|
  |Date|Latit.|Long.|Air|Water|Air|Water|Winds|Course|tance |of the|--------|
  |    |  N.  |  W. |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |Needle|   |    |
  |    |      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |Miles.| West.| A.| W. |
  |----|------|-----|---|-----|---|-----|-----|------|------|------|--------|
  |Aug |      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |      /        |
  | 20 |37 38 |38  6| 78|  76 | omitted |West |N ¼ W |   62 |     | 77 | 75 |
  | 21 |36 15 |38 26| 73|  74 | 78|  76 |W N W|S b W |   82 |     | 77 | 75 |
  | 22 |35 40 |38 44| 7 |  76 | 80|  77 |W b S|S S W |   38 |     | 80 | 77 |
  | 23 |35 35 |40 52| 7 |  77 | 78|  75 |North|W ¼ S |  100 |     | omitted.|
  | 24 |35 12 |41 31| 75|  73 | 75|  74 |W N W|S WbW |   41 |     | 75 | 74 |
  | 25 |35 40 |42 33| 79|  76 | 79|  76 |W b N|W NW¾N|   60 |     | 80 | 76 |
  | 26 |35 30 |42 44| 79|  76 | 80|  76 |S WbW|S W½S |   14 |     | 80 | 76 |
  | 27 |35 14 |43 23| 79|  77 | 81|  79 |West |W SW¼S|   38 |     | 81 | 78 |
  | 28 |34 23 |44  0| 7 |  76 | 78|  78 |N N E|S WbS |   60 |     | 78 | 78 |
  | 29 |34 12 |45 52| 77|  78 | 78|  78 |N E  |W ¼ S |   94 | 8° 0| 79 | 78 |
  | 30 |34  5 |48 31| 78|  78 | 78|  78 |East |W ½ S |  134 |     | 78 | 78 |
  | 31 |34 20 |51  4| 80|  79 | 81|  79 |East |W ¾ S |  129 |     | 80 | 80 |
  |Sep |      |     |   |     |   |     |     |      |      |     |    |    |
  |  1 |34 20 |52 47| 81|  78 | omitted |S S W|W ¼ N |   86 |     | 83 | 80 |
  |  2 |34 55 |55 12| 81|  80 | 83|  80 |S W  |WbN ½W|  125 |     | 83 | 80 |
  |  3 |35 30 |57 24| 83|  80 | 83|  80 |S WbS|WbN ½N|  114 | 6° 0| 84 | 81 |
  |  4 |35 50 |59  1| 82|  80 | 83|  80 |S W½W|WbN ¼N|   82 |     | 83 | 81 |
  |  5 |35 55 |61  0| 81|  80 | 82|  81 |S S W|W ¼ N |   96 |     | 82 | 81 |
  |  6 |36 20 |62 30| 80|  81 | 79|  80 |N WbN|W b N |   75 |     | 78 | 80 |
  |  7 |34 50 |63 10| 87|  80 | 78|  81 |N WbN|S S W |   86 |     | 78 | 81 |
  |  8 |34 45 |64 40| 75|  79 | 75|  79 |North|W ¼ S |   74 |     | 75 | 79 |
  |  9 |35 43 |66 42| 75|  79 | 77|  73 |N E  |W N W |  108 |     | 78 | 80 |
  | 10 |37 20 |68 40| 77|  73 | 77|  70 |E N E|N W   |  126 |     | 78 | 72 |
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------

N.B. Longitude is reckoned from London, and the Thermometer is
according to Fahrenheit.


OBSERVATIONS.

  July 31. At one P.M. the Start bore WNW. distant six leagues.

  August 1. The water appears luminous in the ship's wake.

  ---- 2. The temperature of the water is taken at eight in the
  morning and at eight in the evening.

  ---- 6. The water appears less luminous.

  ---- 7. Formegas SW. dist 32½ deg. St. Mary's SW½S. 33 leagues.

  ---- 8. From this date the temperature of the water is taken at
  eight in the morning and at six in the evening.

  ---- 10. Moonlight, which prevents the luminous appearance of the
  water.

  ---- 11. A strong southerly current.

  ---- 12. Ditto. From this date the temperature of the air and water
  was taken at noon, as well as morning and evening.

  ---- 16. Northerly current.

  ---- 19. First saw gulph weed.

  ---- 21. Southerly current.

  ---- 22. Again saw gulph weed.

  ---- 24. The water appeared luminous in a small degree before the
  moon rose.

  ---- 29. No moon, yet very little light in the water.

  ---- 30. Much gulph weed to-day.

  ---- 31. Ditto.

  Sept. 1. Ditto.

  ---- 2. A little more light in the water.

  ---- 4. No gulph weed to-day. More light in the water.

  ---- 5. Some gulph weed again.

  ---- 6. Little light in the water. A very hard thunder-gust in the
  night.

  ---- 7. Little gulph weed.

  ---- 8. More light in the water. Little gulph weed.

  ---- 9. Little gulph weed. Little light in the water last evening.

  ---- 10. Saw some beds of rock-weed; and we were surprised to
  observe the water six degrees colder by the thermometer than the
  preceding noon.

  This day (10th) the thermometer still kept descending, and at five
  in the morning of the 11th, it was in water as low as 70, when
  we struck soundings. The same evening the pilot came on board,
  and we found our ship about five degrees of longitude a-head of
  the reckoning, which our captain accounted for by supposing our
  course to have been near the edge of the gulph stream, and thus
  an eddy-current always in our favour. By the distance we ran from
  Sept. 9, in the evening, till we struck soundings, we must have
  then been at the western edge of the gulph stream, and the change
  in the temperature of the water was probably owing to our suddenly
  passing from that current, into the waters of our own climate.

  On the 14th of August the following experiment was made. The
  weather being perfectly calm, an empty bottle, corked very tight,
  was sent down 20 fathoms, and it was drawn up still empty. It was
  then sent down again 35 fathoms, when the weight of the water
  having forced in the cork, it was drawn up full; the water it
  contained was immediately tried by the thermometer, and found to be
  70, which was six degrees colder than at the surface: the lead and
  bottle were visible, but not very distinctly so, at the depth of
  12 fathoms, but when only 7 fathoms deep, they were perfectly seen
  from the ship. This experiment was thus repeated Sept. 11, when we
  were in soundings of 18 fathoms. A keg was previously prepared with
  a valve at each end, one opening inward, the other outward; this
  was sent to the bottom in expectation that by the valves being both
  open when going down, and both shut when coming up, it would keep
  within it the water received at bottom. The upper valve performed
  its office well, but the under one did not shut quite close, so
  that much of the water was lost in hauling it up the ship's side.
  As the water in the keg's passage upwards could not enter at the
  top, it was concluded that what water remained in it was of that
  near the ground, and on trying this by the thermometer, it was
  found to be at 58, which was 12 degrees colder than at the surface.


  _This last Journal was obligingly kept for me by Mr. J. Williams,
  my fellow-passenger in the London Packet, who made all the
  experiments with great exactness._




TO MR. O. N[36].

  _On the Art of Swimming._


  [No date.]

  DEAR SIR,

I cannot be of opinion with you that it is too late in life for you
to learn to swim. The river near the bottom of your garden affords
a most convenient place for the purpose. And as your new employment
requires your being often on the water, of which you have such a
dread, I think you would do well to make the trial; nothing being
so likely to remove those apprehensions as the consciousness of
an ability to swim to the shore, in case of an accident, or of
supporting yourself in the water till a boat could come to take you
up.

I do not know how far corks or bladders may be useful in learning to
swim, having never seen much trial of them. Possibly they may be of
service in supporting the body while you are learning what is called
the stroke, or that manner of drawing in and striking out the hands
and feet that is necessary to produce progressive motion. But you
will be no swimmer till you can place some confidence in the power of
the water to support you; I would therefore advise the acquiring that
confidence in the first place; especially as I have known several
who, by a little of the practice necessary for that purpose, have
insensibly acquired the stroke, taught as it were by nature.

The practice I mean is this. Chusing a place where the water deepens
gradually, walk coolly into it till it is up to your breast, then
turn round, your face to the shore, and throw an egg into the water
between you and the shore. It will sink to the bottom, and be easily
seen there, as your water is clear. It must lie in water so deep
as that you cannot reach it to take it up but by diving for it. To
encourage yourself in order to do this, reflect that your progress
will be from deeper to shallower water, and that at any time you may,
by bringing your legs under you and standing on the bottom, raise
your head far above the water. Then plunge under it with your eyes
open, throwing yourself towards the egg, and endeavouring by the
action of your hands and feet against the water to get forward till
within reach of it. In this attempt you will find, that the water
buoys you up against your inclination; that it is not so easy a thing
to sink as you imagined; that you cannot but by active force get down
to the egg. Thus you feel the power of the water to support you, and
learn to confide in that power; while your endeavours to overcome it,
and to reach the egg, teach you the manner of acting on the water
with your feet and hands, which action is afterwards used in swimming
to support your head higher above water, or to go forward through it.

I would the more earnestly press you to the trial of this method,
because, though I think I satisfied you that your body is lighter
than water, and that you might float in it a long time with your
mouth free for breathing, if you would put yourself in a proper
posture, and would be still and forbear struggling; yet till you have
obtained this experimental confidence in the water, I cannot depend
on your having the necessary presence of mind to recollect that
posture and the directions I gave you relating to it. The surprize
may put all out of your mind. For though we value ourselves on being
reasonable knowing creatures, reason and knowledge seem on such
occasions to be of little use to us; and the brutes to whom we allow
scarce a glimmering of either, appear to have the advantage of us.

I will, however, take this opportunity of repeating, those
particulars to you, which I mentioned in our last conversation, as,
by perusing them at your leisure, you may possibly imprint them so in
your memory as on occasion to be of some use to you.

1. That though the legs, arms, and head, of a human body, being solid
parts, are specifically something heavier than fresh water, yet the
trunk, particularly the upper part, from its hollowness, is so much
lighter than water, as that the whole of the body taken together
is too light to sink wholly under water, but some part will remain
above, until the lungs become filled with water, which happens from
drawing water into them instead of air, when a person in the fright
attempts breathing while the mouth and nostrils are under water.

2. That the legs and arms are specifically lighter than salt water,
and will be supported by it, so that a human body would not sink
in salt-water, though the lungs were filled as above, but from the
greater specific gravity of the head.

3. That therefore a person throwing himself on his back in salt
water, and extending his arms, may easily lie so as to keep his mouth
and nostrils free for breathing; and by a small motion of his hands
may prevent turning, if he should perceive any tendency to it.

4. That in fresh water, if a man throws himself on his back, near
the surface, he cannot long continue in that situation but by proper
action of his hands on the water. If he uses no such action, the legs
and lower part of the body will gradually sink till he comes into an
upright position, in which he will continue suspended, the hollow of
the breast keeping the head uppermost.

5. But if, in this erect position, the head is kept upright above the
shoulders, as when we stand on the ground, the immersion will, by the
weight of that part of the head that is out of water, reach above the
mouth and nostrils, perhaps a little above the eyes, so that a man
cannot long remain suspended in water with his head in that position.

6. The body continuing suspended as before, and upright, if the head
be leaned quite back, so that the face looks upwards, all the back
part of the head being then under water, and its weight consequently
in a great measure supported by it, the face will remain above water
quite free for breathing, will rise an inch higher every inspiration,
and sink as much every expiration, but never so low as that the water
may come over the mouth.

7. If therefore a person unacquainted with swimming and falling
accidentally into the water, could have presence of mind sufficient
to avoid struggling and plunging, and to let the body take this
natural position, he might continue long safe from drowning till
perhaps help would come. For as to the cloaths, their additional
weight while immersed is very inconsiderable, the water supporting it
though, when he comes out of the water, he would find them very heavy
indeed.

But, as I said before, I would not advise you or any one to depend on
having this presence of mind on such an occasion, but learn fairly to
swim; as I wish all men were taught to do in their youth; they would,
on many occurrences, be the safer for having that skill, and on many
more the happier, as freer from painful apprehensions of danger,
to say nothing of the enjoyment in so delightful and wholesome an
exercise. Soldiers particularly should, methinks, all be taught to
swim; it might be of frequent use either in surprising an enemy, or
saving themselves. And if I had now boys to educate, I should prefer
those schools (other things being equal) where an opportunity was
afforded for acquiring so advantageous an art, which once learned is
never forgotten.

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[36] Oliver Neale. _Editor._




ON THE SAME SUBJECT,

  _In Answer to some Enquiries of M. Dubourg[37]._


**** I am apprehensive that I shall not be able to find leisure for
making all the disquisitions and experiments which would be desirable
on this subject. I must, therefore, content myself with a few remarks.

The specific gravity of some human bodies, in comparison to that
of water, has been examined by Mr. Robinson, in our Philosophical
Transactions, volume 50, page 30, for the year 1757. He asserts, that
fat persons with small bones float most easily upon the water.

The diving-bell is accurately described in our Transactions.

When I was a boy, I made two oval pallets, each about ten inches
long, and six broad, with a hole for the thumb, in order to retain it
fast in the palm of my hand. They much resembled a painter's pallets.
In swimming I pushed the edges of these forward, and I struck the
water with their flat surfaces as I drew them back. I remember I swam
faster by means of these pallets, but they fatigued my wrists. I
also fitted to the soles of my feet a kind of sandals; but I was not
satisfied with them, because I observed that the stroke is partly
given by the inside of the feet and the ancles, and not entirely with
the soles of the feet.

We have here waistcoats for swimming, which are made of double
sail-cloth, with small pieces of cork quilted in between them.

I know nothing of the _scaphandre_ of M. de la Chapelle.

I know by experience, that it is a great comfort to a swimmer, who
has a considerable distance to go, to turn himself sometimes on
his back, and to vary in other respects the means of procuring a
progressive motion.

When he is seized with the cramp in the leg, the method of driving it
away is to give to the parts affected a sudden, vigorous and violent
shock; which he may do in the air as he swims on his back.

During the great heats of summer there is no danger in bathing,
however warm we may be, in rivers which have been thoroughly warmed
by the sun. But to throw oneself into cold spring water, when the
body has been heated by exercise in the sun, is an imprudence which
may prove fatal. I once knew an instance of four young men, who,
having worked at harvest in the heat of the day, with a view of
refreshing themselves plunged into a spring of cold water: two died
upon the spot, a third the next morning, and the fourth recovered
with great difficulty. A copious draught of cold water, in similar
circumstances, is frequently attended with the same effect in North
America.

The exercise of swimming is one of the most healthy and agreeable in
the world. After having swam for an hour or two in the evening, one
sleeps coolly the whole night, even during the most ardent heat of
summer. Perhaps the pores being cleansed, the insensible perspiration
increases and occasions this coolness. It is certain that much
swimming is the means of stopping a diarrhœa, and even of producing a
constipation. With respect to those who do not know how to swim, or
who are affected with a diarrhœa at a season which does not permit
them to use that exercise, a warm bath, by cleansing and purifying
the skin, is found very salutary, and often effects a radical cure. I
speak from my own experience, frequently repeated, and that of others
to whom I have recommended this.

You will not be displeased if I conclude these hasty remarks by
informing you, that as the ordinary method of swimming is reduced
to the act of rowing with the arms and legs, and is consequently
a laborious and fatiguing operation when the space of water to be
crossed is considerable; there is a method in which a swimmer may
pass to great distances with much facility, by means of a sail. This
discovery I fortunately made by accident, and in the following manner.

When I was a boy I amused myself one day with flying a paper kite;
and approaching the bank of a pond, which was near a mile broad,
I tied the string to a stake, and the kite ascended to a very
considerable height above the pond, while I was swimming. In a little
time, being desirous of amusing myself with my kite, and enjoying at
the same time the pleasure of swimming, I returned; and loosing from
the stake the string with the little stick which was fastened to it,
went again into the water, where I found, that, lying on my back and
holding the stick in my hands, I was drawn along the surface of the
water in a very agreeable manner. Having then engaged another boy
to carry my clothes round the pond, to a place which I pointed out
to him on the other side, I began to cross the pond with my kite,
which carried me quite over without the least fatigue, and with
the greatest pleasure imaginable. I was only obliged occasionally
to halt a little in my course, and resist its progress, when it
appeared that, by following too quick, I lowered the kite too much;
by doing which occasionally I made it rise again. I have never since
that time practised this singular mode of swimming, though I think
it not impossible to cross in this manner from Dover to Calais. The
packet-boat, however, is still preferable. ****

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[37] This and the four following extracts of letters to M. Dubourg,
are re-translated from the French edition of Dr. Franklin's works.
_Editor._




TO M. DUBOURG.

  _On the free Use of Air._


  _London, July 28, 1760._

**** I greatly approve the epithet which you give, in your letter
of the 8th of June, to the new method of treating the small-pox,
which you call the _tonic_ or bracing method; I will take occasion,
from it, to mention a practice to which I have accustomed myself.
You know the cold bath has long been in vogue here as a tonic; but
the shock of the cold water has always appeared to me, generally
speaking, as too violent, and I have found it much more agreeable
to my constitution to bathe in another element, I mean cold air.
With this view I rise almost every morning, and sit in my chamber
without any clothes whatever, half an hour or an hour, according
to the season, either reading or writing. This practice is not in
the least painful, but, on the contrary, agreeable; and if I return
to bed afterwards, before I dress myself, as sometimes happens, I
make a supplement to my night's rest of one or two hours of the most
pleasing sleep that can be imagined. I find no ill consequences
whatever resulting from it, and that at least it does not injure my
health, if it does not in fact contribute much to its preservation. I
shall therefore call it for the future a _bracing_ or _tonic_ bath.
****

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _On the Causes of Colds._


  _March 10, 1773._

**** I shall not attempt to explain why damp clothes occasion
colds, rather than wet ones, because I doubt the fact; I imagine
that neither the one nor the other contribute to this effect, and
that the causes of colds are totally independent of wet and even of
cold. I propose writing a short paper on this subject, the first
moment of leisure I have at my disposal. In the mean time I can
only say, that having some suspicions that the common notion, which
attributes to cold the property of stopping the pores and obstructing
perspiration, was ill founded, I engaged a young physician, who is
making some experiments with Sanctorius's balance, to estimate the
different proportions of his perspiration, when remaining one hour
quite naked, and another warmly clothed. He pursued the experiment
in this alternate manner for eight hours successively, and found his
perspiration almost double during those hours in which he was naked.
****

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Dr. Stark_[38].


  _May 4, 1773._

**** The young physician whom I mentioned is dead, and all the notes
which he had left of his curious experiments are by some accident
lost between our friends Sir John Pringle and Dr. Huck (Saunders);
but these gentlemen, if the papers cannot be recovered, it is to be
presumed, will repeat the experiments themselves ****

  B. FRANKLIN.


  _Dr. Lettsom._

  _London, August 30, 1769._

**** This letter will be forwarded to you by Dr. Lettsom, a young
American physician of much merit, and one of the peaceable sect of
Quakers: you will therefore at least regard him as a curiosity, even
though you should have embraced all the opinions of the majority of
your countrymen concerning these people ****

  B. FRANKLIN.




FROM DR. ----[39] OF BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. OF
PHILADELPHIA.

  _Respecting the Number of Deaths in Philadelphia by Inoculation._


  _Boston, Aug. 3, 1752._

  SIR,

This comes to you on account of Dr. Douglass: he desired me to write
to you for what you know of the number that died of the inoculation
in Philadelphia, telling me he designed to write something on the
small-pox shortly. We shall both be obliged to you for a word on this
affair.

The chief particulars of our visitation, you have in the public
prints. But the less degree of mortality than usual in the common way
of infection, seems chiefly owing to the purging method designed to
prevent the secondary fever; a method first begun and carried on in
this town, and with success beyond expectation. We lost one in eleven
one-sixth, but had we been experienced in this way, at the first
coming of the distemper, probably the proportion had been but one in
thirteen or fourteen. In the year 1730 we lost one in nine, which is
more favourable than ever before with us. The distemper pretty much
the same then as now, but some circumstances not so kind this time.

If there be any particulars which you want to know, please to signify
what they are, and I shall send them.

The number of our inhabitants decreases[40]. On a strict inquiry,
the overseers of the poor find but fourteen thousand one hundred and
ninety Whites, and one thousand five hundred and forty-four Blacks,
including those absent, on account of the small-pox, many of whom, it
is probable, will never return.

I pass this opportunity without any particulars of my old theme.
One thing, however, I must mention, which is, that perhaps my last
letters contained something that seemed to militate with your
doctrine of the _Origin_, &c. But my design was only to relate the
phenomena as they appeared to me. I have received so much light and
pleasure from your writings, as to prejudice me in favour of every
thing from your hand, and leave me only liberty to observe, and a
power of dissenting when some great probability might oblige me: and
if at any time that be the case, you will certainly hear of it.

  I am, Sir, &c.

FOOTNOTES:

[38] The works of Dr. Stark, including the experiments alluded to,
have since been published. _Editor._

[39] Dr. Perkins. _Editor._

[40] Boston is an old town, and was formerly the seat of all the
trade of the country, that was carried on by sea. New towns, and
ports, have, of late, divided the trade with it, and diminished its
inhabitants, though the inhabitants of the country, in general, have
greatly increased.




FROM BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. OF PHILADELPHIA.

  _In Answer to the preceding._


  _Philadelphia, Aug. 13, 1752._

  SIR,

I received your favour of the 3d instant. Some time last winter I
procured from one of our physicians an account of the number of
persons inoculated during the five visitations of the small-pox we
have had in twenty-two years; which account I sent to Mr. W. V. of
your town, and have no copy. If I remember right, the number exceeded
eight hundred, and the deaths were but four. I suppose Mr. V. will
show you the account, if he ever received it. Those four were all
that our doctors allow to have died of the small-pox by inoculation,
though I think there were two more of the inoculated who died of the
distemper; but the eruptions appearing soon after the operation, it
is supposed they had taken the infection before, in the common way.

I shall be glad to see what Dr. Douglass may write on the subject. I
have a French piece printed at Paris, 1724, entitled, _Observations
sur la Saignée du Pied, et sur la Purgation au commencement de la
Petite Verole, & Raisons de doubte contre l' Inoculation._--A letter
of the doctor's is mentioned in it. If he or you have it not, and
desire to see it, I will send it.--Please to favour me with the
particulars of your purging method, to prevent the secondary fever.

I am indebted for your preceding letter, but business sometimes
obliges one to postpone philosophical amusements. Whatever I
have wrote of that kind, are really, as they are entitled, but
_Conjectures_ and _Suppositions_; which ought always to give place,
when careful observation militates against them. I own I have too
strong a penchant to the building of hypotheses; they indulge my
natural indolence: I wish I had more of your patience and accuracy in
making observations, on which, alone, true philosophy can be founded.
And, I assure you, nothing can be more obliging to me, than your kind
communication of those you make, however they may disagree with my
pre-conceived notions.

I am sorry to hear that the number of your inhabitants decreases. I
some time since, wrote a small paper of _Thoughts on the peopling of
Countries_[41], which, if I can find, I will send you, to obtain your
sentiments. The favourable opinion you express of my writings, may,
you see, occasion you more trouble than you expected from,

  Sir, yours, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[41] This paper will be found in a subsequent part of the present
volume. _Editor._




TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN, ESQ.

  _On the Effects of Lead upon the human Constitution[42]._


  _Philadelphia, July 31, 1786._

  DEAR FRIEND,

I recollect that when I had last the pleasure of seeing you at
Southampton, now a twelvemonth since, we had some conversation on
the bad effects of lead taken inwardly; and that at your request I
promised to send you in writing a particular account of several facts
I then mentioned to you, of which you thought some good use might be
made. I now sit down to fulfil that promise.

The first thing I remember of this kind was a general discourse
in Boston when I was a boy, of a complaint from North Carolina
against New-England rum, that it poisoned their people, giving
them the dry-belly-ach, with a loss of the use of their limbs. The
distilleries being examined on the occasion, it was found, that
several of them used leaden still-heads and worms, and the physicians
were of opinion, that the mischief was occasioned by that use of
lead. The legislature of Massachussetts thereupon passed an act,
prohibiting, under severe penalties, the use of such still-heads and
worms hereafter.

In 1724, being in London, I went to work in the printing-house of Mr.
Palmer, Bartholomew-close, as a compositor. I there found a practice,
I had never seen before, of drying a case of types (which are wet in
distribution) by placing it sloping before the fire.

I found this had the additional advantage, when the types were not
only dried but heated, of being comfortable to the hands working over
them in cold weather. I therefore sometimes heated my case when the
types did not want drying. But an old workman observing it advised me
not to do so, telling me I might lose the use of my hands by it, as
two of our companions had nearly done, one of whom, that used to earn
his guinea a week, could not then make more than ten shillings, and
the other, who had the dangles, but seven and sixpence. This, with a
kind of obscure pain, that I had sometimes felt, as it were, in the
bones of my hand when working over the types made very hot, induced
me to omit the practice. But talking afterwards with Mr. James, a
letter-founder in the same Close, and asking him if his people, who
worked over the little furnaces of melted metal, were not subject to
that disorder; he made light of any danger from the effluvia, but
ascribed it to particles of the metal swallowed with their food by
slovenly workmen, who went to their meals after handling the metal,
without well washing their fingers, so that some of the metalline
particles were taken off by their bread and eaten with it. This
appeared to have some reason in it. But the pain I had experienced
made me still afraid of those effluvia.

Being in Derbyshire at some of the furnaces for smelting of lead
ore, I was told, that the smoke of those furnaces was pernicious to
the neighbouring grass and other vegetables; but I do not recollect
to have heard any thing of the effect of such vegetables eaten by
animals. It may be well to make the enquiry.

In America I have often observed, that on the roofs of our
shingled-houses, where moss is apt to grow in northern exposures,
if there be any thing on the roof painted with white lead, such as
balusters, or frames of dormant windows, &c. there is constantly a
streak on the shingles from such paint down to the eaves, on which
no moss will grow, but the wood remains constantly clean and free
from it. We seldom drink rain-water that fall on our houses; and
if we did, perhaps the small quantity of lead descending from such
paint might not be sufficient to produce any sensible ill-effect
on our bodies. But I have been told of a case in Europe, I forget
the place, where a whole family was afflicted with what we call
the dry-belly-ach, or _colica pictorum_, by drinking rain-water.
It was at a country-seat, which, being situated too high to have
the advantage of a well, was supplied with water from a tank, which
received the water from the leaded roofs. This had been drank several
years without mischief, but some young trees planted near the house
growing up above the roof, and shedding their leaves upon it, it
was supposed, that an acid in those leaves had corroded the lead
they covered, and furnished the water of that year with its baneful
particles and qualities.

When I was in Paris with Sir John Pringle in 1767, he visited _La
Charité_, an hospital particularly famous for the cure of that
malady, and brought from thence a pamphlet, containing a list of
the names of persons, specifying their professions or trades, who
had been cured there. I had the curiosity to examine that list,
and found, that all the patients were of trades, that some way or
other use or work in lead; such as plumbers, glaziers, painters, &c.
excepting only two kinds, stone-cutters and soldiers. In them, I
could not reconcile it to my notion, that lead was the cause of that
disorder. But on my mentioning it to a physician of that hospital, he
informed me, that the stone-cutters are continually using melted lead
to fix the ends of iron balustrades in stone; and that the soldiers
had been employed by painters as labourers in grinding of colours.

This, my dear friend, is all I can at present recollect on the
subject. You will see by it, that the opinion of this mischievous
effect from lead, is at least above sixty years old; and you will
observe with concern how long a useful truth may be known and exist,
before it is generally received and practised on.

  I am, ever, yours most affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[42] This letter is taken from a work by Dr. John Hunter, entitled
_Observations on the Diseases of the Army_. _Editor._




TO M. DUBOURG[43].

  _Observations on the prevailing Doctrines of Life and Death._


**** Your observations on the causes of death, and the experiments
which you propose for recalling to life those who appear to be killed
by lightning, demonstrate equally your sagacity and your humanity. It
appears, that the doctrines of life and death, in general, are yet
but little understood.

A toad buried in sand will live, it is said, till the sand becomes
petrified: and then, being inclosed in the stone, it may still live
for we know not how many ages. The facts which are cited in support
of this opinion are too numerous, and too circumstantial, not to
deserve a certain degree of credit. As we are accustomed to see all
the animals, with which we are acquainted, eat and drink, it appears
to us difficult to conceive, how a toad can be supported in such
a dungeon: but if we reflect, that the necessity of nourishment,
which animals experience in their ordinary state, proceeds from the
continual waste of their substance by perspiration, it will appear
less incredible, that some animals in a torpid state, perspiring
less because they use no exercise, should have less need of aliment;
and that others, which are covered with scales or shells, which
stop perspiration, such as land and sea-turtles, serpents, and some
species of fish, should be able to subsist a considerable time
without any nourishment whatever.--A plant, with its flowers, fades
and dies immediately, if exposed to the air without having its
root immersed in a humid soil, from which it may draw a sufficient
quantity of moisture to supply that which exhales from its substance
and is carried off continually by the air. Perhaps, however, if it
were buried in quicksilver, it might preserve for a considerable
space of time its vegetable life, its smell and colour. If this be
the case, it might prove a commodious method of transporting from
distant countries those delicate plants, which are unable to sustain
the inclemency of the weather at sea, and which require particular
care and attention. I have seen an instance of common flies preserved
in a manner somewhat similar. They had been drowned in Madeira wine,
apparently about the time when it was bottled in Virginia, to be
sent hither (to London). At the opening of one of the bottles, at
the house of a friend where I then was, three drowned flies fell
into the first glass that was filled. Having heard it remarked, that
drowned flies were capable of being revived by the rays of the sun,
I proposed making the experiment upon these: they were therefore
exposed to the sun upon a sieve, which had been employed to strain
them out of the wine. In less than three hours, two of them began by
degrees to recover life. They commenced by some convulsive motions
of the thighs, and at length they raised themselves upon their legs,
wiped their eyes with their fore-feet, beat and brushed their wings
with their hind-feet, and soon after began to fly, finding themselves
in Old England, without knowing how they came thither. The third
continued lifeless till sunset, when, losing all hopes of him, he was
thrown away.

I wish it were possible, from this instance, to invent a method of
embalming drowned persons, in such a manner that they may be recalled
to life at any period, however distant; for having a very ardent
desire to see and observe the state of America an hundred years
hence, I should prefer to any ordinary death, the being immersed in a
cask of Madeira wine, with a few friends till that time, to be then
recalled to life by the solar warmth of my dear country! But since in
all probability we live in an age too early and too near the infancy
of science, to hope to see such an art brought in our time to its
perfection, I must for the present content myself with the treat,
which you are so kind as to promise me, of the resurrection of a fowl
or a turkey-cock.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[43] This letter is translated from the French edition of Dr.
Franklin's works. It has no date, but the letter to which it is an
answer is dated 15th April, 1773.




  _An Account of the new-invented Pensylvanian Fire-Places: wherein
  their Construction and Manner of Operation is particularly
  explained; their Advantages above every other Method of warming
  Rooms demonstrated; and all Objections that have been raised
  against the Use of them answered and obviated. With Directions for
  putting them up, and for using them to the best Advantage. And a
  Copper-Plate, in which the several parts of the Machine are exactly
  laid down, from a Scale of Equal Parts._

  BY B. FRANKLIN.

  (First printed at Philadelphia in 1745.)


In these northern colonies the inhabitants keep fires to sit by
generally seven months in the year; that is, from the beginning
of October, to the end of April; and, in some winters, near eight
months, by taking in part of September and May.

Wood, our common fuel, which within these hundred years might be had
at every man's door, must now be fetched near one hundred miles to
some towns, and makes a very considerable article in the expence of
families.

As therefore so much of the comfort and conveniency of our lives, for
so great a part of the year, depends on the article of _fire_; since
fuel is become so expensive, and (as the country is more cleared and
settled) will of course grow scarcer and dearer, any new proposal for
saving the wood, and for lessening the charge, and augmenting the
benefit of fire, by some particular method of making and managing it,
may at least be thought worth consideration.

The new fire-places are a late invention to that purpose, of which
this paper is intended to give a particular account.

That the reader may the better judge whether this method of managing
fire has any advantage over those heretofore in use, it may be proper
to consider both the old and new methods separately and particularly,
and afterwards make the comparison.

In order to this, it is necessary to understand well, some few of the
properties of air and fire, viz.

1. Air is rarefied by _heat_, and condensed by _cold_, _i. e._ the
same quantity of air takes up more space when warm than when cold.
This may be shown by several very easy experiments. Take any clear
glass bottle (a Florence flask stript of the straw is best) place it
before the fire, and as the air within is warmed and rarefied, part
of it will be driven out of the bottle; turn it up, place its mouth
in a vessel of water, and remove it from the fire; then, as the air
within cools and contracts, you will see the water rise in the neck
of the bottle, supplying the place of just so much air as was driven
out. Hold a large hot coal near the side of the bottle, and as the
air within feels the heat, it will again distend and force out the
water.--Or, fill a bladder not quite full of air, tie the neck tight,
and lay it before a fire as near as may be without scorching the
bladder; as the air within heats, you will perceive it to swell and
fill the bladder, till it becomes tight, as if full blown: remove it
to a cool place, and you will see it fall gradually, till it becomes
as lank as at first.

2. Air rarefied and distended by heat is[44] specifically
lighter than it was before, and will rise in other air of greater
density. As wood, oil, or any other matter specifically lighter than
water, if placed at the bottom of a vessel of water, will rise till
it comes to the top; so rarefied air will rise in common air, till
it either comes to air of equal weight, or is by cold reduced to its
former density.

A fire then being made in any chimney, the air over the fire is
rarefied by the heat, becomes lighter, and therefore immediately
rises in the funnel, and goes out; the other air in the room (flowing
towards the chimney) supplies its place, is rarefied in its turn, and
rises likewise; the place of the air thus carried out of the room,
is supplied by fresh air coming in through doors and windows, or, if
they be shut, through every crevice with violence, as may be seen by
holding a candle to a key-hole: If the room be so tight as that all
the crevices together will not supply so much air as is continually
carried off, then, in a little time, the current up the funnel must
flag, and the smoke being no longer driven up, must come into the
room.

1. Fire (_i. e._ common fire) throws out light, heat, and smoke (or
fume.) The two first move in right lines, and with great swiftness,
the latter is but just separated from the fuel, and then moves
only as it is carried by the stream of rarefied air: and without a
continual accession and recession of air, to carry off the smoaky
fumes, they would remain crouded about the fire, and stifle it.

2. Heat may be separated from the smoke as well as from the light, by
means of a plate of iron, which will suffer heat to pass through it
without the others.

3. Fire sends out its rays of heat as well as rays of light, equally
every way; but the greatest sensible heat is over the fire, where
there is, besides the rays of heat shot upwards, a continual rising
stream of hot air, heated by the rays shot round on every side.

These things being understood, we proceed to consider the fire-places
heretofore in use, _viz._

1. The large open fire-places used in the days of our fathers, and
still generally in the country, and in kitchens.

2. The newer-fashioned fire-places, with low breasts, and narrow
hearths.

3. Fire-places with hollow backs, hearths, and jams of iron
(described by M. Gauger, in his tract entitled, _La Mechanique de
Feu_) for warming the air as it comes into the room.

4. The Holland stoves, with iron doors opening into the room.

5. The German stoves, which have no opening in the room where they
are used, but the fire is put in from some other room, or from
without.

6. Iron pots, with open charcoal fires, placed in the middle of a
room.

1. The first of these methods has generally the conveniency of two
warm seats, one in each corner; but they are sometimes too hot to
abide in, and, at other times, incommoded with the smoke; there is
likewise good room for the cook to move, to hang on pots, &c. Their
inconveniencies are, that they almost always smoke, if the door be
not left open; that they require a large funnel, and a large funnel
carries off a great quantity of air, which occasions what is called
a strong draft to the chimney, without which strong draft the smoke
would come out of some part or other of so large an opening, so that
the door can seldom be shut; and the cold air so nips the backs and
heels of those that sit before the fire, that they have no comfort
till either screens or settles are provided (at a considerable
expence) to keep it off, which both cumber the room, and darken the
fire-side. A moderate quantity of wood on the fire, in so large a
hearth, seems but little; and, in so strong and cold a draught, warms
but little; so that people are continually laying on more. In short,
it is next to impossible to warm a room with such a fire-place: and I
suppose our ancestors never thought of warming rooms to sit in; all
they purposed was, to have a place to make a fire in, by which they
might warm themselves when cold.

2. Most of these old-fashioned chimneys in towns and cities, have
been, of late years, reduced to the second sort mentioned, by
building jambs within them, narrowing the hearth, and making a
low arch or breast. It is strange, methinks, that though chimneys
have been so long in use, their construction should be so little
understood till lately, that no workman pretended to make one which
should always carry off all smoke, but a chimney-cloth was looked
upon as essential to a chimney. This improvement, however, by small
openings and low breasts, has been made in our days; and success in
the first experiments has brought it into general use in cities, so
that almost all new chimneys are now made of that sort, and much
fewer bricks will make a stack of chimneys now than formerly. An
improvement, so lately made, may give us room to believe, that still
farther improvements may be found to remedy the inconveniencies yet
remaining. For these new chimneys, though they keep rooms generally
free from smoke, and, the opening being contracted, will allow
the door to be shut, yet the funnel still requiring a considerable
quantity of air, it rushes in at every crevice so strongly, as to
make a continual whistling or howling; and it is very uncomfortable,
as well as dangerous, to sit against any such crevice. Many colds
are caught from this cause only, it being safer to sit in the open
street, for then the pores do all close together, and the air does
not strike so sharply against any particular part of the body.

The Spaniards have a proverbial saying,

    If the wind blows on you through a hole,
    Make your will, and take care of your soul.

Women particularly, from this cause, as they sit much in the house,
get colds in the head, rheums and defluctions, which fall into their
jaws and gums, and have destroyed early many a fine set of teeth in
these northern colonies. Great and bright fires do also very much
contribute to damage the eyes, dry and shrivel the skin, and bring
on early the appearances of old age. In short, many of the diseases
proceeding from colds, as fevers, pleurisies, &c. fatal to very
great numbers of people, may be ascribed to strong drawing chimneys,
whereby, in severe weather, a man is scorched before while he is
froze behind.[45] In the mean time, very little is done by these
chimneys towards warming the room; for the air round the fire-place,
which is warmed by the direct rays from the fire, does not continue
in the room, but is continually crouded and gathered into the chimney
by the current of cold air coming behind it, and so is presently
carried off.

In both these sorts of fire-places, the greatest part of the heat
from the fire is lost; for as fire naturally darts heat every way,
the back, the two jambs, and the hearth, drink up almost all that is
given them, very little being reflected from bodies so dark, porous,
and unpolished; and the upright heat, which is by far the greatest,
flies directly up the chimney. Thus five-sixths at least of the heat
(and consequently of the fuel) is wasted, and contributes nothing
towards warming the room.

3. To remedy this, the Sieur Gauger gives, in his book entitled, La
Mechanique de Feu, published in 1709, seven different constructions
of the third sort of chimneys mentioned above, in which there are
hollow cavities made by iron plates in the back, jambs, and hearths,
through which plates the heat passing warms the air in those
cavities, which is continually coming into the room fresh and warm.
The invention was very ingenious, and had many conveniencies: the
room was warmed in all parts, by the air flowing into it through the
heated cavities: cold air was prevented rushing through the crevices,
the funnel being sufficiently supplied by those cavities: much less
fuel would serve, &c. But the first expence, which was very great,
the intricacy of the design, and the difficulty of the execution,
especially in old chimneys, discouraged the propagation of the
invention; so that there are, I suppose, very few such chimneys now
in use. [The upright heat, too, was almost all lost in these, as in
the common chimneys.]

4. The Holland iron stove, which has a flue proceeding from the
top, and a small iron door opening into the room, comes next to be
considered. Its conveniencies are, that it makes a room all over
warm; for the chimney being wholly closed, except the flue of the
stove, very little air is required to supply that, and therefore not
much rushes in at crevices, or at the door when it is opened. Little
fuel serves, the heat being almost all saved; for it rays out almost
equally from the four sides, the bottom and the top, into the room,
and presently warms the air around it, which, being rarefied, rises
to the ceiling, and its place is supplied by the lower air of the
room, which flows gradually towards the stove, and is there warmed,
and rises in its turn, so that there is a continual circulation
till all the air in the room is warmed. The air, too, is gradually
changed, by the stove-door's being in the room, through which part of
it is continually passing, and that makes these stoves wholesomer,
or at least pleasanter than the German stoves, next to be spoken of.
But they have these inconveniencies. There is no sight of the fire,
which is in itself a pleasant thing. One cannot conveniently make
any other use of the fire but that of warming the room. When the room
is warm, people, not seeing the fire, are apt to forget supplying it
with fuel till it is almost out, then, growing cold, a great deal
of wood is put in, which soon makes it too hot. The change of air
is not carried on quite quick enough, so that if any smoke or ill
smell happens in the room, it is a long time before it is discharged.
For these reasons the Holland stove has not obtained much among the
English (who love the sight of the fire) unless in some workshops,
where people are obliged to sit near windows for the light, and in
such places they have been found of good use.

5. The German stove is like a box, one side wanting. It is composed
of five iron plates screwed together, and fixed so as that you may
put the fuel into it from another room, or from the outside of the
house. It is a kind of oven reversed, its mouth being without, and
body within the room that is to be warmed by it. This invention
certainly warms a room very speedily and thoroughly with little fuel:
no quantity of cold air comes in at any crevice, because there is
no discharge of air which it might supply, there being no passage
into the stove from the room. These are its conveniencies. Its
inconveniencies are, that people have not even so much sight or use
of the fire as in the Holland stoves, and are, moreover, obliged to
breathe the same unchanged air continually, mixed with the breath and
perspiration from one another's bodies, which is very disagreeable to
those who have not been accustomed to it.

[Illustration: (of the Pensylvania fireplace)

  _Plate VIII._      _Vol. II. page 235._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

6. Charcoal fires in pots are used chiefly in the shops of
handicraftsmen. They warm a room (that is kept close, and has no
chimney to carry off the warmed air) very speedily and uniformly; but
there being no draught to change the air, the sulphurous fumes from
the coals [be they ever so well kindled before they are brought in,
there will be some] mix with it, render it disagreeable, hurtful to
some constitutions, and sometimes, when the door is long kept shut,
produce fatal consequences.

To avoid the several inconveniencies, and at the same time retain all
the advantages of other fire-places, was contrived the Pensylvania
fire-place, now to be described.

This machine consists of

A bottom-plate, (i) (_See the Plate annexed_.)

A back plate, (ii)

Two side plates, (iii iii)

Two middle plates, (iv iv) which, joined together, form a tight box,
with winding passages in it for warming the air.

A front plate, (v)

A top plate (vi)

These are all cast of iron, with mouldings or ledges where the
plates come together, to hold them fast, and retain the mortar used
for pointing to make tight joints. When the plates are all in their
places, a pair of slender rods, with screws, are sufficient to bind
the whole very firmly together, as it appears in Fig. 2.

There are, moreover, two thin plates of wrought iron, viz. the
shutter, (vii) and the register, (viii); besides the screw-rods O P,
all which we shall explain in their order.

(i) The bottom plate, or hearth-piece, is round before, with a
rising moulding, that serves as a fender to keep coals and ashes from
coming to the floor, &c. It has two ears, F G, perforated to receive
the screw-rods O P; a long air-hole, _a a_, through which the fresh
outward air passes up into the air-box; and three smoke-holes B C,
through which the smoke descends and passes away; all represented
by dark squares. It has also double ledges to receive between them
the bottom edges of the back plate, the two side-plates, and the two
middle plates. These ledges are about an inch asunder, and about
half an inch high; a profile of two of them, joined to a fragment of
plate, appears in Fig. 3.

(ii) The back plate is without holes, having only a pair of ledges on
each side, to receive the back edges of the two.

(iii iii) Side-plates: These have each a pair of ledges to receive
the side-edges of the front-plate, and a little shoulder for it to
rest on; also two pair of ledges to receive the side-edges of the two
middle plates which form the air-box; and an oblong air-hole near the
top, through which is discharged into the room the air warmed in the
air-box. Each has also a wing or bracket, H and I, to keep in falling
brands, coals, &c. and a small hole, Q and R, for the axis of the
register to turn in.

(iv iv) The air-box is composed of the two middle plates, D E and
F G. The first has five thin ledges or partitions cast on it, two
inches deep, the edges of which are received in so many pair of
ledges cast in the other. The tops of all the cavities formed by
these thin deep ledges, are also covered by a ledge of the same form
and depth, cast with them; so that when the plates are put together,
and the joints luted, there is no communication between the air-box
and the smoke. In the winding passages of this box, fresh air is
warmed as it passes into the room.

(v) The front plate is arched on the under side, and ornamented with
foliages, &c. it has no ledges.

(vi) The top plate has a pair of ears, M N, answerable to those in
the bottom plate, and perforated for the same purpose: it has also a
pair of ledges running round the under side, to receive the top edges
of the front, back, and side-plates. The air-box does not reach up to
the top plate by two inches and a half.

(vii) The shutter is of thin wrought iron and light, of such a length
and breadth as to close well the opening of the fire-place. It is
used to blow up the fire, and to shut up and secure it at nights. It
has two brass knobs for handles, _d d_, and commonly slides up and
down in a groove, left, in putting up the fire-place, between the
foremost ledge of the side-plates, and the face of the front plate;
but some chuse to set it aside when it is not in use, and apply it on
occasion.

(viii) The register is also of thin wrought iron. It is placed
between the back plate and air-box, and can, by means of the key S,
be turned on its axis so as to lie in any position between level and
upright.

The screw-rods O P are of wrought iron, about a third of an inch
thick, with a button at bottom, and a screw and nut at top, and may
be ornamented with two small brasses screwed on above the nuts.

To put this machine to work,

1. A false back of four inch (or, in shallow small chimneys, two
inch) brick work is to be made in the chimney, four inches or more
from the true back; from the top of this false back a closing is to
be made over to the breast of the chimney, that no air may pass into
the chimney, but what goes under the false back, and up behind it.

2. Some bricks of the hearth are to be taken up, to form a hollow
under the bottom plate; across which hollow runs a thin tight
partition, to keep apart the air entering the hollow and the smoke;
and is therefore placed between the air-hole and smoke-holes.

3. A passage is made, communicating with the outward air, to
introduce that air into the fore part of the hollow under the bottom
plate, whence it may rise through the air-hole into the air-box.

4. A passage is made from the back part of the hollow, communicating
with the flue behind the false back: through this passage the smoke
is to pass.

The fire-place is to be erected upon these hollows, by putting all
the plates in their places, and screwing them together.

Its operation may be conceived by observing the plate entitled,
Profile of the Chimney and Fire-Place.

_M_ The mantle-piece, or breast of the chimney.

_C_ The funnel.

_B_ The false back and closing.

_E_ True back of the chimney.

_T_ Top of the fire-place.

_F_ The front of it.

_A_ The place where the fire is made.

_D_ The air-box.

_K_ The hole in the side-plate, through which the warmed air is
discharged out of the air-box into the room.

_H_ The hollow filled with fresh air, entering at the passage _I_,
and ascending into the air-box through the air-hole in the bottom
plate near

_G_ The partition in the hollow to keep the air and smoke apart.

_P_ The passage under the false back and part of the hearth for the
smoke.

The arrows show the course of the smoke.

[Illustration:

  _Plate VIII*._      _Vol. II. page 238._

_PROFILE OF THE PENSYLVANIA CHIMNEY & FIRE-PLACE._

_STAFFORDSHIRE FIRE-PLACE._

_Front View Side View_

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

The fire being made at A, the flame and smoke will ascend and strike
the top T, which will thereby receive a considerable heat. The smoke,
finding no passage upwards, turns over the top of the air-box, and
descends between it and the back plate to the holes in the bottom
plate, heating, as it passes, both plates of the air-box, and the
said back plate; the front plate, bottom and side plates are also all
heated at the same time. The smoke proceeds in the passage that leads
it under and behind the false back, and so rises into the chimney.
The air of the room, warmed behind the back plate, and by the sides,
front, and top plates, becoming specifically lighter than the other
air in the room, is obliged to rise; but the closure over the
fireplace hindering it from going up the chimney, it is forced out
into the room, rises by the mantle-piece to the cieling, and spreads
all over the top of the room, whence being crouded down gradually by
the stream of newly-warmed air that follows and rises above it, the
whole room becomes in a short time equally warmed.

At the same time the air, warmed under the bottom plate, and in the
air-box, rises and comes out of the holes in the side-plates, very
swiftly, if the door of the room be shut, and joins its current with
the stream before-mentioned, rising from the side, back, and top
plates.

The air that enters the room through the air-box is fresh, though
warm; and, computing the swiftness of its motion with the areas of
the holes, it is found that near ten barrels of fresh air are hourly
introduced by the air-box; and by this means the air in the room is
continually changed, and kept, at the same time, sweet and warm.

It is to be observed, that the entering air will not be warm at first
lighting the fire, but heats gradually as the fire increases.

A square opening for a trap-door should be left in the closing of
the chimney, for the sweeper to go up: the door may be made of slate
or tin, and commonly kept close shut, but so placed as that, turning
up against the back of the chimney when open, it closes the vacancy
behind the false back, and shoots the soot, that falls in sweeping,
out upon the hearth. This trap-door is a very convenient thing.

In rooms where much smoking of tobacco is used, it is also convenient
to have a small hole, about five or six inches square, cut near the
ceiling through into the funnel: this hole must have a shutter, by
which it may be closed or opened at pleasure. When open, there will
be a strong draught of air through it into the chimney, which will
presently carry off a cloud of smoke, and keep the room clear: if
the room be too hot like-wise, it will carry off as much of the warm
air as you please, and then you may stop it entirely, or in part, as
you think fit. By this means it is, that the tobacco smoke does not
descend among the heads of the company near the fire, as it must do
before it can get into common chimneys.


_The Manner of using this Fire-Place._

Your cord-wood must be cut into three lengths; or else a short
piece, fit for the fire-place, cut off, and the longer left for the
kitchen or other fires. Dry hickery, or ash, or any woods that burn
with a clear flame are rather to be chosen, because such are less
apt to foul the smoke-passages with soot; and flame communicates
with its light, as well as by contact, greater heat to the plates
and room. But where more ordinary wood is used, half a dry faggot
of brush-wood, burnt at the first making the fire in the morning,
is very advantageous, as it immediately, by its sudden blaze, heats
the plates, and warms the room (which with bad wood slowly kindling
would not be done so soon) and at the same time by the length of
its flame, turning in the passages, consumes and cleanses away the
soot that such bad smoaky wood had produced therein the preceding
day, and so keeps them always free and clean. When you have laid a
little back log, and placed your billets on small dogs, as in common
chimneys, and put some fire to them, then slide down your shutter
as low as the dogs, and the opening being by that means contracted,
the air rushes in briskly, and presently blows up the flames. When
the fire is sufficiently kindled, slide it up again.[46] In some of
these fire-places there is a little six-inch square trap-door of
thin wrought iron or brass, covering a hole of like dimensions near
the fore-part of the bottom plate, which being by a ring lifted up
towards the fire, about an inch, where it will be retained by two
springing sides fixed to it perpendicularly (_See the Plate, Fig.
4._) the air rushes in from the hollow under the bottom plate, and
blows the fire. Where this is used, the shutter serves only to close
the fire at nights. The more forward you can make your fire on the
hearth-plate, not to be incommoded by the smoke, the sooner and
more will the room be warmed. At night, when you go to bed, cover
the coals or brands with ashes as usual; then take away the dogs,
and slide down the shutter close to the bottom-plate, sweeping a
little ashes against it, that no air may pass under it; then turn
the register, so as very near to stop the flue behind. If no smoke
then comes out at crevices into the room, it is right: if any smoke
is perceived to come out, move the register, so as to give a little
draught, and it will go the right way. Thus the room will be kept
warm all night; for the chimney being almost entirely stopt, very
little cold air, if any, will enter the room at any crevice. When you
come to re-kindle the fire in the morning, turn open the register
before you lift up the slider, otherwise, if there be any smoke in
the fireplace, it will come out into the room. By the same use of the
shutter and register, a blazing fire may be presently stifled, as
well as secured, when you have occasion to leave it for any time; and
at your return you will find the brands warm, and ready for a speedy
rekindling. The shutter alone will not stifle a fire, for it cannot
well be made to fit so exactly but that air will enter, and that
in a violent stream, so as to blow up and keep alive the flames,
and consume the wood, if the draught be not checked by turning the
register to shut the flue behind. The register has also two other
uses. If you observe the draught of air into your fire-place to be
stronger than is necessary (as in extreme cold weather it often is)
so that the wood is consumed faster than usual; in that case, a
quarter, half, or two-thirds turn of the register, will check the
violence of the draught, and let your fire burn with the moderation
you desire: and at the same time both the fire-place and the room
will be the warmer, because less cold air will enter and pass
through them. And if the chimney should happen to take fire (which
indeed there is very little danger of, if the preceding direction be
observed in making fires, and it be well swept once a year; for, much
less wood being burnt, less soot is proportionably made; and the fuel
being soon blown into flame by the shutter, or the trap-door bellows,
there is consequently less smoke from the fuel to make soot; then,
though the funnel should be foul, yet the sparks have such a crooked
up and down round about way to go, that they are out before they get
at it). I say, if ever it should be on fire, a turn of the register
shuts all close, and prevents any air going into the chimney, and so
the fire may easily be stifled and mastered.


_The Advantages of this Fire-Place._

Its advantages above the common fire-places are,

1. That your whole room is equally warmed, so that people need not
croud so close round the fire, but may sit near the window, and have
the benefit of the light for reading, writing, needle-work, &c.
They may sit with comfort in any part of the room, which is a very
considerable advantage in a large family, where there must often be
two fires kept, because all cannot conveniently come at one.

2. If you sit near the fire, you have not that cold draught of
uncomfortable air nipping your back and heels, as when before common
fires, by which many catch cold, being scorched before, and, as it
were, froze behind.

3. If you sit against a crevice, there is not that sharp draught of
cold air playing on you, as in rooms where there are fires in the
common way; by which many catch cold, whence proceed coughs[47],
catarrhs, tooth-achs, fevers, pleurisies, and many other diseases.

4. In case of sickness, they make most excellent nursing rooms; as
they constantly supply a sufficiency of fresh air, so warmed at the
same time as to be no way inconvenient or dangerous. A small one
does well in a chamber; and, the chimneys, being fitted for it, it
may be removed from one room to another, as occasion requires, and
fixed in half an hour. The equal temper too, and warmth of the air
of the room, is thought to be particularly advantageous in some
distempers; for it was observed in the winters of 1730 and 1736, when
the small-pox spread in Pensylvania, that very few children of the
Germans died of that distemper in proportion to those of the English;
which was ascribed, by some, to the warmth and equal temper of air
in their stove-rooms, which made the disease as favourable as it
commonly is in the West Indies. But this conjecture we submit to the
judgment of physicians.

5. In common chimneys, the strongest heat from the fire, which is
upwards, goes directly up the chimney, and is lost; and there is such
a strong draught into the chimney that not only the upright heat, but
also the back, sides, and downward heats are carried up the chimney
by that draught of air; and the warmth given before the fire, by
the rays that strike out towards the room, is continually driven
back, crouded into the chimney, and carried up by the same draught
of air. But here the upright heat strikes and heats the top plate,
which warms the air above it, and that comes into the room. The heat
likewise, which the fire communicates to the sides, back, bottom, and
air-box, is all brought into the room; for you will find a constant
current of warm air coming out of the chimney-corner into the room.
Hold a candle just under the mantle-piece, or breast of your chimney,
and you will see the flame bent outwards: by laying a piece of
smoaking paper on the hearth, on either side, you may see how the
current of air moves, and where it tends, for it will turn and carry
the smoke with it.

6. Thus, as very little of the heat is lost, when this fire-place is
used, _much less wood_[48] will serve you, which is a considerable
advantage where wood is dear.

7. When you burn candles near this fire-place, you will find that
the flame burns quite upright, and does not blare and run the tallow
down, by drawing towards the chimney, as against common fires.

8. This fire-place cures most smoaky chimneys, and thereby preserves
both the eyes and furniture.

9. It prevents the fouling of chimneys; much of the lint and dust
that contributes to foul a chimney being, by the low arch, obliged to
pass through the flame, where it is consumed. Then, less wood being
burnt, there is less smoke made. Again, the shutter, or trap-bellows,
soon blowing the wood into a flame, the same wood does not yield so
much smoke as if burnt in a common chimney: for as soon as flame
begins, smoke in proportion ceases.

10. And if a chimney should be foul, it is much less likely to take
fire. If it should take fire, it is easily stifled and extinguished.

11. A fire may be very speedily made in this fire-place by the help
of the shutter, or trap-bellows, as aforesaid.

12. A fire may be soon extinguished, by closing it with the shutter
before, and turning the register behind, which will stifle it, and
the brands will remain ready to rekindle.

13. The room being once warm, the warmth may be retained in it all
night.

14. And lastly, the fire is so secured at night, that not one spark
can fly out into the room to do damage.

With all these conveniences, you do not lose the pleasing sight nor
use of the fire, as in the Dutch stoves, but may boil the tea-kettle,
warm the flat-irons, heat heaters, keep warm a dish of victuals by
setting it on the top, &c.


_Objections answered._

There are some objections commonly made by people that are
unacquainted with these fire-places, which it may not be amiss to
endeavour to remove, as they arise from prejudices which might
otherwise obstruct, in some degree, the general use of this
beneficial machine. We frequently hear it said, _They are of the
nature of Dutch stoves_; _stoves have an unpleasant smell_; _stoves
are unwholesome_; _and, warm rooms make people tender, and apt
to catch cold_.--As to the first, that they are of the nature of
Dutch stoves, the description of those stoves, in the beginning
of this paper, compared with that of these machines, shows that
there is a most material difference, and that these have vastly the
advantage, if it were only in the single article of the admission and
circulation of the fresh air. But it must be allowed there may have
been some cause to complain of the offensive smell of iron stoves.
This smell, however, never proceeded from the iron itself, which, in
its nature, whether hot or cold, is one of the sweetest of metals,
but from the general uncleanly manner of using those stoves. If they
are kept clean, they are as sweet as an ironing-box, which though
ever so hot, never offends the smell of the nicest lady: but it is
common to let them be greased, by setting candlesticks on them,
or otherwise; to rub greasy hands on them; and, above all, to spit
upon them, to try how hot they are, which is an inconsiderate filthy
unmannerly custom; for the slimy matter of spittle drying on burns
and fumes when the stove is hot, as well as the grease, and smells
most nauseously, which makes such close stove-rooms, where there is
no draught to carry off those filthy vapours, almost intolerable to
those that are not from their infancy accustomed to them. At the same
time nothing is more easy than to keep them clean; for when by any
accident they happen to be fouled, a lee made of ashes and water,
with a brush, will scour them perfectly: as will also a little strong
soft soap and water.

That hot iron of itself gives no offensive smell, those know very
well who have (as the writer of this has) been present at a furnace
when the workmen were pouring out the flowing metal to cast large
plates, and not the least smell of it to be perceived. That hot
iron does not, like lead, brass, and some other metals, give out
unwholesome vapours, is plain from the general health and strength
of those who constantly work in iron, as furnace-men, forge-men,
and smiths; that it is in its nature a metal perfectly wholesome
to the body of man, is known from the beneficial use of chalybeate
or iron-mine-waters; from the good done by taking steel filings in
several disorders; and that even the smithy water in which hot irons
are quenched, is found advantageous to the human constitution.--The
ingenious and learned Dr. Desaguliers, to whose instructive writings
the contriver of this machine acknowledges himself much indebted,
relates an experiment he made, to try whether heated iron would yield
unwholesome vapours: he took a cube of iron, and having given it
a very great heat, he fixed it so to a receiver, exhausted by the
air-pump, that all the air rushing in to fill the receiver, should
first pass through a hole in the hot iron. He then put a small bird
into the receiver, who breathed that air without any inconvenience,
or suffering the least disorder. But the same experiment being made
with a cube of hot brass, a bird put into that air died in a few
minutes. Brass, indeed, stinks even when cold, and much more when
hot; lead, too, when hot, yields a very unwholesome steam; but iron
is always sweet and every way taken is wholesome and friendly to the
human body--except in weapons.

_That warmed rooms make people tender, and apt to catch cold_, is a
mistake as great as it is (among the English) general. We have seen
in the preceding pages how the common rooms are apt to give colds;
but the writer of this paper may affirm from his own experience, and
that of his family and friends who have used warm rooms for these
four winters past, that by the use of such rooms, people are rendered
_less liable_ to take cold, and, indeed, _actually hardened_. If
sitting warm in a room made one subject to take cold on going out,
lying warm in bed, should by a parity of reason, produce the same
effect when we rise. Yet we find we can leap out of the warmest bed
naked, in the coldest morning, without any such danger; and in the
same manner out of warm cloaths into a cold bed. The reason is, that
in these cases the pores all close at once, the cold is shut out,
and the heat within augmented, as we soon after feel by the glowing
of the flesh and skin. Thus no one was ever known to catch cold by
the use of the cold bath: and are not cold baths allowed to harden
the bodies of those that use them? Are they not therefore frequently
prescribed to the tenderest constitutions? Now every time you go
out of a warm room into the cold freezing air, you do as it were
plunge into a cold bath, and the effect is in proportion the same;
for (though perhaps you may feel somewhat chilly at first) you find
in a little time your bodies hardened and strengthened, your blood
is driven round with a brisker circulation, and a comfortable steady
uniform inward warmth succeeds that equal outward warmth you first
received in the room. Farther to confirm this assertion, we instance
the Swedes, the Danes, and the Russians: these nations are said to
live in rooms, compared to ours, as hot as ovens[49]; yet where are
the hardy soldiers, though bred in their boasted cool houses, that
can, like these people, bear the fatigues of a winter campaign in so
severe a climate, march whole days to the neck in snow, and at night
entrench in ice as they do?

The mentioning of those northern nations, puts me in mind of a
considerable _public advantage_ that may arise from the general use
of these fire-places. It is observable, that though those countries
have been well inhabited for many ages, wood is still their fuel,
and yet at no very great price; which could not have been, if they
had not universally used stoves, but consumed it as we do, in great
quantities, by open fires. By the help of this saving invention our
wood may grow as fast as we consume it, and our posterity may warm
themselves at a moderate rate, without, being obliged to fetch their
fuel over the Atlantic; as, if pit-coal should not be here discovered
(which is an uncertainty) they must necessarily do.

We leave it to the _political arithmetician_ to compute how much
money will be saved to a country, by its spending two-thirds less of
fuel; how much labour saved in cutting and carriage of it; how much
more land may be cleared by cultivation; how great the profit by the
additional quantity of work done, in those trades particularly that
do not exercise the body so much, but that the workfolks are obliged
to run frequently to the fire to warm themselves: and to physicians
to say, how much healthier thick-built towns and cities will be,
now half-suffocated with sulphury smoke, when so much less of that
smoke shall be made, and the air breathed by the inhabitants be
consequently so much purer. These things it will suffice just to have
mentioned; let us proceed to give some necessary directions to the
workman who is to fix or set up these fire-places.


_Directions to the Bricklayer._

The chimney being first well swept and cleansed from soot, &c.
lay the bottom plate down on the hearth, in the place where the
fire-place is to stand, which may be as forward as the hearth will
allow. Chalk a line from one of its back corners round the plate
to the other corner, that you may afterwards know its place when
you come to fix it; and from those corners, two parallel lines to
the back of the chimney: make marks also on each side, that you
may know where the partition is to stand, which is to prevent any
communication between the air and smoke. Then, removing the plate,
make a hollow under it and beyond it, by taking up as many of the
bricks or tiles as you can, within your chalked lines, quite to
the chimney-back. Dig out six or eight inches deep of the earth
or rubbish, all the breadth and length of your hollow; then make
a passage of four inches square (if the place will allow so much)
leading from the hollow to some place communicating with the outer
air; by _outer air_ we mean air without the room you intend to warm.
This passage may be made to enter your hollow on either side, or in
the fore part, just as you find most convenient, the circumstances
of your chimney considered. If the fire-place is to be put up in
a chamber, you may have this communication of outer air from the
stair-case; or sometimes more easily from between the chamber floor,
and the ceiling of the lower room, making only a small hole in the
wall of the house entering the space betwixt those two joists with
which your air-passage in the hearth communicates. If this air
passage be so situated as that mice may enter it, and nestle in the
hollow, a little grate of wire will keep them out. This passage
being made, and, if it runs under any part of the earth, tiled
over securely, you may proceed to raise your false back. This may
be of four inches or two inches thickness, as you have room, but
let it stand at least four inches from the true chimney-back. In
narrow chimneys this false back runs from jamb to jamb, but in large
old-fashioned chimneys, you need not make it wider than the back of
the fire-place. To begin it, you may form an arch nearly flat, of
three bricks end to end, over the hollow, to leave a passage the
breadth of the iron fire-place, and five or six inches deep, rounding
at bottom, for the smoke to turn and pass under the false back, and
so behind it up the chimney. The false back is to rise till it is
as high as the breast of the chimney, and then to close over to the
breast[50]; always observing, if there is a wooden mantle-tree, to
close above it. If there is no wood in the breast, you may arch over
and close even with the lower part of the breast. By this closing the
chimney is made tight, that no air or smoke can pass up it, without
going under the false back. Then from side to side of your hollow,
against the marks you made with chalk, raise a tight partition,
brick-on-edge, to separate the air from the smoke, bevelling away to
half an inch the brick that comes just under the air-hole, that the
air may have a free passage up into the air-box: lastly, close the
hearth over that part of the hollow that is between the false back
and the place of the bottom plate, coming about half an inch under
the plate, which piece of hollow hearth may be supported by a bit
or two of old iron-hoop; then is your chimney fitted to receive the
fire-place.

To set it, lay first a little bed of mortar all round the
edges of the hollow, and over the top of the partition: then lay
down your bottom plate in its place (with the rods in it) and tread
it till it lies firm. Then put a little fine mortar (made of loam
and lime, with a little hair) into its joints, and set in your back
plate, leaning it for the present against the false back: then set
in your air-box, with a little mortar in its joints; then put in the
two sides, closing them up against the air-box, with mortar in their
grooves, and fixing at the same time your register: then bring up
your back to its place, with mortar in its grooves, and that will
bind the sides together. Then put in your front plate, placing it
as far back in the groove as you can, to leave room for the sliding
plate: then lay on your top plate, with mortar in its grooves also,
screwing the whole firmly together by means of the rods. The capital
letters A B D E, &c. in Plate VIII., shew the corresponding parts of
the several plates. Lastly, the joints being pointed all round on the
outside, the fire-place is fit for use.

When you make your first fire in it, perhaps if the chimney be
thoroughly cold, it may not draw, the work too being all cold and
damp. In such case, put first a few shovels of hot coals in the
fire-place, then lift up the chimney-sweeper's trap-door, and putting
in a sheet or two of flaming paper, shut it again, which will set
the chimney a drawing immediately, and when once it is filled with a
column of warm air, it will draw strongly and continually.

The drying of the mortar and work by the first fire may smell
unpleasantly, but that will soon be over.

In some shallow chimneys, to make more room for the false back and
its flue, four inches or more of the chimney back may be picked away.

Let the room be made as tight as conveniently it may be, so will the
outer air, that must come in to supply the room and draught of the
fire, be all obliged to enter through the passage under the bottom
plate, and up through the air-box, by which means it will not come
cold to your backs, but be warmed as it comes in, and mixed with the
warm air round the fire-place, before it spreads in the room.

But as a great quantity of cold air, in extreme cold weather
especially, will presently enter a room if the door be carelessly
left open, it is good to have some contrivance to shut it, either by
means of screw hinges, a spring, or a pulley.

When the pointing in the joints is all dry and hard, get some
powder of black lead (broken bits of black lead crucibles from the
silver-smiths, pounded fine, will do) and mixing it with a little rum
and water, lay it on, when the plates are warm, with a hard brush,
over the top and front-plates, part of the side and bottom-plates,
and over all the pointing; and, as it dries, rub it to a gloss with
the same brush, so the joints will not be discerned, but it will look
all of a piece, and shine like new iron. And the false back being
plaistered and white-washed, and the hearth reddened, the whole will
make a pretty appearance. Before the black lead is laid on, it would
not be amiss to wash the plates with strong lee and a brush, or soap
and water, to cleanse them from any spots of grease or filth that may
be on them. If any grease should afterwards come on them, a little
wet ashes will get it out.

If it be well set up, and in a tolerable good chimney, smoke will
draw in from as far as the fore part of the bottom plate, as you may
try by a bit of burning paper.

People are at first apt to make their rooms too warm, not imagining
how little a fire will be sufficient. When the plates are no hotter
than that one may just bear the hand on them, the room will generally
be as warm as you desire it.


_Soon after the foregoing piece was published, some persons in
England, in imitation of Mr. Franklin's invention, made what they
call_ Pensylvanian Fire-places, with improvements; _the principal of
which pretended improvements is, a contraction of the passages in the
air-box, originally designed for admitting a quantity of fresh air,
and warming it as it entered the room. The contracting these passages
gains indeed more room for the grate, but in a great measure defeats
their intention. For if the passages in the air-box do not greatly
exceed in dimensions the amount of all the crevices by which cold air
can enter the room, they will not considerably prevent, as they were
intended to do, the entry of cold air through these crevices._

FOOTNOTES:

[44] Body or matter of any sort, is said to be _specifically_ heavier
or lighter than other matter, when it has more or less substance or
weight in the same dimensions.

[45] As the writer is neither physician nor philosopher, the reader
may expect he should justify these his opinions by the authority of
some that are so. M. Clare, F. R. S. in his treatise of _The Motion
of Fluids_, says, page 246, &c. "And here it may be remarked, that
it is more prejudicial to health to sit near a window or door, in
a room where there are many candles and a fire, than in a room
without; for the consumption of air thereby occasioned, will always
be very considerable, and this must necessarily be replaced by cold
air from without. Down the chimney can enter none, the stream of
warm air always arising therein absolutely forbids it, the supply
must therefore come in wherever other openings shall be found. If
these happen to be small, _let those who sit near them beware_; the
smaller the floodgate, the smarter will be the stream. Was a man,
even in a sweat, to leap into a cold bath, or jump from his warm bed,
in the intensest cold, even in a frost, provided he do not continue
over-long therein, and be in health when he does this, we see by
experience that he gets no harm. If he sits a little while against a
window, into which a successive current of cold air comes, his pores
are closed, and he gets a fever. In the first case, the shock the
body endures, is general, uniform, and therefore less fierce; in the
other, a single part, a neck, or ear perchance, is attacked, and that
with the greater violence probably, as it is done by a successive
stream of cold air. And the cannon of a battery, pointed against a
single part of a bastion, will easier make a breach than were they
directed to play singly upon the whole face, and will admit the enemy
much sooner into the town."

That warm rooms, and keeping the body warm in winter, are means of
preventing such diseases, take the opinion of that learned Italian
physician Antonino Parcio, in the preface to his tract _de Militis
Sanitate tuenda_, where, speaking of a particular wet and cold
winter, remarkable at Venice for its sickliness, he says, "Popularis
autem pleuritis quæ Venetiis sæviit mensibus _Dec. Jan. Feb._ ex
cæli, aërisque inclementia facta est, quod non habeant hypocausta
[_stove-rooms_] & quod non soliciti sunt Itali omnes de auribus,
temporibus, collo, totoque corpore defendendis ab injuriis aëris; et
tegmina domorum Veneti disponant parum inclinata, ut nives diutius
permaneant super tegmina. E contra, Germani, qui experiuntur cæli
inclementiam, perdidicere sese defendere ab aëris injuria. Tecta
construunt multum inclinata, ut decidant nives. Germani abundant
lignis, domusque _hypocaustis_; foris autem incedunt pannis
pellibus, gossipio, bene mehercule loricati atque muniti. In Bavaria
interrogabam (curiositate motus videndi Germaniam) quot nam elapsis
mensibus pleuritide vel peripneumonia fuissent absumti: dicebant vix
unus aut alter illis temporibus pleuritide fuit correptus."

The great Dr. Boerhaave, whose authority alone might be sufficient,
in his _Aphorisms_, mentions, as one antecedent cause of pleurisies,
"A cold air, driven violently through some narrow passage upon the
body, overheated by labour or fire."

The eastern physicians agree with the Europeans in this point;
witness the Chinese treatise entitled, _Tschang seng_; i.e. _The
Art of procuring Health and long Life_, as translated in Pere Du
Halde's account of China, which has this passage. "As, of all the
passions which ruffle us, anger does the most mischief, so of all
the malignant affections of the air, a wind that comes through any
narrow passage, which is cold and piercing, is most dangerous; and
coming upon us unawares insinuates itself into the body, often
causing grievous diseases. It should therefore be avoided, according
to the advice of the ancient proverb, as carefully as the point of an
arrow." These mischiefs are avoided by the use of the new-invented
fire-places, as will be shown hereafter.

[46] The shutter is slid up and down in this manner, only in those
fire-places which are so made as that the distance between the top of
the arched opening, and the bottom plate, is the same as the distance
between it and the top plate. Where the arch is higher, as it is in
the draught annexed (which is agreeable to the last improvements) the
shutter is set by, and applied occasionally; because if it were made
deep enough to close the whole opening when slid down, it would hide
part of it when up.

[47] My Lord Molesworth, in his account of Denmark, says, "That few
or none of the people there are troubled with coughs, catarrhs,
consumptions, or such like diseases of the lungs; so that in the
midst of winter in the churches, which are very much frequented,
there is no noise to interrupt the attention due to the preacher.
I am persuaded (says he) their _warm stoves_ contribute to their
freedom from these kind of maladies." page 91.

[48] People who have used these fire-places, differ much in their
accounts of the wood saved by them. Some say five-sixths, others
three-fourths, and others much less. This is owing to the great
difference there was in their former fires; some (according to the
different circumstances of their rooms and chimneys) having been used
to make very large, others middling, and others, of a more sparing
temper, very small ones: while in these fire-places (their size
and draught being nearly the same), the consumption is more equal.
I suppose, taking a number of families together, that two-thirds,
or half the wood, at least, is saved. My common room, I know, is
made thrice as warm as it used to be, with a quarter of the wood I
formerly consumed there.

[49] Mr. Boyle, in his experiments and observations upon cold,
_Shaw's Abridgement_, Vol. I. p. 684, says, "It is remarkable, that
while the cold has strange and tragical effects at Moscow, and
elsewhere, the Russians and Livonians should be exempt from them, who
accustom themselves to pass immediately from a great degree of heat,
to as great an one of cold, without receiving any visible prejudice
thereby. I remember being told by a person of unquestionable credit,
that it was a common practice among them, to go from a hot stove,
into cold water; the same was also affirmed to me by another who
resided at Moscow. This tradition is likewise abundantly confirmed by
Olearius."--"It is a surprising thing, says he, to see how far the
Russians can endure heat; and how, when it makes them ready to faint,
they can go out of their stoves, stark naked, both men and women, and
throw themselves into cold water; and even in winter wallow in the
snow."

[50] See page 240, where the trap-door is described that ought to be
in this closing.




TO DR. INGENHAUSZ, PHYSICIAN TO THE EMPEROR, AT VIENNA[51].

  _On the Causes and Cure of Smoky Chimnies._


  _At Sea, Aug., 28, 1785._

  DEAR FRIEND,

In one of your letters, a little before I left France, you desire
me to give you in writing my thoughts upon the construction and use
of chimneys, a subject you had sometimes heard me touch upon in
conversation. I embrace willingly this leisure afforded by my present
situation to comply with your request, as it will not only show my
regard to the desires of a friend, but may at the same time be of
some utility to others; the doctrine of chimneys appearing not to
be as yet generally well understood, and mistakes respecting them
being attended with constant inconvenience, if not remedied, and with
fruitless expence, if the true remedies are mistaken.

Those who would be acquainted with this subject should begin by
considering on what principle smoke ascends in any chimney. At first
many are apt to think that smoke is in its nature and of itself
specifically lighter than air, and rises in it for the same reason
that cork rises in water. These see no case why smoke should not rise
in the chimney, though the room be ever so close. Others think there
is a power in chimneys to _draw_ up the smoke, and that there are
different forms of chimneys which afford more or less of this power.
These amuse themselves with searching for the best form. The equal
dimensions of a funnel in its whole length is not thought artificial
enough, and it is made, for fancied reasons, sometimes tapering and
narrowing from below upwards, and sometimes the contrary, &c. &c. A
simple experiment or two may serve to give more correct ideas. Having
lit a pipe of tobacco, plunge the stem to the bottom of a decanter
half filled with cold water; then putting a rag over the bowl, blow
through it and make the smoke descend in the stem of the pipe, from
the end of which it will rise in bubbles through the water; and being
thus cooled, will not afterwards rise to go out through the neck of
the decanter, but remain spreading itself and resting on the surface
of the water. This shows that smoke is really heavier than air, and
that it is carried upwards only when attached to, or acted upon, by
air that is heated, and thereby rarefied and rendered specifically
lighter than the air in its neighbourhood.

Smoke being rarely seen but in company with heated air, and its
upward motion being visible, though that of the rarefied air that
drives it is not so, has naturally given rise to the error.

I need not explain to you, my learned friend, what is meant by
rarefied air; but if you make the public use you propose of this
letter, it may fall into the hands of some who are unacquainted with
the term and with the thing. These then may be told, that air is a
fluid which has weight as well as others, though about eight hundred
times lighter than water. That heat makes the particles of air recede
from each other and take up more space, so that the same weight of
air heated will have more bulk, than equal weights of cold air which
may surround it, and in that case must rise, being forced upwards by
such colder and heavier air, which presses to get under it and take
its place. That air is so rarefied or expanded by heat may be proved
to their comprehension, by a lank blown bladder, which, laid before a
fire, will soon swell, grow tight and burst.

[Illustration: (remedies for smoky chimnies)

  _Plate IX._      _Vol. II. page 269._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

Another experiment may be to take a glass tube about an inch in
diameter, and twelve inches long, open at both ends and fixed upright
on legs, so that it need not be handled, for the hands might warm it.
At the end of a quill fasten five or six inches of the finest light
filament of silk, so that it may be held either above the upper
end of the tube or under the lower end, your warm hand being at a
distance by the length of the quill. (Plate IX. fig. 1.) If there
were any motion of air through the tube, it would manifest itself
by its effect on the silk; but if the tube and the air in it are
of the same temperature with the surrounding air, there will be no
such motion, whatever may be the form of the tube, whether crooked
or strait, narrow below and widening upwards, or the contrary; the
air in it will be quiescent. Warm the tube, and you will find, as
long as it continues warm, a constant current of air entering below
and passing up through it, till discharged at the top; because the
warmth of the tube being communicated to the air it contains rarefies
that air and makes it lighter than the air without, which therefore
presses in below, forces it upwards, and follows and takes its place,
and is rarefied in its turn. And, without warming the tube, if you
hold under it a knob of hot iron, the air thereby heated will rise
and fill the tube, going out at its top, and this motion in the
tube will continue as long as the knob remains hot, because the air
entering the tube below is heated and rarefied by passing near and
over that knob.

That this motion is produced merely by the difference of specific
gravity between the fluid within and that without the tube, and not
by any fancied form of the tube itself, may appear by plunging it
into water contained in a glass jar a foot deep, through which such
motion might be seen. The water within and without the tube being
of the same specific gravity, balance each other, and both remain
at rest. But take out the tube, stop its bottom with a finger and
fill it with olive oil, which is lighter than water, then stopping
the top, place it as before, its lower end under water, its top a
very little above. As long as you keep the bottom stopt, the fluids
remain at rest, but the moment it is unstopt, the heavier enters
below, forces up the lighter, and takes its place. And the motion
then ceases, merely because the new fluid cannot be successively made
lighter, as air may be by a warm tube.

In fact, no form of the funnel of a chimney has any share in its
operation or effect respecting smoke, except its height. The longer
the funnel, if erect, the greater its force when filled with heated
and rarefied air, to _draw_ in below and drive up the smoke, if one
may, in compliance with custom, use the expression _draw_, when in
fact it is the superior weight of the surrounding atmosphere that
_presses_ to enter the funnel below, and so _drives up_ before it the
smoke and warm air it meets with in its passage.

I have been the more particular in explaining these first principles,
because, for want of clear ideas respecting them, much fruitless
expence has been occasioned; not only single chimneys, but in some
instances, within my knowledge, whole stacks having been pulled down
and rebuilt with funnels of different forms, imagined more powerful
in _drawing_ smoke; but having still the same height and the same
opening below, have performed no better than their predecessors.

What is it then which makes a _smoky chimney_, that is, a chimney
which, instead of conveying up all the smoke, discharges a part of it
into the room, offending the eyes and damaging the furniture?

The causes of this effect, which have fallen under my observation,
amount to _nine_, differing from each other, and therefore requiring
different remedies.

1. _Smoky chimneys in a new house, are such, frequently from mere
want of air._ The workmanship of the rooms being all good, and just
out of the workman's hand, the joints of the boards of the flooring,
and of the pannels of wainscotting are all true and tight, the more
so as the walls, perhaps not yet thoroughly dry, preserve a dampness
in the air of the room which keeps the wood-work swelled and close.
The doors and the sashes too, being worked with truth, shut with
exactness, so that the room is as tight as a snuff-box, no passage
being left open for air to enter, except the key-hole, and even that
is sometimes covered by a little dropping shutter. Now if smoke
cannot rise but as connected with rarefied air, and a column of such
air, suppose it filling the funnel, cannot rise, unless other air
be admitted to supply its place; and if, therefore, no current of
air enter the opening of the chimney, there is nothing to prevent
the smoke coming out into the room. If the motion upwards of the
air in a chimney that is freely supplied, be observed by the rising
of the smoke or a feather in it, and it be considered that in the
time such feather takes in rising from the fire to the top of the
chimney, a column of air equal to the content of the funnel must be
discharged, and an equal quantity supplied from the room below, it
will appear absolutely impossible that this operation should go on
if the tight room is kept shut; for were there any force capable of
drawing constantly so much air out of it, it must soon be exhausted
like the receiver of an air-pump, and no animal could live in it.
Those therefore who stop every crevice in a room to prevent the
admission of fresh air, and yet would have their chimney carry up
the smoke, require inconsistencies, and expect impossibilities.
Yet under this situation, I have seen the owner of a new house, in
despair, and ready to sell it for much less than it cost, conceiving
it uninhabitable, because not a chimney in any one of its rooms would
carry off the smoke, unless a door or window were left open. Much
expence has also been made, to alter and amend new chimneys which
had really no fault; in one house particularly that I knew, of a
nobleman in Westminster, that expence amounted to no less than three
hundred pounds, _after_ his house had been, as he thought, finished
and all charges paid. And after all, several of the alterations were
ineffectual, for want of understanding the true principles.

_Remedies._ When you find on trial, that opening the door or a
window, enables the chimney to carry up all the smoke, you may be
sure that want of air _from without_, was the cause of its smoking.
I say _from without_, to guard you against a common mistake of those
who may tell you, the room is large, contains abundance of air,
sufficient to supply any chimney, and therefore it cannot be that the
chimney wants air. These reasoners are ignorant, that the largeness
of a room, if tight, is in this case of small importance, since it
cannot part with a chimney full of its air without occasioning so
much vacuum; which it requires a great force to effect, and could not
be borne if effected.

It appearing plainly, then, that some of the outward air must be
admitted, the question will be, how much is _absolutely necessary_;
for you would avoid admitting more, as being contrary to one of your
intentions in having a fire, viz. that of warming your room. To
discover this quantity, shut the door gradually while a middling
fire is burning, till you find that, before it is quite shut, the
smoke begins to come out into the room, then open it a little till
you perceive the smoke comes out no longer. There hold the door, and
observe the width of the open crevice between the edge of the door
and the rabbit it should shut into. Suppose the distance to be half
an inch, and the door eight feet high, you find thence that your room
requires an entrance for air equal in area to ninety-six half inches,
or forty-eight square inches, or a passage of six inches by eight.
This however is a large supposition, there being few chimneys, that,
having a moderate opening and a tolerable height of funnel, will not
be satisfied with such a crevice of a quarter of an inch; and I have
found a square of six by six, or thirty-six square inches, to be a
pretty good medium, that will serve for most chimneys. High funnels,
with small and low openings, may indeed be supplied thro' a less
space, because, for reasons that will appear hereafter, the _force
of levity_, if one may so speak, being greater in such funnels, the
cool air enters the room with greater velocity, and consequently
more enters in the same time. This however has its limits; for
experience shows, that no increased velocity, so occasioned, has
made the admission of air through the key-hole equal in quantity to
that through an open door; though through the door the current moves
slowly, and through the key-hole with great rapidity.

It remains then to be considered how and where this necessary
quantity of air from without is to be admitted so as to be least
inconvenient. For if at the door, left so much open, the air thence
proceeds directly to the chimney, and in its way comes cold to your
back and heels as you sit before your fire. If you keep the door
shut, and raise a little the sash of your window, you feel the same
inconvenience. Various have been the contrivances to avoid this, such
as bringing in fresh air through pipes in the jams of the chimney,
which, pointing upwards, should blow the smoke up the funnel; opening
passages into the funnel above, to let in air for the same purpose.
But these produce an effect contrary to that intended: for as it
is the constant current of air passing from the room _through the
opening of the chimney_ into the funnel which prevents the smoke
coming out into the room, if you supply the funnel by other means or
in other ways with the air it wants, and especially if that air be
cold, you diminish the force of that current, and the smoke in its
effort to enter the room finds less resistance.

The wanted air must then _indispensably_ be admitted into the
room, to supply what goes off through the opening of the chimney.
M. Gauger, a very ingenious and intelligent French writer on the
subject, proposes with judgment to admit it _above_ the opening
of the chimney; and to prevent inconvenience from its coldness,
he directs its being made to pass in its entrance through winding
cavities made behind the iron back and sides of the fire-place, and
under the iron hearth-plate; in which cavities it will be warmed, and
even heated, so as to contribute much, instead of cooling, to the
warming of the room. This invention is excellent in itself, and may
be used with advantage in building new houses; because the chimneys
may then be so disposed, as to admit conveniently the cold air to
enter such passages: but in houses built without such views, the
chimneys are often so situated, as not to afford that convenience,
without great and expensive alterations. Easy and cheap methods,
though not quite so perfect in themselves, are of more general
utility; and such are the following.

In all rooms where there is a fire, the body of air warmed and
rarefied before the chimney is continually changing place, and making
room for other air that is to be warmed in its turn. Part of it
enters and goes up the chimney, and the rest rises and takes place
near the ceiling. If the room be lofty, that warm air remains above
our heads as long as it continues warm, and we are little benefited
by it, because it does not descend till it is cooler. Few can imagine
the difference of climate between the upper and lower parts of such
a room, who have not tried it by the thermometer, or by going up a
ladder till their heads are near the ceiling. It is then among this
warm air that the wanted quantity of outward air is best admitted,
with which being mixed, its coldness is abated, and its inconvenience
diminished so as to become scarce observable. This may be easily
done, by drawing down about an inch the upper sash of a window; or,
if not moveable, by cutting such a crevice through its frame; in both
which cases, it will be well to place a thin shelf of the length,
to conceal the opening, and sloping upwards to direct the entering
air horizontally along and under the ceiling. In some houses the air
may be admitted by such a crevice made in the wainscot, cornish or
plastering, near the ceiling and over the opening of the chimney.
This, if practicable, is to be chosen, because the entering cold air
will there meet with the warmest rising air from before the fire, and
be soonest tempered by the mixture. The same kind of shelf should
also be placed here. Another way, and not a very difficult one, is
to take out an upper pane of glass in one of your sashes, set in a
tin frame, (Plate, Fig. 2.) giving it two springing angular sides,
and then replacing it, with hinges below on which it may be turned
to open more or less above. It will then have the appearance of an
internal sky light. By drawing this pane in, more or less, you may
admit what air you find necessary. Its position will naturally throw
that air up and along the ceiling. This is what is called in France
a _Was ist das?_ As this is a German question, the invention is
probably of that nation, and takes its name from the frequent asking
of that question when it first appeared. In England, some have of
late years cut a round hole about five inches diameter in a pane
of the sash and placed against it a circular plate of tin hung on
an axis, and cut into vanes, which, being separately bent a little
obliquely, are acted upon by the entering air, so as to force the
plate continually round like the vanes of a windmill. This admits the
outward air, and by the continual whirling of the vanes, does in some
degree disperse it. The noise only, is a little inconvenient.

2. A second cause of the smoking of chimneys is, _their openings
in the room being too large_; that is, too wide, too high, or
both. Architects in general have no other ideas of proportion
in the opening of a chimney, than what relate to symmetry and
beauty, respecting the dimensions of the room;[52] while its true
proportion, respecting its function and utility depends on quite
other principles; and they might as properly proportion the step
in a stair-case to the height of the story, instead of the natural
elevation of men's legs in mounting. The proportion then to be
regarded, is what relates to the height of the funnel. For as the
funnels in the different stories of a house are necessarily of
different heights or lengths, that from the lowest floor being
the highest or longest, and those of the other floors shorter and
shorter, till we come to those in the garrets, which are of course
the shortest; and the force of draft being, as already said, in
proportion to the height of funnel filled with rarefied air; and a
current of air from the room into the chimney, sufficient to fill
the opening, being necessary to oppose and prevent the smoke coming
out into the room; it follows, that the openings of the longest
funnels may be larger, and that those of the shorter funnels should
be smaller. For if there be a large opening to a chimney that does
not draw strongly, the funnel may happen to be furnished with the
air it demands by a partial current entering on one side of the
opening, and, leaving the other side free of any opposing current,
may permit the smoke to issue there into the room. Much too of the
force of draft in a funnel depends on the degree of rarefaction in
the air it contains, and that depends on the nearness to the fire of
its passage in entering the funnel. If it can enter far from the fire
on each side, or far above the fire in a wide or high opening, it
receives little heat in passing by the fire, and the contents of the
funnel is by that means less different in levity from the surrounding
atmosphere, and its force in drawing consequently weaker. Hence if
too large an opening be given to chimneys in upper rooms, those rooms
will be smoky: on the other hand, if too small openings be given to
chimneys in the lower rooms, the entering air, operating too directly
and violently on the fire, and afterwards strengthening the draft as
it ascends the funnel, will consume the fuel too rapidly.

_Remedy._ As different circumstances frequently mix themselves
in these matters, it is difficult to give precise dimensions for
the openings of all chimneys. Our fathers made them generally
much too large; we have lessened them; but they are often still
of greater dimension than they should be, the human eye not being
easily reconciled to sudden and great changes. If you suspect that
your chimney smokes from the too great dimension of its opening,
contract it by placing moveable boards so as to lower and narrow
it gradually, till you find the smoke no longer issues into the
room. The proportion so found will be that which is proper for that
chimney, and you may employ the bricklayer or mason to reduce it
accordingly. However, as, in building new houses, something must
be sometimes hazarded, I would make the openings in my lower rooms
about thirty inches square and eighteen deep, and those in the upper,
only eighteen inches square and not quite so deep; the intermediate
ones diminishing in proportion as the height of funnel diminished.
In the larger openings, billets of two feet long, or half the common
length of cordwood, may be burnt conveniently; and for the smaller,
such wood may be sawed into thirds. Where coals are the fuel, the
grates will be proportioned to the openings. The same depth is nearly
necessary to all, the funnels being all made of a size proper to
admit a chimney-sweeper. If in large and elegant rooms custom or
fancy should require the appearance of a larger chimney, it may be
formed of expensive marginal decorations, in marble, &c. In time
perhaps, that which is fittest in the nature of things may come to be
thought handsomest. But at present, when men and women in different
countries show themselves dissatisfied with the forms God has given
to their heads, waists and feet, and pretend to shape them more
perfectly, it is hardly to be expected that they will be content
always with the best form of a chimney. And there are some, I know,
so bigotted to the fancy of a large noble opening, that rather than
change it, they would submit to have damaged furniture, sore eyes,
and skins almost smoked to bacon.

3. Another cause of smoky chimneys is, _too short a funnel_. This
happens necessarily in some cases, as where a chimney is required in
a low building; for, if the funnel be raised high above the roof, in
order to strengthen its draft, it is then in danger of being blown
down, and crushing the roof in its fall.

_Remedies_. Contract the opening of the chimney, so as to oblige all
the entering air to pass through or very near the fire; whereby it
will be more heated and rarefied, the funnel itself be more warmed,
and its contents have more of what may be called the force of levity,
so as to rise strongly and maintain a good draft at the opening.

Or you may in some cases, to advantage, build additional stories over
the low building, which will support a high funnel.

If the low building be used as a kitchen, and a contraction of the
opening therefore inconvenient, a large one being necessary, at
least when there are great dinners, for the free management of so
many cooking utensils; in such case, I would advise the building of
two more funnels joining to the first, and having three moderate
openings, one to each funnel, instead of one large one. When there is
occasion to use but one, the other two may be kept shut by sliding
plates, hereafter to be described;[53] and two or all of them may be
used together when wanted. This will indeed be an expence, but not an
useless one, since your cooks will work with more comfort, see better
than in a smoky kitchen what they are about, your victuals will be
cleaner dressed, and not taste of smoke, as is often the case; and
to render the effect more certain, a stack of three funnels may be
safely built higher above the roof than a single funnel.

The case of too short a funnel is more general than would be
imagined, and often found where one would not expect it. For it is
not uncommon, in ill-contrived buildings, instead of having a funnel
for each room or fire-place, to bend and turn the funnel of an upper
room so as to make it enter the side of another funnel that comes
from below. By this means the upper room funnel is made short of
course, since its length can only be reckoned from the place where
it enters the lower room funnel; and that funnel is also shortened
by all the distance between the entrance of the second funnel and
the top of the stack: for all that part being readily supplied with
air through the second funnel, adds no strength to the draught,
especially as that air is cold when there is no fire in the second
chimney. The only easy remedy here is, to keep the opening shut of
that funnel in which there is no fire.

4. Another very common cause of the smoking of
chimneys, is, _their overpowering one another_. For instance, if
there be two chimneys in one large room, and you make fires in both
of them, the doors and windows close shut, you will find that the
greater and stronger fire shall overpower the weaker, and draw air
down its funnel to supply its own demand; which air descending in
the weaker funnel will drive down its smoke, and force it into the
room. If, instead of being in one room, the two chimneys are in
two different rooms, communicating by a door, the case is the same
whenever that door is open. In a very tight house, I have known a
kitchen chimney on the lowest floor, when it had a great fire in,
it, overpower any other chimney in the house, and draw air and smoke
into its room, as often as the door was opened communicating with the
stair-case.

_Remedy._ Take care that every room has the means of supplying itself
from without, with the air its chimney may require, so that no one of
them may be obliged to borrow from another, nor under the necessity
of lending. A variety of these means have been already described.

5. Another cause of smoking is, _when the tops of chimneys are
commanded by higher buildings, or by a hill_, so that the wind
blowing over such eminences falls like water over a dam, sometimes
almost perpendicularly on the tops of the chimneys that lie in its
way, and beats down the smoke contained in them.

_Remedy._ That commonly applied to this case, is a turncap made of
tin or plate iron, covering the chimney above and on three sides,
open on one side, turning on a spindle, and which, being guided or
governed by a vane, always presents its back to the current. This
I believe may be generally effectual, though not certain, as there
may be cases in which it will not succeed. Raising your funnels, if
practicable, so as their tops may be higher, or at least equal with
the commanding eminence, is more to be depended on. But the turning
cap, being easier and cheaper, should first be tried. If obliged to
build in such a situation, I would chuse to place my doors on the
side next the hill, and the backs of my chimneys on the furthest
side; for then the column of air falling over the eminence, and of
course pressing on that below and forcing it to enter the doors or
_Was ist das_es on that side, would tend to balance the pressure down
the chimneys, and leave the funnels more free in the exercise of
their functions.

6. There is another case of command, the reverse of that last
mentioned. It is where the commanding eminence is farther from the
wind than the chimney commanded. To explain this a figure may be
necessary. Suppose then a building whose side A happens to be exposed
to the wind, and forms a kind of dam against its progress. (Plate,
Figure 3.) The air obstructed by this dam will, like water, press and
search for passages through it; and finding the top of the chimney B,
below the top of the dam, it will force itself down that funnel, in
order to get through by some door or window open on the other side of
the building. And if there be a fire in such chimney, its smoke is of
course beat down, and fills the room.

_Remedy._ I know of but one, which is to raise such funnel higher
than the roof, supporting it, if necessary by iron bars. For a
turn-cap in this case has no effect, the dammed up air pressing down
through it in whatever position the wind may have placed its opening.

I know a city in which many houses are rendered smoky by this
operation. For their kitchens being built behind, and connected by a
passage with the houses, and the tops of the kitchen chimneys lower
than the top of the houses, the whole side of a street, when the wind
blows against its back, forms such a dam, as above described; and the
wind, so obstructed, forces down those kitchen chimneys (especially
when they have but weak fires in them) to pass through the passage
and house into the street. Kitchen chimneys, so formed and situated,
have another inconvenience. In summer, if you open your upper room
windows for air, a light breeze blowing over your kitchen chimney
towards the house, though not strong enough to force down its smoke
as aforesaid, is sufficient to waft it into your windows, and fill
the rooms with it; which, besides the disagreeableness, damages your
furniture.

7. Chimneys, otherwise drawing well, are sometimes made to smoke by
_the improper and inconvenient situation of a door_. When the door
and chimney are on the same side of the room as in the figure, if the
door A, being in the corner, is made to open against the wall (Plate,
Figure 4) which is common, as being there, when open, more out of the
way, it follows, that when the door is only opened in part, a current
of air rushing in passes along the wall into and across the opening
of the chimney B, and flirts some of the smoke out into the room.
This happens more certainly when the door is shutting, for then the
force of the current is augmented, and becomes very inconvenient to
those who, warming themselves by the fire, happen to sit in its way.

The _remedies_ are obvious and easy. Either put an intervening
skreen from the wall round great part of the fire-place; or, which is
perhaps preferable, shift the hinges of your door, so as it may open
the other way, and when open throw the air along the other wall.

8. A room, that has no fire in its chimney, is sometimes filled
with _smoke which is received at the top of its funnel and descends
into the room_. In a former paper[54] I have already explained the
descending currents of air in cold funnels; it may not be amiss
however to repeat here, that funnels without fires have an effect,
according to their degree of coldness or warmth, on the air that
happens to be contained in them. The surrounding atmosphere is
frequently changing its temperature; but stacks of funnels, covered
from winds and sun by the house that contains them, retain a more
equal temperature. If, after a warm season, the outward air suddenly
grows cold, the empty warm funnels begin to draw strongly upward;
that is, they rarefy the air contained in them, which of course
rises, cooler air enters below to supply its place, is rarefied in
its turn and rises; and this operation continues till the funnel
grows cooler, or the outward air warmer, or both, when the motion
ceases. On the other hand, if after a cold season, the outward air
suddenly grows warm and of course lighter, the air contained in
the cool funnels, being heavier, descends into the room; and the
warmer air which enters their tops being cooled in its turn, and
made heavier, continues to descend; and this operation goes on, till
the funnels are warmed by the passing of warm air through them, or
the air itself grows cooler. When the temperature of the air and of
the funnels is nearly equal, the difference of warmth in the air
between day and night is sufficient to produce these currents, the
air will begin to ascend the funnels as the cool of the evening comes
on, and this current will continue till perhaps nine or ten o'clock
the next morning, when it begins to hesitate; and as the heat of the
day approaches, it sets downwards, and continues so till towards
evening, when it again hesitates for some time, and then goes upwards
constantly during the night, as before mentioned. Now when smoke
issuing from the tops of neighbouring funnels passes over the tops of
funnels which are at the time drawing downwards, as they often are
in the middle part of the day, such smoke is of necessity drawn into
these funnels, and descends with the air into the chamber.

The _remedy_ is to have a sliding plate, hereafter described[55],
that will shut perfectly the offending funnel.

9. Chimneys which generally draw well, do nevertheless sometimes give
smoke into the rooms, _it being driven down by strong winds passing
over the tops of their funnels_, though not descending from any
commanding eminence. This case is most frequent where the funnel is
short, and the opening turned from the wind. It is the more grievous,
when it happens to be a cold wind that produces the effect, because
when you most want your fire, you are sometimes obliged to extinguish
it. To understand this, it may be considered that the rising light
air, to obtain a free issue from the funnel, must push out of its
way or oblige the air that is over it to rise. In a time of calm or
of little wind this is done visibly, for we see the smoke that is
brought up by that air rise in a column above the chimney. But when a
violent current of air, that is, a strong wind, passes over the top
of a chimney, its particles have received so much force, which keeps
them in a horizontal direction and follow each other so rapidly,
that the rising light air has not strength sufficient to oblige them
to quit that direction and move upwards to permit its issue. Add to
this, that some of the current passing over that side of the funnel
which it first meets with, viz. at A, (Plate IX. Figure 5.) having
been compressed by the resistance of the funnel, may expand itself
over the flue, and strike the interior opposite side at B, from
whence it may be reflected downwards and from side to side in the
direction of the pricked lines c c c.

_Remedies._ In some places, particularly in Venice, where they have
not stacks of chimneys but single flues, the custom is, to open or
widen the top of the flue rounding in the true form of a funnel;
(Plate, Figure 6) which some think may prevent the effect just
mentioned, for that the wind blowing over one of the edges into the
funnel may be slanted out again on the other side by its form. I have
had no experience of this; but I have lived in a windy country, where
the contrary is practised, the tops of the flues being _narrowed_
inwards, so as to form a slit for the issue of the smoke, long as
the breadth of the funnel, and only four inches wide. This seems to
have been contrived on a supposition, that the entry of the wind
would thereby be obstructed, and perhaps it might have been imagined,
that the whole force of the rising warm air being condensed, as it
were, in the narrow opening, would thereby be strengthened, so as
to overcome the resistance of the wind. This however did not always
succeed; for when the wind was at north-east and blew fresh, the
smoke was forced down by fits into the room I commonly sat in, so
as to oblige me to shift the fire into another. The position of the
slit of this funnel was indeed north-east and south-west. Perhaps if
it had lain across the wind, the effect might have been different.
But on this I can give no certainty. It seems a matter proper to
be referred to experiment. Possibly a turn-cap might have been
serviceable, but it was not tried.

Chimneys have not been long in use in England. I formerly saw a
book printed in the time of queen Elizabeth, which remarked the
then modern improvements of living, and mentioned among others the
convenience of chimneys. "Our forefathers," said the author, "had
no chimneys. There was in each dwelling house only one place for a
fire, and the smoke went out through a hole in the roof; but now
there is scarce a gentleman's house in England that has not at least
one chimney in it."--When there was but one chimney, its top might
then be opened as a funnel, and perhaps, borrowing the form from the
Venetians, it was then the flue of a chimney got that name. Such is
now the growth of luxury, that in both England and France we must
have a chimney for every room, and in some houses every possessor
of a chamber, and almost every servant, will have a fire; so that
the flues being necessarily built in stacks, the opening of each as
a funnel is impracticable. This change of manners soon consumed the
firewood of England, and will soon render fuel extremely scarce
and dear in France, if the use of coals be not introduced in the
latter kingdom as it has been in the former, where it at first met
with opposition; for there is extant in the records of one of queen
Elizabeth's parliaments, a motion made by a member, reciting, "That
many dyers, brewers, smiths, and other artificers of London, had
of late taken to the use of pit-coal for their fires, instead of
wood, which filled the air with noxious vapours and smoke, very
prejudicial to the health, particularly of persons coming out of
the country; and therefore moving that a law might pass to prohibit
the use of such fuel (at least during the session of parliament) by
those artificers."--It seems it was not then commonly used in private
houses. Its supposed unwholesomeness was an objection. Luckily the
inhabitants of London have got over that objection, and now think
it rather contributes to render their air salubrious, as they have
had no general pestilential disorder since the general use of coals,
when, before it, such were frequent. Paris still burns wood at an
enormous expence continually augmenting, the inhabitants having still
that prejudice to overcome. In Germany you are happy in the use of
stoves, which save fuel wonderfully: your people are very ingenious
in the management of fire; but they may still learn something in that
art from the Chinese[56], whose country being greatly populous and
fully cultivated, has little room left for the growth of wood, and
having not much other fuel that is good, have been forced upon many
inventions during a course of ages, for making a little fire go as
far as possible.

I have thus gone through all the common causes of the smoking of
chimneys that I can at present recollect as having fallen under
my observation; communicating the remedies that I have known
successfully used for the different cases, together with the
principles on which both the disease and the remedy depend, and
confessing my ignorance wherever I have been sensible of it. You
will do well, if you publish, as you propose, this letter, to add in
notes, or as you please, such observations as may have occurred to
your attentive mind; and if other philosophers will do the same, this
part of science, though humble, yet of great utility, may in time
be perfected. For many years past, I have rarely met with a case of
a smoky chimney, which has not been solvable on these principles,
and cured by these remedies, where people have been willing to apply
them; which is indeed not always the case; for many have prejudices
in favour of the nostrums of pretending chimney-doctors and fumists,
and some have conceits and fancies of their own, which they rather
chuse to try, than to lengthen a funnel, alter the size of an
opening, or admit air into a room, however necessary; for some are as
much afraid of fresh air as persons in the hydrophobia are of fresh
water. I myself had formerly this prejudice, this _aerophobia_, as I
now account it, and dreading the supposed dangerous effects of cool
air, I considered it as an enemy, and closed with extreme care every
crevice in the rooms I inhabited. Experience has convinced me of
my error. I now look upon fresh air as a friend: I even sleep with
an open window. I am persuaded that no common air from without, is
so unwholesome as the air within a close room that has been often
breathed and not changed. Moist air too, which formerly I thought
pernicious, gives me now no apprehensions: for considering that
no dampness of air applied to the outside of my skin can be equal
to what is applied to and touches it within, my whole body being
full of moisture, and finding that I can lie two hours in a bath
twice a week, covered with water, which certainly is much damper
than any air can be, and this for years together, without catching
cold, or being in any other manner disordered by it, I no longer
dread mere moisture, either in air or in sheets or shirts: and I
find it of importance to the happiness of life, the being freed
from vain terrors, especially of objects that we are every day
exposed inevitably to meet with. You physicians have of late happily
discovered, after a contrary opinion had prevailed some ages, that
fresh and cool air does good to persons in the small pox and other
fevers. It is to be hoped, that in another century or two we may all
find out, that it is not bad even for people in health. And as to
moist air, here I am at this present writing in a ship with above
forty persons, who have had no other but moist air to breathe for six
weeks past; every thing we touch is damp, and nothing dries, yet we
are all as healthy as we should be on the mountains of Switzerland,
whose inhabitants are not more so than those of Bermuda or St.
Helena, islands on whose rocks the waves are dashed into millions of
particles, which fill the air with damp, but produce no diseases,
the moisture being pure, unmixed with the poisonous vapours arising
from putrid marshes and stagnant pools, in which many insects die and
corrupt the water. These places only, in my opinion (which however
I submit to yours) afford unwholesome air; and that it is not the
mere water contained in damp air, but the volatile particles of
corrupted animal matter mixed with that water, which renders such air
pernicious to those who breathe it. And I imagine it a cause of the
same kind that renders the air in close rooms, where the perspirable
matter is breathed over and over again by a number of assembled,
people so hurtful to health. After being in such a situation, many
find themselves affected by that _febricula_, which the English alone
call a _cold_, and, perhaps from the name, imagine that they caught
the malady by _going out_ of the room, when it was in fact by being
in it.

You begin to think that I wander from my subject, and go out of my
depth. So I return again to my chimneys.

We have of late many lecturers in experimental philosophy. I have
wished that some of them would study this branch of that science,
and give experiments in it as a part of their lectures. The addition
to their present apparatus need not be very expensive. A number of
little representations of rooms composed each of five panes of sash
glass, framed in wood at the corners, with proportionable doors,
and moveable glass chimneys, with openings of different sizes, and
different lengths of funnel, and some of the rooms so contrived as
to communicate on occasion with others, so as to form different
combinations, and exemplify different cases; with quantities of green
wax taper cut into pieces of an inch and half, sixteen of which stuck
together in a square, and lit, would make a strong fire for a little
glass chimney, and blown out would continue to burn and give smoke as
long as desired. With such an apparatus all the operations of smoke
and rarified air in rooms and chimneys might be seen through their
transparent sides; and the effect of winds on chimneys, commanded or
otherwise, might be shown, by letting the entering air blow upon them
through an opened window of the lecturer's chamber, where it would
be constant while he kept a good fire in his chimney. By the help of
such lectures our fumists would become better instructed. At present
they have generally but one remedy, which perhaps they have known
effectual in some one case of smoky chimneys, and they apply that
indiscriminately to all the other cases, without success,--but not
without expence to their employers.

With all the science, however, that a man shall suppose himself
possessed of in this article, he may sometimes meet with cases
that shall puzzle him. I once lodged in a house at London, which,
in a little room, had a single chimney and funnel. The opening was
very small, yet it did not keep in the smoke, and all attempts to
have a fire in this room were fruitless. I could not imagine the
reason, till at length observing that the chamber over it, which had
no fire-place in it, was always filled with smoke when a fire was
kindled below and that the smoke came through the cracks and crevices
of the wainscot; I had the wainscot taken down, and discovered that
the funnel, which went up behind it, had a crack many feet in length,
and wide enough to admit my arm, a breach very dangerous with regard
to fire, and occasioned probably by an apparent irregular settling of
one side of the house. The air entering this breach freely, destroyed
the drawing force of the funnel. The remedy would have been, filling
up the breach or rather rebuilding the funnel: but the landlord
rather chose to stop up the chimney.

Another puzzling case I met with at a friend's country house near
London. His best room had a chimney in which, he told me, he never
could have a fire, for all the smoke came out into the room. I
flattered myself I could easily find the cause, and prescribe the
cure. I had a fire made there, and found it as he said. I opened
the door, and perceived it was not want of air. I made a temporary
contraction of the opening of the chimney, and found that it was not
its being too large that caused the smoke to issue. I went out and
looked up at the top of the chimney: its funnel was joined in the
same stack with others, some of them shorter, that drew very well,
and I saw nothing to prevent its doing the same. In fine, after
every other examination I could think of, I was obliged to own the
insufficiency of my skill. But my friend, who made no pretension to
such kind of knowledge, afterwards discovered the cause himself. He
got to the top of the funnel by a ladder, and looking down, found
it filled with twigs and straw cemented by earth, and lined with
feathers. It seems the house, after being built, had stood empty some
years before he occupied it; and he concluded that some large birds
had taken the advantage of its retired situation to make their nest
there. The rubbish, considerable in quantity, being removed, and the
funnel cleared, the chimney drew well, and gave satisfaction.

In general smoke is a very tractable thing, easily governed and
directed when one knows the principles, and is well informed of
the circumstances. You know I made it _descend_ in my Pensylvania
stove. I formerly had a more simple construction, in which the same
effect was produced, but visible to the eye (Plate, Figure 7). It
was composed of two plates A B and C D, placed as in the figure.
The lower plate A B rested with its edge in the angle made by the
hearth with the back of the chimney. The upper plate was fixed to
the breast, and lapped over the lower about six inches wide and
the length of the plates (near two feet) between them. Every other
passage of air into the funnel was well stopped. When therefore a
fire was made at E, for the first time with charcoal, till the air
in the funnel was a little heated through the plates, and then wood
laid on, the smoke would rise to A, turn over the edge of that plate,
descend to D, then turn under the edge of the upper plate, and go
up the chimney. It was pretty to see, but of no great use. Placing
therefore the under plate in a higher situation, I removed the
upper plate C D, and placed it perpendicularly (Plate, Figure 8) so
that the upper edge of the lower plate A B came within about three
inches of it, and might be pushed farther from it, or suffered to
come nearer to it, by a moveable wedge between them. The flame then
ascending from the fire at E, was, carried to strike the upper plate,
made it very hot, and its heat rose and spread with the rarefied air
into the room.

I believe you have seen in use with me, the contrivance of a
sliding-plate over the fire, seemingly placed to oppose the rising of
the smoke, leaving but a small passage for it, between the edge of
the plate and the back of the chimney. It is particularly described,
and its uses explained, in my former printed letter, and I mention it
here only as another instance of the tractability of smoke[57].

What is called the Staffordshire chimney, (see the Plate, facing page
238) affords an example of the same kind. The opening of the chimney
is bricked up, even with the fore-edge of its jams, leaving open only
a passage over the grate of the same width, and perhaps eight inches
high. The grate consists of semicircular bars, their upper bar of
the greatest diameter, the others under it smaller and smaller, so
that it has the appearance of half a round basket. It is, with the
coals it contains, wholly without the wall that shuts up the chimney,
yet the smoke bends and enters the passage above it, the draft being
strong, because no air can enter that is not obliged to pass near or
through the fire, so that all that the funnel is filled with is much
heated, and of course much rarefied.

Much more of the prosperity of a winter country depends on the plenty
and cheapness of fuel, than is generally imagined. In travelling I
have observed, that in those parts where the inhabitants can have
neither wood nor coal nor turf but at excessive prices, the working
people live in miserable hovels, are ragged, and have nothing
comfortable about them. But when fuel is cheap (or where they have
the art of managing it to advantage) they are well furnished with
necessaries, and have decent habitations. The obvious reason is,
that the working hours of such people are the profitable hours, and
they who cannot afford sufficient fuel have fewer such hours in the
twenty four, than those who have it cheap and plenty: for much of the
domestic work of poor women, such as spinning, sewing, knitting; and
of the men in those manufactures that require little bodily exercise,
cannot well be performed where the fingers are numbed with cold,
those people, therefore, in cold weather, are induced to go to bed
sooner, and lie longer in a morning, than they would do if they could
have good fires or warm stoves to sit by; and their hours of work are
not sufficient to produce the means of comfortable subsistence. Those
public works, therefore, such as roads, canals, &c. by which fuel
may be brought cheap into such countries from distant places, are of
great utility; and those who promote them may be reckoned among the
benefactors of mankind.

I have great pleasure in having thus complied with your request, and
in the reflection, that the friendship you honour me with, and in
which I have ever been so happy, has continued so many years without
the smallest interruption. Our distance from each other is now
augmented, and nature must soon put an end to the possibility of my
continuing our correspondence: but if consciousness and memory remain
in a future state, my esteem and respect for you, my dear friend,
will be everlasting.

  B. FRANKLIN.


_Notes for the Letter upon Chimneys._

No. I.

The latest work on architecture that I have seen, is that entitled
_Nutshells_, which appears to be written by a very ingenious man, and
contains a table of the proportions of the openings of chimneys; but
they relate solely to the proportions he gives his rooms, without
the smallest regard to the funnels. And he remarks, respecting those
proportions, that they are similar to the harmonic divisions of a
monochord.[58] He does not indeed lay much stress on this; but it
shows that we like the appearance of principles; and where we have
not true ones, we have some satisfaction in producing such as are
imaginary.


No. II.

The description of the sliding plates here promised, and which hath
been since brought into use under various names, with some immaterial
changes, is contained in a former letter to J. B. Esq. as follows:


  TO J. B.[59] ESQ. AT BOSTON, IN NEW-ENGLAND.

  _London, Dec. 2, 1758,_

  DEAR SIR,

I have executed here an easy simple contrivance, that I have long
since had in speculation, for keeping rooms warmer in cold weather
than they generally are, and with less fire. It is this. The opening
of the chimney is contracted, by brick-work faced with marble slabs,
to about two feet between the jams, and the breast brought down to
within about three feet of the hearth. An iron frame is placed just
under the breast, and extending quite to the back of the chimney,
so that a plate of the same metal may slide horizontally backwards
and forwards in the grooves on each side of the frame. This plate
is just so large as to fill the whole space, and shut the chimney
entirely when thrust quite in, which is convenient when there is no
fire. Drawing it out, so as to leave a space between its further edge
and the back, of about two inches; this space is sufficient for the
smoke to pass; and so large a part of the funnel being stopt by the
rest of the plate, the passage of warm air out of the room, up the
chimney, is obstructed and retarded, and by that means much cold air
is prevented from coming in through crevices, to supply its place.
This effect is made manifest three ways. First, when the fire burns
briskly in cold weather, the howling or whistling noise made by the
wind, as it enters the room through the crevices, when the chimney
is open as usual, ceases as soon as the plate is slid in to its
proper distance. Secondly, opening the door of the room about half
an inch, and holding your hand against the opening, near the top of
the door, you feel the cold air coming in against your hand, but
weakly, if the plate be in. Let another person suddenly draw it out,
so as to let the air of the room go up the chimney, with its usual
freedom where chimneys are open, and you immediately feel the cold
air rushing in strongly. Thirdly, if something be set against the
door, just sufficient, when the plate is in, to keep the door nearly
shut, by resisting the pressure of the air that would force it open:
then, when the plate is drawn out, the door will be forced open by
the increased pressure of the outward cold air endeavouring to get in
to supply the place of the warm air, that now passes out of the room
to go up the chimney. In our common open chimneys, half the fuel is
wasted, and its effect lost; the air it has warmed being immediately
drawn off. Several of my acquaintance, having seen this simple
machine in my room, have imitated it at their own houses, and it
seems likely to become pretty common. I describe it thus particularly
to you, because I think it would be useful in Boston, where firing is
often dear.

Mentioning chimneys puts me in mind of a property I formerly had
occasion to observe in them, which I have not found taken notice of
by others; it is, that in the summer time, when no fire is made in
the chimneys, there is, nevertheless, a regular draft of air through
them, continually passing upwards, from about five or six o'clock
in the afternoon, till eight or nine o'clock the next morning, when
the current begins to slacken and hesitate a little, for about half
an hour, and then sets as strongly down again, which it continues to
do till towards five in the afternoon, then slackens and hesitates
as before, going sometimes a little up, then a little down, till, in
about a half an hour, it gets into a steady upward current for the
night, which continues till eight or nine the next day; the hours
varying a little as the days lengthen and shorten, and sometimes
varying from sudden changes in the weather; as if, after being long
warm, it should begin to grow cool about noon, while the air was
coming down the chimney, the current will then change earlier than
the usual hour, &c.

This property in chimneys I imagine we might turn to some account,
and render improper, for the future, the old saying, _as useless
as a chimney in summer_. If the opening of the chimney, from the
breast down to the hearth, be closed by a slight moveable frame or
two, in the manner of doors, covered with canvas, that will let the
air through, but keep out the flies; and another little frame set
within upon the hearth, with hooks on which to hang joints of meat,
fowls, &c. wrapt well in wet linen cloths, three or four fold, I
am confident, that if the linen is kept wet, by sprinkling it once
a day, the meat would be so cooled by the evaporation, carried on
continually by means of the passing air, that it would keep a week
or more in the hottest weather. Butter and milk might likewise be
kept cool, in vessels or bottles covered with wet cloths. A shallow
tray, or keeler, should be under the frame to receive any water that
might drip from the wetted cloths. I think, too, that this property
of chimneys might, by means of smoke-jack vanes, be applied to some
mechanical purposes, where a small but pretty constant power only is
wanted.

If you would have my opinion of the cause of this changing current of
air in chimneys, it is, in short, as follows. In summer time there
is generally a great difference in the warmth of the air at mid-day
and mid-night, and, of course, a difference of specific gravity
in the air, as the more it is warmed the more it is rarefied. The
funnel of a chimney, being for the most part surrounded by the house,
is protected, in a great measure, from the direct action of the
sun's rays, and also from the coldness of the night air. It thence
preserves a middle temperature between the heat of the day, and the
coldness of the night. This middle temperature it communicates to
the air contained in it. If the state of the outward air be cooler
than that in the funnel of the chimney, it will, by being heavier,
force it to rise, and go out at the top. What supplies its place from
below, being warmed, in its turn, by the warmer funnel, is likewise
forced up by the colder and weightier air below, and so the current
is continued till the next day, when the sun gradually changes the
state of the outward air, makes it first as warm as the funnel of
the chimney can make it (when the current begins to hesitate) and
afterwards warmer. Then the funnel, being cooler than the air that
comes into it, cools that air, makes it heavier than the outward air,
of course it descends; and what succeeds it from above being cooled
in its turn, the descending current continues till towards evening,
when it again hesitates and changes its course, from the change of
warmth in the outward air, and the nearly remaining same middle
temperature in the funnel.

Upon this principle, if a house were built behind Beacon-hill, an
adit carried from one of the doors into the hill horizontally, till
it meet with a perpendicular shaft sunk from its top, it seems
probable to me, that those who lived in the house would constantly,
in the heat even of the calmest day, have as much cool air passing
through the house, as they should chuse; and the same, though
reversed in its current, during the stillest night.

I think, too, this property might be made of use to miners; as,
where several shafts or pits are sunk perpendicularly into the
earth, communicating at bottom by horizontal passages, which is a
common case, if a chimney of thirty or forty feet high were built
over one of the shafts, or so near the shaft, that the chimney might
communicate with the top of the shaft, all air being excluded but
what should pass up or down by the shaft, a constant change of air
would, by this means, be produced in the passages below, tending to
secure the workmen from those damps, which so frequently incommode
them. For the fresh air would be almost always going down the open
shaft, to go up the chimney, or down the chimney, to go up the shaft.
Let me add one observation more, which is, that if that part of the
funnel of a chimney, which appears above the roof of a house, be
pretty long, and have three of its sides exposed to the heat of the
sun successively, viz. when he is in the east, in the south, and in
the west, while the north side is sheltered by the building from the
cool northerly winds; such a chimney will often be so heated by the
sun, as to continue the draft strongly upwards, through the whole
twenty-four hours, and often for many days together. If the outside
of such a chimney be painted black, the effect will be still greater,
and the current stronger.


No. III.

It is said the northern Chinese have a method of warming their ground
floors, which is ingenious. Those floors are made of tiles, a foot
square and two inches thick, their corners being supported by bricks
set on end, that are a foot long and four inches square; the tiles,
too, join into each other, by ridges and hollows along their sides.
This forms a hollow under the whole floor, which on one side of the
house has an opening into the air, where a fire is made, and it has a
funnel rising from the other side to carry off the smoke. The fuel is
a sulphurous pitcoal, the smell of which in the room is thus avoided,
while the floor, and of course the room, is well warmed. But as the
underside of the floor must grow foul with soot, and a thick coat of
soot prevents much of the direct application of the hot air to the
tiles, I conceive that burning the smoke, by obliging it to descend
through red coals, would in this construction be very advantageous,
as more heat would be given by the flame than by the smoke, and the
floor being thereby kept free from soot would be more heated with
less fire. For this purpose I would propose erecting the funnel close
to the grate, so as to have only an iron plate between the fire and
the funnel, through which plate, the air in the funnel being heated,
it will be sure to draw well, and force the smoke to descend, as in
the figure (Plate, Figure 9.) where A is the funnel or chimney, B the
grate on which the fire is placed, C one of the apertures through
which the descending smoke is drawn into the channel D of figure
10, along which channel it is conveyed by a circuitous route, as
designated by the arrows, until it arrives at the small aperture E,
figure 10, through which it enters the funnel F. G in both figures is
the iron plate against which the fire is made, which, being heated
thereby, will rarefy the air in that part of the funnel, and cause
the smoke to ascend rapidly. The flame thus dividing from the grate
to the right and left, and turning in passages, disposed, as in
figure 10, so as that every part of the floor may be visited by it
before it enters the funnel F, by the two passages E E, very little
of the heat will be lost, and a winter room thus rendered very
comfortable.


No. IV.

Page 265. _Few can imagine_, &c. It is said the Icelanders have very
little fuel, chiefly drift wood that comes upon their coast. To
receive more advantage from its heat, they make their doors low, and
have a stage round the room above the door, like a gallery, wherein
the women can sit and work, the men read or write, &c. The roof being
tight, the warm air is confined by it and kept from rising higher and
escaping; and the cold air, which enters the house when the door is
opened, cannot rise above the level of the top of the door, because
it is heavier than the warm air above the door, and so those in the
gallery are not incommoded by it. Some of our too lofty rooms might
have a stage so constructed as to make a temporary gallery above, for
the winter, to be taken away in summer. Sedentary people would find
much comfort there in cold weather.


No. V.

Page 285. _Where they have the art of managing it_, &c. In some
houses of the lower people among the northern nations of Europe, and
among the poorer sort of Germans in Pensylvania, I have observed this
construction, which appears very advantageous. (Plate Figure 11.) A
is the kitchen with its chimney; B an iron stove in the stove-room.
In a corner of the chimney is a hole through the back into the stove,
to put in fuel, and another hole above it to let the smoke of the
stove come back into the chimney. As soon as the cooking is over,
the brands in the kitchen chimney are put through the hole to supply
the stove, so that there is seldom more than one fire burning at a
time. In the floor over the stove-room, is a small trap door, to
let the warm air rise occasionally into the chamber. Thus the whole
house is warmed at little expence of wood, and the stove-room kept
constantly warm; so that in the coldest winter nights, they can work
late, and find the room still comfortable when they rise to work
early. An English farmer in America, who makes great fires in large
open chimneys, needs the constant employment of one man to cut and
haul wood for supplying them; and the draft of cold air to them is
so strong, that the heels of his family are frozen while they are
scorching their faces, and the room is never warm, so that little
sedentary work can be done by them in winter. The difference in
this article alone of economy shall, in a course of years, enable
the German to buy out the Englishman, and take possession of his
plantation.


_Miscellaneous Observations._

Chimneys, whose funnels go up in the north wall of a house and are
exposed to the north winds, are not so apt to draw well as those in
a south wall; because, when rendered cold by those winds, they draw
downwards.

Chimneys, enclosed in the body of a house, are better than those
whose funnels are exposed in cold walls.

Chimneys in stacks are apt to draw better than separate funnels,
because the funnels, that have constant fires in them, warm the
others, in some degree, that have none.

One of the funnels, in a house I once occupied, had a particular
funnel joined to the south side of the stack, so that three of its
sides were exposed to the sun in the course of the day, viz. (Plate,
Figure 12.) the east side E during the morning, the south side S in
the middle part of the day, and the west side W during the afternoon,
while its north side was sheltered by the stack from the cold winds.
This funnel, which came from the ground-floor, and had a considerable
height above the roof, was constantly in a strong drawing state day
and night, winter and summer.

Blacking of funnels, exposed to the sun, would probably make them
draw still stronger.

In Paris I saw a fire-place so ingeniously contrived as to serve
conveniently two rooms, a bedchamber and a study. The funnel over the
fire was round. The fire-place was of cast iron (Plate, Figure 13.)
having an upright back A, and two horizontal semicircular plates B C,
the whole so ordered as to turn on the pivots D E. The plate B always
stopped that part of the round funnel that was next to the room
without fire, while the other half of the funnel over the fire was
always open. By this means a servant in the morning could make a fire
on the hearth C, then in the study, without disturbing the master by
going into his chamber; and the master, when he rose, could, with a
touch of his foot, turn the chimney on its pivots, and bring the fire
into his chamber, keep it there as long as he wanted it, and turn it
again, when he went out, into his study. The room which had no fire
in it was also warmed by the heat coming through the back plate, and
spreading in the room, as it could not go up the chimney.

FOOTNOTES:

[51] This letter, which has been published in a separate pamphlet,
both in this country and America, first appeared in the Transactions
of the American Philosophical Society, in which it was read Oct. 21,
1785. _Editor._

[52] See Notes at the end of the Letter, No. I.

[53] See Notes at the end of the Letter, No. II.

[54] See Notes at the end of the letter, No. II.

[55] See Notes at the end of the letter, No. II.

[56] See Notes at the end of the letter, No. III.

[57] See Notes at the end of the Letter, No. II.

[58] "It may be just remarked here, that upon comparing these
proportions with those arising from the common divisions of the
monochord, it happens that the first answers to unisons, and although
the second is a discord, the third answers to the third minor, the
fourth to the third major, the fifth to the fourth, the sixth to the
fifth, and the seventh to the octave." NUTSHELLS, page 85.

[59] Badoin. _Editor._


[Illustration:

  _Plate X._      _Vol. II. page 297._

STOVE FOR BURNING PIT-COAL.

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]




  _Description of a new Stove for burning of Pitcoal, and consuming
  all its smoke._[60] _By Dr. B._ FRANKLIN.


Towards the end of the last century an ingenious French philosopher,
whose name I am sorry I cannot recollect, exhibited an experiment
to show, that very offensive things might be burnt in the middle of
a chamber, such as woollen rags, feathers, &c. without creating the
least smoke or smell. The machine in which it was made, if I remember
right, was of this form, (Plate X. Figure 1.) made of plate iron.
Some clear burning charcoals were put into the opening of the short
tube A, and supported there by the grate B. The air, as soon as the
tubes grew warm, would ascend in the longer leg C and go out at D,
consequently air must enter at A descending to B. In this course it
must be heated by the burning coals through which it passed, and
rise more forcibly in the longer tube, in proportion to its degree
of heat or rarefaction, and length of that tube. For such a machine
is a kind of inverted syphon; and as the greater weight of water in
the longer leg of a common syphon in descending is accompanied by an
ascent of the same fluid in the shorter; so, in this inverted syphon,
the greater quantity of levity of air in the longer leg, in rising
is accompanied by the descent of air in the shorter. The things to
be burned being laid on the hot coals at A, the smoke must descend
through those coals, be converted into flame, which, after destroying
the offensive smell, came out at the end of the longer tube as mere
heated air.

Whoever would repeat this experiment with success must take care that
the part A, B, of the short tube, be quite full of burning coals,
so that no part of the smoke may descend and pass by them without
going through them, and being converted into flame; and that the
longer tube be so heated as that the current of ascending hot air
is established in it before the things to be burnt are laid on the
coals; otherwise there will be a disappointment.

It does not appear either in the Memoirs of the Academy of Sciences,
or Philosophical Transactions of the English Royal Society, that any
improvement was ever made of this ingenious experiment, by applying
it to useful purposes. But there is a German book, entitled _Vulcanus
Famulans_, by Joh. George Leutmann, P. D. printed at Wirtemberg in
1723, which describes, among a great variety of other stoves for
warming rooms, one, which seems to have been formed on the same
principle, and probably from the hint thereby given, though the
French experiment is not mentioned. This book being scarce, I have
translated the chapter describing the stove, viz.


"_Vulcanus Famulans, by John George Leutmann, P. D._

"_Wirtemberg, 1723._

"CHAP. VII.

"On a Stove, which draws downwards.

"Here follows the description of a sort of stove, which can easily
be removed and again replaced at pleasure. This drives the fire down
under itself, and gives no smoke, but however a very unwholesome
vapour.

"In the figure, A is an iron vessel like a funnel, (Plate X. Figure
20.) in diameter at the top about twelve inches, at the bottom near
the grate about five inches; its height twelve inches. This is set on
the barrel C, which is ten inches diameter and two feet long, closed
at each end E E. From one end rises a pipe or flue about four inches
diameter, on which other pieces of pipe are set, which are gradually
contracted to D, where the opening is but about two inches. Those
pipes must together be at least four feet high. B is an iron grate.
F F are iron handles guarded with wood, by which the stove is to be
lifted and moved. It stands on three legs. Care must be taken to stop
well all the joints, that no smoke may leak through.

"When this stove is to be used, it must first be carried into the
kitchen and placed in the chimney near the fire. There burning wood
must be laid and left upon its grate till the barrel C is warm, and
the smoke no longer rises at A, but descends towards C. Then it is to
be carried into the room which it is to warm. When once the barrel C
is warm, fresh wood may be thrown into the vessel A as often as one
pleases, the flame descends and without smoke, which is so consumed
that only a vapour passes out at D.

"As this vapour is unwholesome, and affects the head, one may be
freed from it, by fixing in the wall of the room an inverted funnel,
such as people use to hang over lamps, through which their smoke goes
out as through a chimney. This funnel carries out all the vapour
cleverly, so that one finds no inconvenience from it, even though the
opening D be placed a span below the mouth of the said funnel G. The
neck of the funnel is better when made gradually bending, than if
turned in a right angle.

"The cause of the draft downwards in the stove is the pressure of the
outward air, which, falling into the vessel A in a column of twelve
inches diameter, finds only a resisting passage at the grate B, of
five inches, and one at D, of two inches, which are much too weak
to drive it back again; besides, A stands much higher than B, and
so the pressure on it is greater and more forcible, and beats down
the frame to that part where it finds the least resistance. Carrying
the machine first to the kitchen fire for preparation, is on this
account, that in the beginning the fire and smoke naturally ascend,
till the air in the close barrel C is made thinner by the warmth.
When that vessel is heated, the air in it is rarefied, and then all
the smoke and fire descends under it.

"The wood should be thoroughly dry, and cut into pieces five or six
inches long, to fit it for being thrown into the funnel A." Thus far
the German book.

It appears to me, by Mr. Leutmann's explanation of the operation of
this machine, that he did not understand the principles of it, whence
I conclude he was not the inventor of it; and by the description of
it, wherein the opening at A is made so large, and the pipe E, D,
so short, I am persuaded he never made nor saw the experiment, for
the first ought to be much smaller and the last much higher, or it
hardly will succeed. The carrying it in the kitchen, too, every time
the fire should happen to be out, must be so troublesome, that it is
not likely ever to have been in practice, and probably has never been
shown but as a philosophical experiment. The funnel for conveying
the vapour out of the room would besides have been uncertain in its
operation, as a wind blowing against its mouth would drive the vapour
back.

The stove I am about to describe was also formed on the idea given by
the French experiment, and completely carried into execution before
I had any knowledge of the German invention; which I wonder should
remain so many years in a country, where men are so ingenious in the
management of fire, without receiving long since the improvements I
have given it.


_Description of the Parts._

A, the bottom plate which lies flat upon the hearth, with its
partitions, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, (Plate X. Figure 2.) that are cast with
it, and a groove Z Z, in which are to slide, the bottom edges of the
small plates Y, Y, figure 12; which plates meeting at X close the
front.

B 1, figure 3, is the cover plate showing its under side, with the
grooves 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, to receive the top edges of the partitions
that are fixed to the bottom plate. It shows also the grate W W, the
bars of which are cast in the plate, and a groove V V, which comes
right over the groove Z Z, figure 2, receiving the upper edges of the
small sliding plates Y Y, figure 12.

B 2, figure 4, shows the upper side of the same plate, with a square
impression or groove for receiving the bottom mouldings T T T T of
the three-sided box C, figure 5, which is cast in one piece.

D, figure 6, its cover, showing its under side with grooves to
receive the upper edges S S S of the sides of C, figure 5, also a
groove R, R, which when the cover is put on comes right over another
Q Q in C, figure 5, between which it is to slide.

E, figure 7, the front plate of the box.

P, a hole three inches diameter through the cover D, figure 6, over
which hole stands the vase F, figure 8, which has a corresponding
hole two inches diameter through its bottom.

The top of the vase opens at O, O, O, figure 8, and turns back
upon a hinge behind when coals are to be put in; the vase has a
grate within at N N of cast iron H, figure 9, and a hole in the top,
one and a half inches diameter, to admit air, and to receive the
ornamental brass guilt flame M, figure 10, which stands in that hole,
and, being itself hollow and open, suffers air to pass through it to
the fire.

G, figure 11, is a drawer of plate iron, that slips in between in
the partitions 2 and 3, figure 2, to receive the falling ashes. It
is concealed when the small sliding plates Y Y, figure 12, are shut
together.

I, I, I, I, figure 8, is a niche built of brick in the chimney and
plastered. It closes the chimney over the vase, but leaves two
funnels, one in each corner, communicating with the bottom box K K,
figure 2.


  _Dimensions of the Parts._

                                             _Feet._    _In._

  Front of the bottom box,                      2         0
  Height of its partitions,                     0         4¼
  Length of No. 1, 2, 3 and 4, each,            1         3
  Length of No. 5 and 6, each,                  0         8¼
  Breadth of the passage between No. 2 and 3,   0         6
  Breadth of the other passages each,           0         3½
  Breadth of the grate,                         0         6½
  Length of ditto,                              0         8
  Bottom moulding of box C, square,             1         0
  Height of the sides of ditto,                 0         4
  Length of the back side,                      0        10
  Length of the right and left sides, each,     0         9½
  Length of the front plate E, where longest,   0        11
  The cover D, square,                          0        12
  Hole in ditto, diameter,                      0         3
  Sliding plates Y Y, their length, each,       1         0
  -----  -----  ----- their breadth, each,      0         4½
  Drawer G, its length,                         1         0
  -----  -----  breadth,                        0         5¾
  -----  -----  depth,                          0         4
  -----  -----  depth of its further end, only, 0         1
  Grate H in the vase, its diameter to the
    extremity of its knobs,                     0         5¾
  Thickness of the bars at top,                 0         0¼
  -----  -----  -----   at bottom, less,        0         0
  Depth of the bars at the top,                 0         0¾
  Height of the vase,                           1         6
  Diameter of the opening O, O, in the clear,   0         8
  Diameter of the air-hole at top,              0         1½
  -----    of the flame hole at bottom,         0         2


_To fix this Machine._

Spread mortar on the hearth to bed the bottom plate A, then lay that
plate level, equally distant from each jamb, and projecting out
as far as you think proper. Then putting some Windsor loam in the
grooves of the cover B, lay that on: trying the sliding plates Y Y,
to see if they move freely in the grooves Z Z, V V, designed for them.

Then begin to build the niche, observing to leave the square corners
of the chimney unfilled; for they are to be funnels. And observe also
to leave a free open communication between the passages at K K, and
the bottom of those funnels, and mind to close the chimney above the
top of the niche, that no air may pass up that way. The concave back
of the niche will rest on the circular iron partition 1 A 4, figure
2, then, with a little loam, put on the box C over the grate, the
open side of the box in front.

Then, with loam in three of its grooves, the groove R R being left
clean, and brought directly over the groove Q Q in the box, put on
the cover D, trying the front plate E, to see if it slides freely in
those grooves.

Lastly, set on the vase, which has small holes in the moulding of its
bottom to receive two iron pins that rise out of the plate D at I I,
for the better keeping it steady.

Then putting in the grate H, which rests on its three knobs h h h
against the inside of the vase, and slipping the drawer into its
place; the machine is fit for use.


_To use it._

Let the first fire be made after eight in the evening or before
eight in the morning, for at those times and between those hours all
night, there is usually a draft up a chimney, though it has long been
without fire; but between those hours in the day there is often, in
a cold chimney, a draft downwards, when, if you attempt to kindle a
fire, the smoke will come into the room.

But to be certain of your proper time, hold a flame over the air-hole
at the top. If the flame is drawn strongly down for a continuance,
without whiffling, you may begin to kindle a fire.

First put in a few charcoals on the grate H.

Lay some small sticks on the charcoals,

Lay some pieces of paper on the sticks,

Kindle the paper with a candle,

Then shut down the top, and the air will pass down through the
air-hole, blow the flame of the paper down through the sticks, kindle
them, and their flame passing lower kindles the charcoal.

When the charcoal is well kindled, lay on it the sea-coals, observing
not to choak the fire by putting on too much at first.

The flame descending through the hole in the bottom of the vase,
and that in plate D into the box C, passes down farther through the
grate W W in plate B 1, then passes horizontally towards the back of
the chimney; there dividing, and turning to the right and left, one
part of it passes round the far end of the partition 2, then coming
forward it turns round the near end of partition 1, then moving
backward it arrives at the opening into the bottom of one of the
upright corner funnels behind the niche, through which it ascends
into the chimney, thus heating that half of the box and that side of
the niche. The other part of the divided flame passes round the far
end of partition 3, round the near end of partition 4, and so into
and up the other corner funnel, thus heating the other half of the
box, and the other side of the niche. The vase itself, and the box C
will also be very hot, and the air surrounding them being heated, and
rising, as it cannot get into the chimney, it spreads in the room,
colder air succeeding is warmed in its turn, rises and spreads, till
by the continual circulation the whole is warmed.

If you should have occasion to make your first fire at hours not
so convenient as those above mentioned, and when the chimney does
not draw, do not begin it in the vase, but in one or more of the
passages of the lower plate, first covering the mouth of the vase.
After the chimney has drawn a while with the fire thus low, and
begins to be a little warm, you may close those passages and kindle
another fire in the box C, leaving its sliding shutter a little open;
and when you find after some time that the chimney being warmed draws
forcibly, you may shut that passage, open your vase, and kindle your
fire there, as above directed. The chimney well warmed by the first
day's fire will continue to draw constantly all winter, if fires are
made daily.

You will, in the management of your fire, have need of the following
implements:

A pair of small light tongs, twelve or fifteen inches long, plate,
figure 13.

A light poker about the same length with a flat broad point, figure
14.

A rake to draw ashes out of the passages of the lower plate, where
the lighter kind escaping the ash-box will gather by degrees, and
perhaps once in a week or ten days require being removed, figure 15.

And a fork with its prongs wide enough to slip on the neck of the
vase cover, in order to raise and open it when hot, to put in fresh
coals, figure 16.

In the management of this stove there are certain precautions to
be observed, at first with attention, till they become habitual.
To avoid the inconvenience of smoke, see that the grate H be clear
before you begin to light a fresh fire. If you find it clogged with
cinders and ashes, turn it up with your tongs and let them fall upon
the grate below; the ashes will go through it, and the cinders may be
raked off and returned into the vase when you would burn them. Then
see that all the sliding plates are in their places and close shut,
that no air may enter the stove but through the round opening at the
top of the vase. And to avoid the inconvenience of dust from the
ashes, let the ash-drawer be taken out of the room to be emptied; and
when you rake the passages, do it when the draft of the air is strong
inwards, and put the ashes carefully into the ash-box, that remaining
in its place.

If, being about to go abroad, you would prevent your fire burning in
your absence, you may do it by taking the brass flame from the top
of the vase, and covering the passage with a round tin plate, which
will prevent the entry of more air than barely sufficient to keep a
few of the coals alive. When you return, though some hours absent, by
taking off the tin plate and admitting the air, your fire will soon
be recovered.

The effect of this machine, well managed, is to burn not only the
coals, but all the smoke of the coals, so that while the fire is
burning, if you go out and observe the top of your chimney, you will
see no smoke issuing, nor any thing but clear warm air, which as
usual makes the bodies seen through it appear waving.

But let none imagine from this, that it may be a cure for bad or
smoky chimneys, much less, that as it burns the smoke it may be used
in a room that has no chimney. It is by the help of a good chimney,
the higher the better, that it produces its effect; and though a
flue of plate iron sufficiently high might be raised in a very lofty
room, the management to prevent all disagreeable vapour would be too
nice for common practice, and small errors would have unpleasing
consequences.

It is certain that clean iron yields no offensive smell when heated.
Whatever of that kind you perceive, where there are iron stoves,
proceeds therefore from some foulness burning or fuming on their
surface. They should therefore never be spit upon, or greased, nor
should any dust be suffered to lie upon them. But as the greatest
care will not always prevent these things, it is well once a week
to wash the stove with soap lees and a brush, rinsing it with clean
water.


_The Advantages of this Stove._

1. The chimney does not grow foul, nor ever need sweeping; for as no
smoke enters it, no soot can form in it.

2. The air heated over common fires instantly quits the room and
goes up the chimney with the smoke; but in the stove, it is obliged
to descend in flame and pass through the long winding horizontal
passages, communicating its heat to a body of iron plate, which,
having thus time to receive the heat, communicates the same to the
air of the room, and thereby warms it to a greater degree.

3. The whole of the fuel is consumed by being turned into flame, and
you have the benefit of its heat, whereas in common chimneys a great
part goes away in smoke which you see as it rises, but it affords
you no rays of warmth. One may obtain some notion of the quantity of
fuel thus wasted in smoke, by reflecting on the quantity of soot that
a few weeks firing will lodge against the sides of the chimney, and
yet this is formed only of those particles of the column of smoke
that happen to touch the sides in its ascent. How much more must have
passed off in the air? And we know that this soot is still fuel;
for it will burn and flame as such, and when hard caked together is
indeed very like and almost as solid as the coal it proceeds from.
The destruction of your fuel goes on nearly in the same quantity
whether in smoke or in flame: but there is no comparison in the
difference of heat given. Observe when fresh coals are first put on
your fire, what a body of smoke arises. This smoke is for a long
time too cold to take flame. If you then plunge a burning candle
into it, the candle instead of inflaming the smoke will instantly be
itself extinguished. Smoke must have a certain degree of heat to be
inflammable. As soon as it has acquired that degree, the approach of
a candle will inflame the whole body, and you will be very sensible
of the difference of the heat it gives. A still easier experiment
may be made with the candle itself. Hold your hand near the side of
its flame, and observe the heat it gives; then blow it out, the hand
remaining in the same place, and observe what heat may be given by
the smoke that rises from the still burning snuff. You will find it
very little. And yet that smoke has in it the substance of so much
flame, and will instantly produce it, if you hold another candle
above it so as to kindle it. Now the smoke from the fresh coals laid
on this stove, instead of ascending and leaving the fire while too
cold to burn, being obliged to descend through the burning coals,
receives among them that degree of heat which converts it into flame,
and the heat of that flame is communicated to the air of the room, as
above explained.

4. The flame from the fresh coals laid on in this stove, descending
through the coals already ignited, preserves them long from
consuming, and continues them in the state of red coals as long as
the flame continues that surrounds them, by which means the fires
made in this stove are of much longer duration than in any other,
and fewer coals are therefore necessary for a day. This is a very
material advantage indeed. That flame should be a kind of pickle, to
preserve burning coals from consuming, may seem a paradox to many,
and very unlikely to be true, as it appeared to me the first time
I observed the fact. I must therefore relate the circumstances,
and shall mention an easy experiment, by which my reader may be in
possession of every thing necessary to the understanding of it. In
the first trial I made of this kind of stove, which was constructed
of thin plate iron, I had instead of the vase a kind of inverted
pyramid like a mill-hopper; and fearing at first that the small
grate contained in it might be clogged by cinders, and the passage
of the flame sometimes obstructed, I ordered a little door near the
grate, by means of which I might on occasion clear it: though after
the stove was made, and before I tried it, I began to think this
precaution superfluous, from an imagination, that the flame being
contracted in the narrow part where the grate was placed, would be
more powerful in consuming what it should there meet with, and that
any cinders between or near the bars would be presently destroyed
and the passage opened. After the stove was fixed and in action, I
had a pleasure now and then in opening that door a little, to see
through the crevice how the flame descended among the red coals,
and observing once a single coal lodged on the bars in the middle
of the focus, a fancy took me to observe by my watch in how short a
time it would be consumed. I looked at it long without perceiving
it to be at all diminished, which surprised me greatly. At length
it occurred to me, that I and many others had seen the same thing
thousands of times, in the conservation of the red coal formed in
the snuff of a burning candle, which while envelloped in flame, and
thereby prevented from the contact of passing air, is long continued
and augments instead of diminishing, so that we are often obliged
to remove it by the snuffers, or bend it out of the flame into the
air, where it consumes presently to ashes. I then supposed, that to
consume a body by fire, passing air was necessary to receive and
carry off the separated particles of the body: and that the air
passing in the flame of my stove, and in the flame of a candle,
being already saturated with such particles, could not receive more,
and therefore left the coal undiminished as long as the outward air
was prevented from coming to it by the surrounding flame, which
kept it in a situation somewhat like that of charcoal in a well
luted crucible, which, though long kept in a strong fire, comes out
unconsumed.

An easy experiment will satisfy any one of this conserving power of
flame envelloping red coal. Take a small stick of deal or other wood
the size of a goose quill, and hold it horizontally and steadily in
the flame of the candle above the wick, without touching it, but in
the body of the flame. The wood will first be inflamed, and burn
beyond the edge of the flame of the candle, perhaps a quarter of an
inch. When the flame of the wood goes out, it will leave a red coal
at the end of the stick, part of which will be in the flame of the
candle and part out in the air. In a minute or two you will perceive
the coal in the air diminish gradually, so as to form a neck; while
the part in the flame continues of its first size, and at length the
neck being quite consumed it drops off; and by rolling it between
your fingers when extinguished you will find it still a solid coal.

However, as one cannot be always putting on fresh fuel in this stove
to furnish a continual flame as is done in a candle, the air in the
intervals of time gets at the red coals and consumes them. Yet the
conservation while it lasted, so much delayed the consumption of the
coals, that two fires, one made in the morning, and the other in the
afternoon, each made by only a hatfull of coals, were sufficient to
keep my writing room, about sixteen feet square and ten high, warm a
whole day. The fire kindled at seven in the morning would burn till
noon; and all the iron of the machine with the walls of the niche
being thereby heated, the room kept warm till evening, when another
smaller fire kindled kept it warm till midnight.

Instead of the sliding plate E, which shuts the front of the box C,
I sometimes used another which had a pane of glass, or, which is
better, of Muscovy talc, that the flame might be seen descending
from the bottom of the vase and passing in a column through the box
C, into the cavities of the bottom plate, like water falling from a
funnel, admirable to such as are not acquainted with the nature of
the machine, and in itself a pleasing spectacle.

Every utensil, however properly contrived to serve its purpose,
requires some practice before it can be used adroitly. Put into the
hands of a man for the first time a gimblet or a hammer (very simple
instruments) and tell him the use of them, he shall neither bore a
hole or drive a nail with the dexterity and success of another who
has been accustomed to handle them. The beginner therefore in the
use of this machine will do well not to be discouraged with little
accidents that may arise at first from his want of experience.
Being somewhat complex, it requires as already said a variety of
attentions; habit will render them unnecessary. And the studious man
who is much in his chamber, and has a pleasure in managing his own
fire, will soon find this a machine most comfortable and delightful.
To others who leave their fires to the care of ignorant servants, I
do not recommend it. They will with difficulty acquire the knowledge
necessary, and will make frequent blunders that will fill your
room with smoke. It is therefore by no means fit for common use in
families. It may be adviseable to begin with the flaming kind of
stone coal, which is large, and, not caking together, is not so apt
to clog the grate. After some experience, any kind of coal may be
used, and with this advantage, that no smell, even from the most
sulphurous kind can come into your room, the current of air being
constantly into the vase, where too that smell is all consumed.

The vase form was chosen as being elegant in itself, and very
proper for burning of coals: where wood is the usual fuel, and
must be burned in pieces of some length, a long square chest may
be substituted, in which A is the cover opening by a hinge behind,
B the grate, C the hearth-box with its divisions as in the other,
D the plan of the chest, E the long narrow grate. (Plate, Figure
17.) This I have not tried, but the vase machine was completed in
1771, and used by me in London three winters, and one afterwards in
America, much to my satisfaction; and I have not yet thought of any
improvement it may be capable of, though such may occur to others.
For common use, while in France, I have contrived another grate
for coals, which has in part the same property of burning the smoke
and preserving the red coals longer by the flame, though not so
completely as in the vase, yet sufficiently to be very useful, which
I shall now describe as follows.

A, is a round grate, one foot (French) in diameter, and eight inches
deep between the bars and the back; (Plate, Figure 18.) the sides
and back of plate iron; the sides having holes of half an inch
diameter distant three or four inches from each other, to let in air
for enlivening the fire. The back without holes. The sides do not
meet at top nor at bottom by eight inches: that square is filled by
grates of small bars crossing front to back to let in air below,
and let out the smoke or flame above. The three middle bars of the
front grate are fixed, the upper and lower may be taken out and put
in at pleasure, when hot, with a pair of pincers. This round grate
turns upon, an axis, supported by the crotchet B, the stem of which
is an inverted conical tube five inches deep, which comes on as many
inches upon a pin that fits it, and which is fixed upright in cast
iron plate D, that lies upon the hearth; in the middle of the top and
bottom grates are fixed small upright pieces E E about an inch high,
which as the whole is turned on its axis stop it when the grate is
perpendicular. Figure 19 is another view of the same machine.

In making the first fire in a morning with this grate, there is
nothing particular to be observed. It is made as in other grates,
the coals being put in above, after taking out the upper bar, and
replacing it when they are in. The round figure of the fire when
thoroughly kindled is agreeable, it represents the great giver of
warmth to our system. As it burns down and leaves a vacancy above,
which you would fill with fresh coals, the upper bar is to be taken
out, and afterwards replaced. The fresh coals, while the grate
continues in the same position, will throw up as usual a body of
thick smoke. But every one accustomed to coal fires in common grates
must have observed, that pieces of fresh coal stuck in below among
the red coals have their smoke so heated as that it becomes flame
as fast as it is produced, which flame rises among the coals and
enlivens the appearance of the fire. Here then is the use of this
swivel grate. By a push with your tongs or poker, you turn it on
its pin till it faces the back of the chimney, then turn it over on
its axis gently till it again faces the room, whereby all the fresh
coals will be found under the live coals, and the greater part of the
smoke arising from the fresh coals will in its passage through the
live ones be heated so as to be converted into flame: whence you have
much more heat from them, and your red coals are longer preserved
from consuming. I conceive this construction, though not so complete
a consumer of all the smoke as the vase, yet to be fitter for common
use, and very advantageous. It gives too a full sight of the fire,
always a pleasing object, which we have not in the other. It may
with a touch be turned more or less from any one of the company that
desires to have less of its heat, or presented full to one just come
out of the cold. And supported in a horizontal position, a tea-kettle
may be boiled on it.

The author's description of his Pensylvania fireplace, first
published in 1744, having fallen into the hands of workmen in Europe,
who did not, it seems, well comprehend the principles of that
machine, it was much disfigured in their imitations of it; and one
of its main intentions, that of admitting a sufficient quantity of
fresh air warmed in entering through the air-box, nearly defeated,
by a pretended improvement, in lessening its passages to make more
room for coals in a grate. On pretence of such improvements, they
obtained patents for the invention, and for a while made great profit
by the sale, till the public became sensible of that defect, in the
expected operation. If the same thing should be attempted with this
vase stove, it will be well for the buyer to examine thoroughly
such pretended improvements, lest, being the mere productions of
ignorance, they diminish or defeat the advantages of the machine, and
produce inconvenience and disappointment.

The method of burning smoke, by obliging it to descend through hot
coals, may be of great use in heating the walls of a hot-house. In
the common way, the horizontal passages or flues that are made to go
and return in those walls, lose a great deal of their effect when
they come to be foul with soot; for a thick blanket-like lining of
soot prevents much of the hot air from touching and heating the brick
work in its passage, so that more fire must be made as the flue grows
fouler: but by burning the smoke they are kept always clean. The same
method may also be of great advantage to those businesses in which
large coppers or caldrons are to be heated.

  _Written at Sea, 1785._

FOOTNOTE:

[60] From the Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, in
which it was read January 28, 1786. _Editor._




TO MISS STEPHENSON.

  _Method of Contracting Chimneys. Modesty in Disputation._


  _Craven-Street, Saturday Evening, past 10._

The question you ask me is a very sensible one, and I shall be
glad if I can give you a satisfactory answer. There are two ways
of contracting a chimney; one, by contracting the opening _before_
the fire; the other, by contracting the funnel _above_ the fire.
If the funnel above the fire is left open in its full dimensions,
and the opening before the fire is contracted; then the coals, I
imagine, will burn faster, because more air is directed through the
fire, and in a stronger stream; that air which before passed over
it, and on each side of it, now passing _through_ it. This is seen
in narrow stove chimneys, when a sacheverell or blower is used,
which still more contracts the narrow opening.--But if the funnel
only _above_ the fire is contracted, then, as a less stream of air
is passing up the chimney, less must pass through the fire, and
consequently it should seem that the consuming of the coals would
rather be checked than augmented by such contraction. And this will
also be the case, when both the opening _before_ the fire, and the
funnel _above_ the fire are contracted, provided the funnel above
the fire is more contracted in proportion than the opening before
the fire.--So you see I think you had the best of the argument; and
as you notwithstanding gave it up in complaisance to the company, I
think you had also the best of the dispute. There are few, though
convinced, that know how to give up, even an error, they have been
once engaged in maintaining; there is therefore the more merit in
dropping a contest where one thinks one's self right; it is at least
respectful to those we converse with. And indeed all our knowledge
is so imperfect, and we are from a thousand causes so perpetually
subject to mistake and error, that positiveness can scarce ever
become even the most knowing; and modesty in advancing any opinion,
however plain and true we may suppose it, is always decent, and
generally more likely to procure assent. Pope's rule

    To speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence,

is therefore a good one; and if I had ever seen in your conversation
the least deviation from it, I should earnestly recommend it to your
observation.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MICHAEL HILLEGRAS ESQ.

  _Respecting covering Houses with Copper.[61]_


  _London, March 17, 1770._

  DEAR SIR,

I received your favour of November 25, and have made enquiries, as
you desired, concerning the copper covering of houses. It has been
used here in a few instances only, and the practice does not seem to
gain ground. The copper is about the thickness of a common playing
card, and though a dearer metal than lead, I am told, that, as less
weight serves, on account of its being so much thinner, and as
slighter woodwork in the roof is sufficient to support it, the roof
is not dearer on the whole, than one covered with lead. It is said,
that hail and rain make a disagreeable drumming noise on copper; but
this I suppose is rather fancy; for the plates being fastened on
the rafters, must, in a great measure, deaden such sound. The first
cost, whatever it is, will be all, as a copper covering must last for
ages; and when the house decays, the plates will still have intrinsic
worth. In Russia, I am informed many houses are covered with plates
of iron tinned, such as our tin pots and other vases are made of,
laid on over the edges of one another like tiles; and which, it is
said, last very long, the tin preserving the iron from much decay by
rusting. In France and the Low Countries, I have seen many spouts or
pipes for conveying the water down from the roofs of houses, made of
the same kind of tin plates soldered together; and they seem to stand
very well.

  With sincere regard, I am,

  Yours, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[61] The two following letters, and the accompanying paper, appeared
in several periodical publications, both English and American, many
years before the death of Franklin, which is sufficient to give them
authenticity. _Editor._




TO SAMUEL RHOADS, ESQ.

  _On the same Subject._


  _London, June 26, 1770._

  DEAR FRIEND,

It is a long time since I had the pleasure of hearing from you
directly. Mrs. Franklin has indeed now and then acquainted me of your
welfare, which I am always glad to hear of. It is, I fear, partly,
if not altogether, my fault, that our correspondence has not been
regularly continued. One thing I am sure of, that it has been from no
want of regard on either side, but rather from too much business, and
avocations of various kinds, and my having little of importance to
communicate.

One of our good citizens, Mr. Hillegras, anxious for the future
safety of our town, wrote to me some time since, desiring I would
enquire concerning the covering of our houses here with copper. I
sent him the best information I could then obtain, but have since
received the inclosed from an ingenious friend, who is what they call
here a civil engineer. I should be glad you would peruse it, think of
the matter a little and give me your sentiments of it. When you have
done with the paper, please to give it to Mr. Hillegras. I am told
by Lord Despencer, who has covered a long piazza, or gallery, with
copper, that the expence is charged in this account too high, for his
cost but one shilling and ten-pence per foot, all charges included.
I suppose his copper must have been thinner. And, indeed, it is so
strong a metal, that I think it may well be used very thin.

It appears to me of great importance, to build our dwelling houses,
if we can, in a manner more secure from danger by fire. We scarcely
ever hear of fire in Paris. When I was there I took particular notice
of the construction of their houses, and I did not see how one of
them could well be burnt, the roofs are slate or tile, the walls are
stone, the walls generally lined with stucco or plaster, instead of
wainscot, the floors of stucco, or of six square tiles painted brown,
or of flag stone, or of marble; if any floors were of wood, it was of
oak wood, which is not so inflammable as pine. Carpets prevent the
coldness of stone or brick floors offending the feet in winter, and
the noise of treading on such floors, overhead, is less inconvenient
than on boards. The stairs too, at Paris, are either stone or brick,
with only a wooden edge or corner for the step; so that on the whole,
though the Parisians commonly burn wood in their chimneys, a more
dangerous kind of fuel than that used here, yet their houses escape
extremely well, as there is little in a room that can be consumed
by fire except the furniture: whereas in London, perhaps scarcely a
year passes in which half a million of property and many lives are
not lost by this destructive element. Of late, indeed, they begin
here to leave off wainscoting their rooms, and instead of it cover
the walls with stucco, often formed into pannels like wainscot,
which being painted, is very strong and warm. Stone staircases too,
with iron rails, grow more and more into fashion here: but stone
steps cannot, in some circumstances, be fixed; and there, methinks,
oak is safer than pine; and I assure you, that in many genteel
houses here, both old and new, the stairs and floors are oak, and
look extremely well. Perhaps solid oak for the steps would be still
safer than boards; and two steps might be cut diagonally out of one
piece. Excuse my talking to you on a subject with which you must
be so much better acquainted than I am. It is partly to make out a
letter, and partly in hope, that, by turning your attention to the
point, some methods of greater security in our future building may be
thought of and promoted by you, whose judgment I know has deservedly
great weight with our fellow-citizens. For though our town has not
hitherto suffered very greatly by fire, yet I am apprehensive, that
some time or other, by a concurrence of unlucky circumstances, such
as dry weather, hard frost, and high winds, a fire then happening
may suddenly spread far and wide over our cedar roofs, and do us an
immense mischief. I am,

  Yours, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Paper referred to in the preceding Letter._

The carpentry of the roof being formed with its proper descents,
is, in the first place, sheeted or covered with deals, nailed
horizontally upon the rafters, after the same manner as when intended
to be covered with lead. The sheets of the copper for this covering
are two feet by four, and for covering the slopes of the roof are
cast so thin, as to weigh eight or nine pounds, and for covering the
flats or gutters, ten or eleven pounds each, or about one pound, or a
pound and a quarter, to the superficial foot.

A string of strong cartridge paper (over-lapping a little at its
joints) is regularly tacked down upon the sheeting, under the copper
covering, as the work proceeds from eaves to ridge. It prevents the
jingling sound of hail or rain falling upon the roof, and answers
another purpose to be mentioned by-and-by.

In order to shew the regular process of laying down the roof, we must
begin with fastening two sheets together lengthwise. The edges of two
sheets are laid down so as to lap or cover each other an inch, and a
slip of the same copper, about three and a half inches broad, called
the reeve, is introduced between them. Four oblong holes, or slits,
are then cut or punched through the whole, and they are fastened or
riveted together by copper nails, with small round shanks and flat
heads. Indents are then cut 1¾ inch deep upon the seam at top and
bottom. The right hand sheet and the reeve are then folded back to
the left. The reeve is then folded to the right, and the sheets being
laid on the roof in their place, it is nailed down to the sheeting
with flat-headed short copper nails. The right hand sheet is then
folded over the reeve to the right, and the whole beat down flat
upon the cartridge paper covering the sheeting, and thus they are
fastened and laid in their places, by nailing down the reeve only;
and by reason of the oblong holes through them and the reeve, have a
little liberty to expand or contract with the heat and cold, without
raising themselves up from the sheeting, or tearing themselves or
the fastening to pieces. Two other sheets are then fixed together,
according to the first and second operations above, and their seam,
with the reeve, introduced under the upper ends of the seam of the
former, so as to cover down about two inches upon the upper ends
of the former sheets: and so far the cartridge paper is allowed
to cover the two first sheets. This edge of the paper is dipped in
oil, or in turpentine, so far before its application, and thus a
body between the sheets is formed impenetrable to wet, and the reeve
belonging to the two last sheets is nailed down to the sheeting as
before, and the left hand sheet is turned down to the right. Four
sheets are now laid down, with the seam or joint rising to the ridge;
and thus the work is continued, both vertically and horizontally,
till the roof be covered, the sides and ends of each sheet being
alternately each way, undermost and uppermost.

The price for copper, nails, and workmanship, runs at about eight
pounds ten shillings per hundred weight, or two shillings and
three-pence per foot, superficial, exclusive of the lappings; and
about two shillings and eight-pence per foot upon the whole; which
is rather above half as much more as the price of doing it well with
lead.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. AT LONDON.

  _Magical Square of Squares._


  SIR,

According to your request I now send you the arithmetical curiosity,
of which this is the history.

Being one day in the country, at the house of our common friend, the
late learned Mr. Logan, he showed me a folio French book filled with
magic squares, wrote, if I forget not, by one M. Frenicle, in which
he said the author had discovered great ingenuity and dexterity in
the management of numbers; and though several other foreigners had
distinguished themselves in the same way, he did not recollect that
any one Englishman had done any thing of the kind remarkable.

I said, it was, perhaps, a mark of the good sense of our English
mathematicians, that they would not spend their time in things that
were merely _difficiles nugæ_, incapable of any useful application.
He answered, that many of the arithmetical or mathematical questions,
publicly proposed and answered in England, were equally trifling and
useless. Perhaps the considering and answering such questions, I
replied, may not be altogether useless, if it produces by practice an
habitual readiness and exactness in mathematical disquisitions, which
readiness may, on many occasions, be of real use. In the same way,
says he, may the making of these squares be of use. I then confessed
to him, that in my younger days, having once some leisure (which I
still think I might have employed more usefully) I had amused myself
in making these kind of magic squares, and, at length, had acquired
such a knack at it, that I could fill the cells of any magic square
of reasonable size, with a series of numbers as fast as I could
write them, disposed in such a manner as that the sums of every row,
horizontal, perpendicular, or diagonal, should be equal; but not
being satisfied with these, which I looked on as common and easy
things, I had imposed on myself more difficult tasks, and succeeded
in making other magic squares, with a variety of properties, and
much more curious. He then shewed me several in the same book, of an
uncommon and more curious kind; but as I thought none of them equal
to some I remembered to have made, he desired me to let him see
them; and accordingly, the next time I visited him, I carried him a
square of 8, which I found among my old papers, and which I will now
give you, with an account of its properties. (_See Plate_ V. Fig. 3.)

The properties are,

1. That every strait row (horizontal or vertical) of 8 numbers added
together makes 260, and half each row half 260.

2. That the bent row of 8 numbers, ascending and descending
diagonally, viz. from 16 ascending to 10, and from 23 descending
to 17; and every one of its parallel bent rows of 8 numbers make
260.--Also the bent row from 52 descending to 54, and from 43
ascending to 45; and every one of its parallel bent rows of 8 numbers
make 260.--Also the bent row from 45 to 43, descending to the left,
and from 23 to 17, descending to the right, and every one of its
parallel bent rows of 8 numbers, make 260.--Also the bent row from
52 to 54, descending to the right, and from 10 to 16, descending to
the left, and every one of its parallel bent rows of 8 numbers make
260.--Also the parallel bent rows next to the above-mentioned, which
are shortened to 3 numbers ascending, and 3 descending, &c. as from
53 to 4 ascending, and from 29 to 44 descending, make, with the two
corner numbers, 260.--Also the 2 numbers 14, 61 ascending, and 36,
19 descending, with the lower 4 numbers situated like them, viz. 50,
1, descending, and 32, 47, ascending, make 260.--And, lastly, the 4
corner numbers, with the 4 middle numbers, make 260.

[Illustration:

  _Plate XI._      _Vol. II. page 327._

_A Magic Square of Squares._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

So this magical square seems perfect in its kind. But these are not
all its properties; there are 5 other curious ones, which, at some
other time, I will explain to you.

Mr. Logan then shewed me an old arithmetical book, in quarto, wrote,
I think, by one Stifelius, which contained a square of 16, that he
said he should imagine must have been a work of great labour; but if
I forget not, it had only the common properties of making the same
sum, viz. 2056, in every row, horizontal, vertical, and diagonal.
Not willing to be out-done by Mr. Stifelius, even in the size of my
square, I went home, and made, that evening, the following magical
square of 16, which, besides having all the properties of the
foregoing square of 8, _i. e._ it would make the 2056 in all the same
rows and diagonals, had this added, that a four-square hole being cut
in a piece of paper of such a size as to take in and show through it
just 16 of the little squares, when laid on the greater square, the
sum of the 16 numbers so appearing through the hole, wherever it was
placed on the greater square, should likewise make 2056. This I sent
to our friend the next morning, who, after some days, sent it back
in a letter with these words: "I return to thee thy astonishing or
most stupendous piece of the magical square, in which----" but the
compliment is too extravagant, and therefore, for his sake, as well
as my own, I ought not to repeat it. Nor is it necessary; for I make
no question but you will readily allow this square of 16 to be the
most magically magical of any magic square ever made by any magician.
(_See the Plate._)

I did not, however, end with squares, but composed also a magic
circle, consisting of 8 concentric circles, and 8 radial rows, filled
with a series of numbers from 12 to 75 inclusive, so disposed as that
the numbers of each circle, or each radial row, being added to the
central number 12, they make exactly 360, the number of degrees in
a circle; and this circle had, moreover, all the properties of the
square of 8. If you desire it, I will send it; but at present, I
believe, you have enough on this subject. I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THE SAME.

  _Magical Circle._


  SIR,

I am glad the perusal of the magical squares afforded you any
amusement. I now send you the magical circle. (_See Plate_ XII.)

Its properties, besides those mentioned in my former, are these.

Half the number in any radial row, added with half the central
number, make 180, equal to the number of degrees in a semi-circle.

Also half the numbers in any one of the concentric circles, taken
either above or below the horizontal double line, with half the
central number, make 180.

And if any four adjoining numbers, standing nearly in a square, be
taken from any part, and added with half the central number, they
make 180.

[Illustration:

  _Plate XII._       _Vol. II. page 328._

A MAGIC CIRCLE OF CIRCLES.

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

There are, moreover, included four other sets of circular spaces,
excentric with respect to the first, each of these sets containing
five spaces. The centres of the circles that bound them, are at A, B,
C, and D. Each set, for the more easy distinguishing them from the
first, are drawn with a different coloured ink, red, blue, green,
and yellow.[62]

These sets of excentric circular spaces intersect those of the
concentric, and each other; and yet the numbers contained in each of
the twenty excentric spaces, taken all around, make, with the central
number, the same sum as those in each of the 8 concentric, viz. 360.
The halves, also of those drawn from the centres A and C, taken above
or below the double horizontal line, and of those drawn from centres
B and D, taken to the right or left of the vertical line, do, with
half the central number, make just 180.

It may be observed, that there is not one of the numbers but what
belongs at least to two of the different circular spaces; some to
three, some to four, some to five; and yet they are all so placed as
never to break the required number 360, in any of the 28 circular
spaces within the primitive circle.

These interwoven circles make so perplexed an appearance, that it
is not easy for the eye to trace every circle of numbers one would
examine, through all the maze of circles intersected by it; but if
you fix one foot of the compasses in either of the centres, and
extend the other to any number in the circle you would examine
belonging to that centre, the moving foot will point the others out,
by passing round over all the numbers of that circle successively. I
am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[62] In the plate they are distinguished by dashed or dotted lines,
as different as the engraver could well make them.




TO THE REV. FATHER BECCARIA.

  _Describing a new musical Instrument composed of Glasses._


  _London, July 13, 1762._

  REV. SIR,

I once promised myself the pleasure of seeing you at Turin, but as
that is not now likely to happen, being just about returning to my
native country, America, I sit down to take leave of you (among
others of my European friends that I cannot see) by writing.

I thank you for the honourable mention you have so frequently made
of me in your letters to Mr. Collinson and others, for the generous
defence you undertook and executed with so much success, of my
electrical opinions; and for the valuable present you have made me
of your new work, from which I have received great information and
pleasure. I wish I could in return entertain you with any thing new
of mine on that subject; but I have not lately pursued it. Nor do I
know of any one here that is at present much engaged in it.

Perhaps, however, it may be agreeable to you, as you live in a
musical country, to have an account of the new instrument lately
added here to the great number that charming science was before
possessed of.--As it is an instrument that seems peculiarly adapted
to Italian music, especially that of the soft and plaintive kind,
I will endeavour to give you such a description of it, and of the
manner of constructing it, that you or any of your friends, may
be enabled to imitate it, if you incline so to do, without being
at the expence and trouble of the many experiments I have made in
endeavouring to bring it to its present perfection.

You have doubtless heard the sweet tone that is drawn from a drinking
glass, by passing a wet finger round its brim. One Mr. Puckeridge, a
gentleman from Ireland, was the first who thought of playing tunes,
formed of these tones. He collected a number of glasses of different
sizes, fixed them near each other on a table, and tuned them by
putting into them water more or less, as each note required. The
tones were brought out by passing his fingers round their brims.--He
was unfortunately burned here, with his instrument, in a fire which
consumed the house he lived in. Mr. E. Delaval, a most ingenious
member of our Royal Society, made one in imitation of it, with a
better choice and form of glasses, which was the first I saw or
heard. Being charmed with the sweetness of its tones, and the music
he produced from it, I wished only to see the glasses disposed in a
more convenient form, and brought together in a narrower compass, so
as to admit of a greater number of tones, and all within reach of
hand to a person sitting before the instrument, which I accomplished,
after various intermediate trials, and less commodious forms, both of
glasses and construction, in the following manner.

[Illustration: (hemispherical glass vessel)]

The glasses are blown as near as possible in the form of hemispheres,
having each an open neck or socket in the middle. The thickness of
the glass near the brim about a tenth of an inch, or hardly quite so
much, but thicker as it comes nearer the neck, which in the largest
glasses is about an inch deep, and an inch and half wide within,
these dimensions lessening as the glasses themselves diminish in
size, except that the neck of the smallest ought not to be shorter
than half an inch.--The largest glass is nine inches diameter, and
the smallest three inches. Between these three are twenty-three
different sizes, differing from each other a quarter of an inch in
diameter.--To make a single instrument there should be at least six
glasses blown of each size; and out of this number one may probably
pick thirty-seven glasses (which are sufficient for three octaves
with all the semitones) that will be each either the note one wants
or a little sharper than that note, and all fitting so well into each
other as to taper pretty regularly from the largest to the smallest.
It is true there are not thirty-seven sizes, but it often happens
that two of the same size differ a note or half note in tone, by
reason of a difference in thickness, and these may be placed one in
the other without sensibly hurting the regularity of the taper form.

The glasses being chosen, and every one marked with a diamond the
note you intend it for, they are to be tuned by diminishing the
thickness of those that are too sharp. This is done by grinding them
round from the neck towards the brim, the breadth of one or two
inches, as may be required; often trying the glass by a well tuned
harpsichord, comparing the tone drawn from the glass by your finger,
with the note you want, as sounded by that string of the harpsichord.
When you come nearer the matter, be careful to wipe the glass clean
and dry before each trial, because the tone is something flatter when
the glass is wet, than it will be when dry;--and grinding a very
little between each trial, you will thereby tune to great exactness.
The more care is necessary in this, because if you go below your
required tone, there is no sharpening it again but by grinding
somewhat off the brim, which will afterwards require polishing, and
thus increase the trouble.

The glasses being thus tuned, you are to be provided with a case
for them, and a spindle on which they are to be fixed. My case is
about three feet long, eleven inches every way wide within at the
biggest end, and five inches at the smallest end; for it tapers all
the way, to adapt it better to the conical figure of the set of
glasses. This case opens in the middle of its height, and the upper
part turns up by hinges fixed behind. The spindle, which is of hard
iron, lies horizontally from end to end of the box within, exactly
in the middle, and is made to turn on brass gudgeons at each end.
It is round, an inch diameter at the thickest end, and tapering to
a quarter of an inch at the smallest.--A square shank comes from
its thickest end through the box, on which shank a wheel is fixed
by a screw. This wheel serves as a fly to make the motion equable,
when the spindle, with the glasses, is turned by the foot like a
spinning-wheel. My wheel is of mahogany, eighteen inches diameter,
and pretty thick, so as to conceal near its circumference about 25lb
of lead.--An ivory pin is fixed in the face of this wheel, and about
four inches from the axis. Over the neck of this pin is put the loop
of the string that comes up from the moveable step to give it motion.
The case stands on a neat frame with four legs.

To fix the glasses on the spindle, a cork is first to be fitted in
each neck pretty tight, and projecting a little without the neck,
that the neck of one may not touch the inside of another when put
together, for that would make a jarring.--These corks are to be
perforated with holes of different diameters, so as to suit that
part of the spindle on which they are to be fixed. When a glass is
put on, by holding it stiffly between both hands, while another turns
the spindle, it may be gradually brought to its place. But care must
be taken that the hole be not too small, lest in forcing it up the
neck should split; nor too large, lest the glass not being firmly
fixed should turn or move on the spindle, so as to touch and jar
against its neighbouring glass. The glasses thus are placed one in
another, the largest on the biggest end of the spindle which is to
the left hand; the neck of this glass is towards the wheel, and the
next goes into it in the same position, only about an inch of its
brim appearing beyond the brim of the first; thus proceeding, every
glass when fixed shews about an inch of its brim (or three quarters
of an inch, or half an inch, as they grow smaller) beyond the brim
of the glass that contains it; and it is from these exposed parts of
each glass that the tone is drawn, by laying a finger upon one of
them as the spindle and glasses turn round.

My largest glass is G, a little below the reach of a common voice,
and my highest G, including three compleat octaves.--To distinguish
the glasses the more readily to the eye, I have painted the apparent
parts of the glasses within side, every semitone white, and the other
notes of the octave with the seven prismatic colours, _viz._ C, red;
D, orange; E, yellow; F, green; G, blue; A, indigo; B, purple; and C,
red again;--so that glasses of the same colour (the white excepted)
are always octaves to each other.

This instrument is played upon, by sitting before the middle of the
set of glasses as before the keys of a harpsichord, turning them
with the foot, and wetting them now and then with a spunge and clean
water. The fingers should be first a little soaked in water, and
quite free from all greasiness; a little fine chalk upon them is
sometimes useful, to make them catch the glass and bring out the tone
more readily. Both hands are used, by which means different parts are
played together.--Observe, that the tones are best drawn out when the
glasses turn _from_ the ends of the fingers, not when they turn _to_
them.

The advantages of this instrument are, that its tones are
incomparably sweet beyond those of any other; that they may be
swelled and softened at pleasure by stronger or weaker pressures of
the finger, and continued to any length; and that the instrument,
being once well tuned, never again wants tuning.

In honour of your musical language, I have borrowed from it the name
of this instrument, calling it the Armonica.

  With great esteem and respect, I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO A FRIEND[63].

  _Respecting the best Mediums for conveying Sound._


  _July 20, 1762._

  DEAR SIR,

I have perused your paper on sound, and would freely mention to
you, as you desire it, every thing that appeared to me to need
correction:--But nothing of that kind occurs to me, unless it be,
where you speak of the air as "the _best_ medium for conveying
sound." Perhaps this is speaking rather too positively, if there be,
as I think there are, some other mediums that will convey it farther
and more readily.--It is a well-known experiment, that the scratching
of a pin at one end of a long piece of timber, may be heard by an
ear applied near the other end, though it could not be heard at the
same distance through the air.--And two stones being struck smartly
together under water, the stroke may be heard at a greater distance
by an ear also placed under water, than it can be heard through the
air. I think I have heard it near a mile; how much farther it may be
heard I know not; but suppose a great deal farther, because the sound
did not seem faint, as if at a distance, like distant sounds through
air, but smart and strong, and as if present just at the ear.--I wish
you would repeat these experiments now you are upon the subject, and
add your own observations.--And if you were to repeat, with your
naturally exact attention and observation, the common experiment of
the bell in the exhausted receiver, possibly something new may occur
to you, in considering,

1. Whether the experiment is not ambiguous; _i. e._ whether the
gradual exhausting of the air, as it creates an increasing difference
of pressure on the outside, may not occasion in the glass a
difficulty of vibrating, that renders it less fit to communicate to
the air without, the vibrations that strike it from within; and the
diminution of the sound arise from this cause, rather than from the
diminution of the air?

2. Whether, as the particles of air themselves are at a distance
from each other, there must not be some medium between them, proper
for conveying sound, since otherwise it would stop at the first
particle?

3. Whether the great difference we experience in hearing sounds at
a distance, when the wind blows towards us from the sonorous body,
or towards that from us, can be well accounted for by adding to or
subtracting from the swiftness of sound, the degree of swiftness that
is in the wind at the time? The latter is so small in proportion,
that it seems as if it could scarce produce any sensible effect,
and yet the difference is very great. Does not this give some hint,
as if there might be a subtle fluid, the conductor of sound, which
moves at different times in different directions over the surface of
the earth, and whose motion may perhaps be much swifter than that of
the air in our strongest winds; and that in passing through air, it
may communicate that motion to the air which we call wind, though a
motion in no degree so swift as its own?

4. It is somewhere related, that a pistol fired on the top of an
exceeding high mountain, made a noise like thunder in the valleys
below. Perhaps this fact is not exactly related: but if it is, would
not one imagine from it, that the rarer the air, the greater sound
might be produced in it from the same cause?

5. Those balls of fire which are sometimes seen passing over a
country, computed by philosophers to be often thirty miles high at
least, sometimes burst at that height; the air must be exceeding rare
there, and yet the explosion produces a sound that is heard at that
distance, and for seventy miles round on the surface of the earth,
so violent too as to shake buildings, and give an apprehension of an
earthquake. Does not this look as if a rare atmosphere, almost a
vacuum, was no bad conductor of sound?

I have not made up my own mind on these points, and only mention them
for your consideration, knowing that every subject is the better for
your handling it.

  With the greatest esteem, I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[63] Mr. Oliver Neave. _Editor._




TO LORD KAIMS, AT EDINBURGH.

  _On the Harmony and Melody of the old Scotch Tunes._


  _June 2, 1765._

**** In my passage to America I read your excellent work, the
_Elements of Criticism_, in which I found great entertainment. I
only wished you had examined more fully the subject of music, and
demonstrated that the pleasure artists feel in hearing much of that
composed in the modern taste, is not the natural pleasure arising
from melody or harmony of sounds, but of the same kind with the
pleasure we feel on seeing the surprising feats of tumblers and
rope-dancers, who execute difficult things. For my part I take this
to be really the case, and suppose it the reason why those who
are unpractised in music, and therefore unacquainted with those
difficulties, have little or no pleasure in hearing this music. Many
pieces of it are mere compositions of tricks. I have sometimes, at a
concert, attended by a common audience, placed myself so as to see
all their faces, and observed no signs of pleasure in them during
the performance of a great part that was admired by the performers
themselves; while a plain old Scotch tune, which they disdained, and
could scarcely be prevailed on to play, gave manifest and general
delight. Give me leave, on this occasion, to extend a little the
sense of your position, that "melody and harmony are separately
agreeable, and in union delightful," and to give it as my opinion,
that the reason why the Scotch tunes have lived so long, and will
probably live for ever (if they escape being stifled in modern
affected ornament) is merely this, that they are really compositions
of melody and harmony united, or rather that their melody is harmony.
I mean the simple tunes sung by a single voice. As this will appear
paradoxical, I must explain my meaning. In common acceptation,
indeed, only an agreeable _succession_ of sounds is called _melody_,
and only the _co-existence_ of agreeable sounds, _harmony_. But since
the memory is capable of retaining for some moments a perfect idea of
the pitch of a past sound, so as to compare with it the pitch of a
succeeding sound, and judge truly of their agreement or disagreement,
there may and does arise from thence a sense of harmony between the
present and past sounds, equally pleasing with that between two
present sounds. Now the construction of the old Scotch tunes is this,
that almost every succeeding emphatical note is a third, a fifth, an
octave, or in short some note that is in concord with the preceding
note. Thirds are chiefly used, which are very pleasing concords. I
use the word _emphatical_ to distinguish those notes which have a
stress laid on them in singing the tune, from the lighter connecting
notes, that serve merely, like grammar articles in common speech, to
tack the whole together.

That we have a most perfect idea of a sound just past, I might appeal
to all acquainted with music, who know how easy it is to repeat a
sound in the same pitch with one just heard. In tuning an instrument,
a good ear can as easily determine that two strings are in unison
by sounding them separately, as by sounding them together; their
disagreement is also as easily, I believe I may say more easily and
better distinguished, when sounded separately; for when sounded
together, though you know by the beating that one is higher than the
other, you cannot tell which it is. I have ascribed to memory the
ability of comparing the pitch of a present tone with that of one
past. But if there should be, as possibly there may be, something
in the ear, similar to what we find in the eye, that ability would
not be entirely owing to memory. Possibly the vibrations given to
the auditory nerves by a particular sound may actually continue some
time after the cause of those vibrations is past, and the agreement
or disagreement of a subsequent sound become by comparison with them
more discernible. For the impression made on the visual nerves by a
luminous object will continue for twenty or thirty seconds. Sitting
in a room, look earnestly at the middle of a window a little while
when the day is bright, and then shut your eyes; the figure of the
window will still remain in the eye, and so distinct that you may
count the panes. A remarkable circumstance attending this experiment,
is, that the impression of forms is better retained than that of
colours; for after the eyes are shut, when you first discern the
image of the window, the panes appear dark, and the cross bars of the
sashes, with the window frames and walls, appear white or bright;
but if you still add to the darkness in the eyes by covering them
with your hand, the reverse instantly takes place, the panes appear
luminous and the cross bars dark. And by removing the hand they are
again reversed. This I know not how to account for.--Nor for the
following; that after looking long through green spectacles, the
white paper of a book will on first taking them off appear to have a
blush of red; and after long looking through red glasses, a greenish
cast; this seems to intimate a relation between green and red not
yet explained. Farther, when we consider by whom these ancient tunes
were composed, and how they were first performed, we shall see that
such harmonical successions of sounds was natural and even necessary
in their construction. They were composed by the minstrels of those
days to be played on the harp accompanied by the voice. The harp was
strung with wire, which gives a sound of long continuance, and had
no contrivance like that in the modern harpsichord, by which the
sound of the preceding could be stopt, the moment a succeeding note
began. To avoid actual discord, it was therefore necessary that the
succeeding emphatic note should be a chord with the preceding, as
their sounds must exist at the same time. Hence arose that beauty
in those tunes that has so long pleased, and will please for ever,
though men scarce know why. That they were originally composed for
the harp, and of the most simple kind, I mean a harp without any
half notes but those in the natural scale, and with no more than
two octaves of strings, from C to C, I conjecture from another
circumstance, which is, that not one of those tunes, really ancient,
has a single artificial half note in it, and that in tunes where it
was most convenient for the voice to use the middle notes of the
harp, and place the key in F, there the B, which if used should be
a B flat, is always omitted, by passing over it with a third. The
connoisseurs in modern music will say, I have no taste, but I cannot
help adding, that I believe our ancestors, in hearing a good song,
distinctly articulated, sung to one of those tunes, and accompanied
by the harp, felt more real pleasure than is communicated by the
generality of modern operas, exclusive of that arising from the
scenery and dancing. Most tunes of late composition, not having
this natural harmony united with their melody, have recourse to the
artificial harmony of a bass, and other accompanying parts.[64] This
support, in my opinion, the old tunes do not need, and are rather
confused than aided by it. Whoever has heard James Oswald play them
on his violoncello, will be less inclined to dispute this with me.
I have more than once seen tears of pleasure in the eyes of his
auditors; and yet, I think, even _his_ playing those tunes would
please more, if he gave them less modern ornament.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[64] The celebrated Rousseau in his Dictionnaire de Musique, printed
1768, appears to have similar sentiments of our modern harmony, viz.

"M. Rameau prétend que les dessus d'une certaine simplicité suggerènt
naturellement leur basse, & qu'un homme ayant l'oreille juste & non
exercée, entonnera naturellement cette basse. C'est-là un préjugé
de musicien, démenti par toute expérience. Non seulement celui qui
n'aura jamais entendu ni basse ni harmonie, ne trouvera, de lui-même,
ni cette harmonie ni cette basse; mais elles lui déplairont si on les
lui fait entendre, & il aimera beaucoup mieux le simple unisson.

Quand on songe que, de tous les peuples de la terre, qui tous ont
une musique & un chant, les Européens sont les seuls qui aient une
harmonie des accords, & qui trouvent ce mélange agréable; quand
on songe que le monde a duré tant de siècles, sans que, de toutes
les nations qui ont cultivé les beaux arts, aucune ait connu cette
harmonie; qu'aucun animal, qu'aucun oiseau, qu'aucan être dans la
nature ne produit d'autre accord que l'unisson, ni d'autre musique
que la mélodie; que les langues orientales, si sonores, si musicales;
que les oreilles Grecques, si délicates, si sensibles, exercées avec
tant d'art, n'ont jamais guidé ces peuples voluptueax & passionnés
vers notre harmonie; que, sans elle, leur musique avoits des effets
si prodigieux: qu'avec elle la nôtre en a de si foibles: qu'entin
il étoit réservé à des peuples du Nord, dont les organes durs &
grossiers sont plus touchés de l'éclat & du bruit des voix, que de la
douceur des accens, & de la mélodie des inflexions, de faire cette
grande découverte, & de la donner pour principe à toutes les régles
de l'art; quand, dis-je, on fait attention à tout cela, il est bien
difficile de ne pas soupçonner que toute notre harmonie n'est qu'une
invention gothique & barbare, dont nous ne nous fussions jamais
avisés, si nous fussions été plus sensibles aux véritables beautés de
l'art, & à la musique vraiment naturelle."




TO MR. PETER FRANKLIN, NEWPORT, NEW ENGLAND.

  _On the Defects of Modern Music._


  [No date.]

  DEAR BROTHER,

**** I like your ballad, and think it well adapted for your purpose
of discountenancing expensive foppery, and encouraging industry and
frugality. If you can get it generally sung in your country, it may
probably have a good deal of the effect you hope and expect from it.
But as you aimed at making it general, I wonder you chose so uncommon
a measure in poetry, that none of the tunes in common use will suit
it. Had you fitted it to an old one, well known, it must have spread
much faster than I doubt it will do from the best new tune we can
get composed for it. I think too, that if you had given it to some
country girl in the heart of the Massachusets, who has never heard
any other than psalm tunes, or _Chevy Chace_, the _Children in the
Wood_, the _Spanish Lady_, and such old simple ditties, but has
naturally a good ear, she might more probably have made a pleasing
popular tune for you, than any of our masters here, and more proper
for your purpose, which would best be answered, if every word could
as it is sung be understood by all that hear it, and if the emphasis
you intend for particular words could be given by the singer as
well as by the reader; much of the force and impression of the song
depending on those circumstances. I will however get it as well done
for you as I can.

Do not imagine that I mean to depreciate the skill of our composers
of music here; they are admirable at pleasing _practised_ ears, and
know how to delight _one another_; but, in composing for songs, the
reigning taste seems to be quite out of nature, or rather the reverse
of nature, and yet like a torrent, hurries them all away with it; one
or two perhaps only excepted.

You, in the spirit of some ancient legislators, would influence the
manners of your country by the united powers of poetry and music. By
what I can learn of _their_ songs, the music was simple, conformed
itself to the usual pronunciation of words, as to measure, cadence or
emphasis, &c. never disguised and confounded the language by making
a long syllable short, or a short one long when sung; their singing
was only a more pleasing, because a melodious manner of speaking;
it was capable of all the graces of prose oratory, while it added
the pleasure of harmony. A modern song, on the contrary, neglects
all the proprieties and beauties of common speech, and in their
place introduces its _defects_ and _absurdities_ as so many graces.
I am afraid you will hardly take my word for this, and therefore I
must endeavour to support it by proof. Here is the first song I lay
my hand on. It happens to be a composition of one of our greatest
masters, the ever-famous Handel. It is not one of his juvenile
performances, before his taste could be improved and formed: it
appeared when his reputation was at the highest, is greatly admired
by all his admirers, and is really excellent in its kind. It is
called, "The additional favourite song in Judas Maccabeus." Now I
reckon among the defects and improprieties of common speech, the
following, viz.

1. _Wrong placing the accent or emphasis_, by laying it on words of
no importance, or on wrong syllables.

2. _Drawling_; or extending the sound of words or syllables beyond
their natural length.

3. _Stuttering_; or making many syllables of one.

4. _Unintelligibleness_; the result of the three foregoing united.

5. _Tautology_; and

6. _Screaming_, without cause.

For the _wrong placing of the accent, or emphasis_, see it on the
word _their_ instead of being on the word _vain_.

[Illustration (music): with _their_ vain my-ste-rious Art]

And on the word _from_, and the wrong syllable _like_.

[Illustration (music): God _like_ wisdom _from_ a-bove.]

For the _drawling_, see the last syllable of the word _wounded_.

[Illustration (music): Nor can heal the wound_ed_ heart]

And in the syllable _wis_, and the word _from_, and syllable _bove_

[Illustration (music): God-like _wis_dom _from_ a-_bove_]

For the _stuttering_, see the words _ne'er relieve_, in

[Illustration (music): Ma-gick charms can _ne'er_ _re-lieve_ you]

Here are four syllables made of one, and eight of three; but this
is moderate. I have seen in another song that I cannot now find,
seventeen syllables made of three, and sixteen of one: the latter I
remember was the word _charms_; viz. _cha, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, arms_. Stammering with a witness!

For the _unintelligibleness_; give this whole song to any taught
singer, and let her sing it to any company that have never heard it;
you shall find they will not understand three words in ten. It is
therefore, that at the oratorios and operas one sees with books in
their hands all those who desire to understand what they hear sung by
even our best performers.

For the _tautology_; you have, _with their vain mysterious art_,
twice repeated; _magic charms can ne'er relieve you_, three times.
_Nor can heal the wounded heart_, three times. _Godlike wisdom from
above_, twice; and, _this alone can deceive you_, two or three times.
But this is reasonable when compared with _the Monster Polypheme, the
Monster Polypheme_, a hundred times over and over, in his admired
_Acis and Galatea_.

As to the _screaming_; perhaps I cannot find a fair instance in this
song; but whoever has frequented our operas will remember many. And
yet here methinks the words _no_ and _e'er_, when sung to these
notes, have a little of the air of _screaming_, and would actually be
screamed by some singers.

[Illustration (music): _No_ magic charms can _e'er_ re-lieve you.]

I send you inclosed the song with its music at length. Read the words
without the repetitions. Observe how few they are, and what a shower
of notes attend them: you will then perhaps be inclined to think with
me, that though the words might be the principal part of an ancient
song, they are of small importance in a modern one; they are in short
only _a pretence for singing_.

  I am, as ever,

  Your affectionate brother,

  B. FRANKLIN.

P. S. I might have mentioned _inarticulation_ among the defects in
common speech that are assumed as beauties in modern singing. But
as that seems more the fault of the singer than of the composer, I
omitted it in what related merely to the composition. The fine singer
in the present mode, stifles all the hard consonants, and polishes
away all the rougher parts of words that serve to distinguish them
one from another; so that you hear nothing but an admirable pipe, and
understand no more of the song, than you would from its tune played
on any other instrument. If ever it was the ambition of musicians to
make instruments that should imitate the human voice, that ambition
seems now reversed, the voice aiming to be like an instrument. Thus
wigs were first made to imitate a good natural head of hair;--but
when they became fashionable, though in unnatural forms, we have seen
natural hair dressed to look like wigs.




  _Description of the Process to be observed in making large Sheets
  of Paper in the Chinese Manner, with one smooth surface._[65]


In Europe to have a large surface of paper connected together and
smooth on one side, the following operations are performed.

1. A number of small sheets are to be made separately.

2. These are to be couched, one by one, between blankets.

3. When a heap is formed it must be put under a strong press, to
force out the water.

4. Then the blankets are to be taken away, one by one, and the sheets
hung up to dry.

5. When dry they are to be again pressed, or if to be sized, they
must be dipped into size made of warm water, in which glue and alum
are dissolved.

6. They must then be pressed again to force out the superfluous size.

7. They must then be hung up a second time to dry, which, if the air
happens to be damp, requires some days.

8. They must then be taken down, laid together, and again pressed.

9. They must be pasted together at their edges.

10. The whole must be glazed by labour, with a flint.

In China, if they would make sheets, suppose of four and a half ells
long and one and a half ells wide, they have two large vats, each
five ells long and two ells wide, made of brick, lined with a plaster
that holds water. In these the stuff is mixed ready to work.

Between these vats is built a kiln or stove, with two inclining
sides; each side something larger than the sheet of paper; they are
covered with a fine stucco that takes a polish, and are so contrived
as to be well heated by a small fire circulating in the walls.

The mould is made with thin but deep sides, that it may be both
light and stiff: it is suspended at each end with cords that pass
over pullies fastened to the cieling, their ends connected with a
counterpoise nearly equal the weight of the mould.

Two men, one at each end of the mould, lifting it out of the water
by the help of the counterpoise, turn it and apply it with the stuff
to the smooth surface of the stove, against which they press it, to
force out great part of the water through the wires. The heat of the
wall soon evaporates the rest, and a boy takes off the dried sheet by
rolling it up. The side next the stove receives the even polish of
the stucco, and is thereby better fitted to receive the impression of
fine prints. If a degree of sizing is required, a decoction of rice
is mixed with the stuff in the vat.

Thus the great sheet is obtained, smooth and sized, and a number of
the European operations saved.

As the stove has two polished sides, and there are two vats, the same
operation is at the same time performed by two other men at the other
vat; and one fire serves.

FOOTNOTE:

[65] Communicated by Dr. Franklin to the American Philosophical
Society, in which it was read, June 20, 1788. _Editor._




TO NOAH WEBSTER, JUN. ESQ. AT HARTFORD[66].

  _On Modern Innovations in the English Language and in Printing._


  _Philadelphia, Dec_.26, 1789.

  DEAR SIR,

I received, some time since, your _Dissertations on the English
Language_. It is an excellent work, and will be greatly useful in
turning the thoughts of our countrymen to correct writing. Please to
accept my thanks for it, as well as for the great honour you have
done me in its dedication. I ought to have made this acknowledgment
sooner, but much indisposition prevented me.

I cannot but applaud your zeal for preserving the purity of our
language both in its expression and pronunciation, and in correcting
the popular errors several of our states are continually falling
into with respect to both. Give me leave to mention some of them,
though possibly they may already have occurred to you. I wish,
however, that in some future publication of yours, you would set a
discountenancing mark upon them. The first I remember, is the word
_improved_. When I left New England in the year 1723, this word had
never been used among us, as far as I know, but in the sense of
_ameliorated_, or _made better_, except once in a very old book of
Dr. Mather's, entitled _Remarkable Providences_. As that man wrote a
very obscure hand, I remember that when I read that word in his book
used instead of the word _employed_, I conjectured that it was an
error of the printer, who had mistaken a short _l_ in the writing for
an _r_, and a _y_ with too short a tail for a _v_, whereby _employed_
was converted into _improved_: but when I returned to Boston in
1733, I found this change had obtained favour, and was then become
common; for I met with it often in perusing the newspapers, where it
frequently made an appearance rather ridiculous. Such, for instance,
as the advertisement of a country house to be sold, which had been
many years _improved_ as a tavern; and in the character of a deceased
country gentleman, that he had been, for more than thirty years,
_improved_ as a justice of the peace. This use of the word _improve_
is peculiar to New England, and not to be met with among any other
speakers of English, either on this or the other side of the water.

During my late absence in France, I find that several other new
words have been introduced into our parliamentary language. For
example, I find a verb from the substantive _notice_. _I should
not have_ noticed _this, were it not that the gentleman_, &c. Also
another verb, from the substantive _advocate_; _The gentleman who_
advocates, _or who has_ advocated _that motion_,&c. Another from
the substantive _progress_, the most awkward and abominable of the
three: _the committee having_ progressed, _resolved to adjourn_. The
word _opposed_, though not a new word, I find used in a new manner,
as, _the gentlemen who are_ opposed _to this measure, to which I
have also myself always been_ opposed. If you should happen to be
of my opinion with respect to these innovations, you will use your
authority in reprobating them.

The Latin language, long the vehicle used in distributing knowledge
among the different nations of Europe, is daily more and more
neglected; and one of the modern tongues, viz. French, seems, in
point of universality, to have supplied its place. It is spoken in
all the courts of Europe; and most of the literati, those even who
do not speak it, have acquired enough knowledge of it, to enable
them easily to read the books, that are written in it. This gives
a considerable advantage to that nation. It enables its authors
to inculcate and spread through other nations, such sentiments
and opinions, on important points, as are most conducive to its
interests, or which may contribute to its reputation, by promoting
the common interests of mankind. It is, perhaps, owing to its being
written in French, that Voltaire's Treatise on Toleration has had so
sudden and so great an effect on the bigotry of Europe, as almost
entirely to disarm it. The general use of the French language has
likewise a very advantageous effect on the profits of the bookselling
branch of commerce, it being well known, that the more copies can
be sold, that are struck off from one composition of types, the
profits increase in a much greater proportion, than they do in
making a greater number of pieces in any other kind of manufacture.
And at present there is no capital town in Europe without a French
bookseller's shop corresponding with Paris. Our English bids fair
to obtain the second place. The great body of excellent printed
sermons in our language, and the freedom of our writings on political
subjects, have induced a great dumber of divines of different sects
and nations, as well as gentlemen concerned in public affairs, to
study it, so far at least as to read it. And if we were to endeavour
the facilitating its progress, the study of our tongue might become
much more general. Those, who have employed some part of their time
in learning a new language, must have frequently observed, that while
their acquaintance with it was imperfect, difficulties, small in
themselves, operated as great ones in obstructing their progress. A
book, for example, ill printed, or a pronunciation in speaking, not
well articulated, would render a sentence unintelligible, which, from
a clear print, or a distinct speaker, would have been immediately
comprehended. If, therefore, we would have the benefit of seeing our
language more generally known among mankind, we should endeavour
to remove all the difficulties, however small, that discourage the
learning of it. But I am sorry to observe, that, of late years, those
difficulties, instead of being diminished, have been augmented.

In examining the English books, that were printed between the
restoration and the accession of George the Second, we may observe,
that all the substantives were begun with a capital, in which we
imitated our mother tongue, the German. This was more particularly
useful to those, who were not well acquainted with the English,
there being such a prodigious number of our words, that are both
verbs and substantives, and spelt in the same manner, though
often accented differently in pronunciation. This method has, by
the fancy of printers, of late years been entirely laid aside;
from an idea, that suppressing the capitals shows the character
to greater advantage; those letters prominent above the line,
disturbing its even, regular appearance. The effect of this change
is so considerable, that a learned man of France, who used to read
our books, though not perfectly acquainted with our language, in
conversation with me on the subject of our authors, attributed the
greater obscurity he found in our modern books, compared with those
of the period above mentioned, to a change of style for the worse in
our writers: of which mistake I convinced him, by marking for him
each substantive with a capital, in a paragraph, which he then easily
understood, though before he could not comprehend it. This shows the
inconvenience of that pretended improvement.

From the same fondness for an uniform and even appearance of
characters in the line, the printers have of late banished also the
Italic types, in which words, of importance to be attended to in the
sense of the sentence, and words, on which an emphasis should be put
in reading, used to be printed. And lately, another fancy has induced
other printers to use the round _s_ instead of the long one, which
formerly served well to distinguish a word readily by its varied
appearance. Certainly the omitting this prominent letter makes a
line appear more even, but renders it less immediately legible; as
the paring of all men's noses might smooth and level their faces,
but would render their physiognomies less distinguishable. Add to
all these improvements backwards, another modern fancy, that _grey_
printing is more beautiful than black. Hence the English new books
are printed in so dim a character, as to be read with difficulty
by old eyes; unless in a very strong light and with good glasses.
Whoever compares a volume of the Gentleman's Magazine, printed
between the years 1731 and 1740, with one of those printed in the
last ten years, will be convinced of the much greater degree of
perspicuity given by black than by the grey. Lord Chesterfield
pleasantly remarked this difference to Faulkener, the printer of the
Dublin Journal, who was vainly making encomiums on his own paper, as
the most complete of any in the world. "But Mr. Faulkener," says my
lord, "don't you think it might be still farther improved, by using
paper and ink not quite so near of a colour?"--For all these reasons,
I cannot but wish, that our American printers would, in their
editions, avoid these fancied improvements, and thereby render their
works more agreeable to foreigners in Europe, to the great advantage
of our bookselling commerce.

Farther, to be more sensible of the advantage of clear and distinct
printing, let us consider the assistance it affords in reading
well aloud to an auditory. In so doing, the eye generally slides
forward three or four words before the voice. If the sight clearly
distinguishes what the coming words are, it gives time to order
the modulation of the voice to express them properly. But if they
are obscurely printed or disguised, by omitting the capitals and
long _ʃ_'s, or otherwise, the reader is apt to modulate wrong; and
finding he has done so, he is obliged to go back and begin the
sentence again; which lessens the pleasure of the hearers. This
leads me to mention an old error in our mode of printing. We are
sensible, that when a question is met with in the reading, there is a
proper variation to be used in the management of the voice. We have
therefore a point, called an interrogation, affixed to the question,
in order to distinguish it. But this is absurdly placed at its end,
so that the reader does not discover it till he finds, that he has
wrongly modulated his voice, and is therefore obliged to begin again
the sentence. To prevent this, the Spanish printers, more sensibly,
place an interrogation at the beginning as well as at the end of the
question. We have another error of the same kind in printing plays,
where something often occurs, that is marked as spoken _aside_. But
the word _aside_ is placed at the end of the speech, when it ought
to precede it, as a direction to the reader, that he may govern his
voice accordingly. The practice of our ladies in meeting five or six
together, to form little busy parties, where each is employed in some
useful work, while one reads to them, is so commendable in itself,
that it deserves the attention of authors and printers to make it as
pleasing as possible, both to the reader and hearers.

My best wishes attend you, being, with sincere esteem,

  Sir,

  Your most obedient and very humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[66] This letter is taken from an American periodical publication
entitled the Columbian Magazine. _Editor._




  _A Scheme for a New Alphabet and reformed Mode of Spelling; with
  Remarks and Examples concerning the same; and an Enquiry into its
  Uses, in a Correspondence between Miss S----[67] and Dr. Franklin,
  written in the Characters of the Alphabet[68]._


  TABLE OF THE REFORMED ALPHABET


  To face page 357,
  Vol. II.

  |Characters
  |
  |     |_Sounded_ respectively, as in
  |     |the Words in the Column below.
  |     |
  |     |                       |_Names_ of Letters as expressed in
  |     |                       |the reformed Sounds and Characters.
  |     |                       |
  |     |                       |     |_Manner of pronouncing_ the Sounds.
  +-----+-----------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+
  |  o  |Old.                   |  o  |The first VOWEL naturally, and deepest|
  |     |                       |     |  sound; requires only the mouth, and |
  |     |                       |     |  breathe through it.                 |
  | *ϖ  |John, folly; awl, ball.|  ϖ  |The next requiring the mouth opened a |
  |     |                       |     |  little more, or hollower.           |
  |  a  |Man, can.              |  a  |The next, a little more.              |
  |  e  |Men, lend, name, lane. |  e  |The next requires the _tongue_ to be a|
  |     |                       |     |  little more elevated.               |
  |  i  |Did, sin, deed, seen.  |  i  |The next still more.                  |
  |  u  |Tool, fool, rule.      |  u  |The next requires the _lips_ to be    |
  |     |                       |     |  gathered up, leaving a small opening|
  | *ų  |Um, un; as in umbrage, |  ų  |The next a very short vowel, the sound|
  |     |  unto, &c. and        |     |  of which we should express in our   |
  |     |  as in _er_.          |     |  present letters thus, _uh_; a short,|
  |     |                       |     |  and not very strong _aspiration_.   |
  |  h  |Hunter, happy, high.   | huh |A stronger or more forcible aspiration|
  |     |                       |     |                                      |
  |  g  |Give, gather,          |  gi |The first CONSONANT; being formed by  |
  |     |                       |     |  the _root of the tongue_; this is   |
  |     |                       |     |  the present hard _g_.               |
  |  k  |Keep, kick.            |  ki |A kindred sound; a little more acute; |
  |     |                       |     |  to be used instead of the hard _c_. |
  | *Ի  |(sh) Ship, wish.       | ish |A new letter wanted in our language;  |
  |     |                       |     |  our _sh_, separately taken, not     |
  |     |                       |     |  being proper elements of the sound. |
  | *ŋ  |(ng) ing, repeating,   | ing |A new letter wanted for the same      |
  |     |  among,               |     |  reason:--These are formed _back in  |
  |     |                       |     |  the mouth_.                         |
  |  n  |End.                   |  en |Formed _more forward_ in the mouth;   |
  |     |                       |     |  the _tip of the tongue_ to the      |
  |     |                       |     |  _roof_ of the mouth.                |
  |  r  |Art.                   |  r  |The same; the tip of the tongue a     |
  |     |                       |     |  little loose or separate from the   |
  |     |                       |     |  roof of the mouth, and vibrating.   |
  |  t  |Teeth.                 |  ti |The tip of the tongue more forward;   |
  |     |                       |     |  touching, and then leaving, the roof|
  |  d  |Deed.                  |  di |The same; touching a little fuller.   |
  |  l  |ell, tell.             |  el |The same; touching just about the     |
  |     |                       |     |  _gums_ of the _upper teeth_.        |
  |  s  |Essence.               |  es |This sound is formed by the breath    |
  |     |                       |     |  passing _between_ the moist end of  |
  |     |                       |     |  the _tongue_ and the _upper teeth_. |
  |  z  |(ez) Wages.            |  ez |The same; a little denser and duller. |
  | *ɧ  |(th) Think             |  eɧ |The tongue under, and a little        |
  |     |                       |     |  _behind_, the upper teeth; touching |
  |     |                       |     |  them, but so as to let the breath   |
  |     |                       |     |  pass between.                       |
  | *ƕ  |(dh) Thy.              |  eƕ |The same; a little fuller.            |
  |  f  |Effect.                |  ef |Formed by the _lower lip_ against the |
  |     |                       |     |  upper teeth.                        |
  |  v  |Ever.                  |  ev |The same; fuller and duller.          |
  |  b  |Bees.                  |  b  |The _lips full together_, and _opened_|
  |     |                       |     |  as the air passes out.              |
  |  p  |Peep.                  |  pi |The same; but a thinner sound.        |
  |  m  |Ember.                 |  em |The _closing_ of the lips, while the  |
  |     |                       |     |  _e_ [here annexed] is sounding.     |
  +-----+-----------------------+-----+--------------------------------------+

  * _N. B._ The six new letters are marked with an asterisk (*) to
  distinguish them, and show how few new characters are proposed. B. V.

  [Transcriber Note: The original text used italic styling on each
  character in columns 1 and 3 above, and column 1 below.  This
  styling (underscores) has been removed from the tables for clarity.]


  REMARKS [_on the Alphabetical Table_.]

              { It is endeavoured to give the alphabet
  o           { a _more natural order_; beginning first with
              { the simple sounds formed by the breath,
  to          { with none or very little help of tongue,
              { teeth, and lips, and produced chiefly in
  huh         { the windpipe.

              { Then coming forward to those, formed
  g k         { by the roof of the tongue next to the
              { windpipe.

  r n         { Then to those, formed more forward,
  t d         { the forepart of the tongue against the
              { roof of the mouth.

              { Then those, formed still more forward
  l           { in the mouth, by the tip of the tongue
  s z         { applied first to the roots of the upper
              { teeth.

  ɧ           { Then to those, formed by the tip of the
  ƕ           { tongue applied to the ends or edges of
              { the upper teeth.

  f           { Then to those, formed still more forward,
  v           { by the under lip applied to the upper
              { teeth.

  b           { Then to those, formed yet more forward
  p           { by the upper and under lip opening
              { to let out the sounding breath.

              { And lastly, ending with the shutting
  m           { up of the mouth, or closing the lips while
              { any vowel is sounding.


In this alphabet _c_ is _omitted_ as unnecessary; _k_ supplying
its hard sound, and _s_ the soft; _k_ also supplies well the place
of _q_, and with an _s_ added the place of _x_: _q_ and _x_ are
therefore omitted. The vowel _u_ being sounded as _oo_ makes the _w_
unnecessary. The _y_, where used simply, is supplied by _i_, and
where as a dipthong, by two vowels: that letter is therefore omitted
as useless. The jod _j_ is also omitted, its sound being supplied by
the new letter _Ի_, _ish_, which serves other purposes, assisting in
the formation of other sounds;--thus the _Ի_ with a _d_ before it
gives the sound of the jod _j_ and soft _g_, as in "James, January,
giant, gentle," "_dԻeems_, _dԻhanueri_, _dԻųiant_, _dԻentel_;" with
a _t_ before it, it gives the sound of _ch_, as in "cherry, chip,"
"_tԻeri_, _tԻip_;" and with a _z_ before it, the French sound of the
jod _j_, as in "jamais," "_zԻame_."

Thus the _g_ has no longer _two different_ sounds, which occasioned
confusion, but is, as every letter ought to be, confined to one. The
same is to be observed in _all_ the letters, vowels, and consonants,
that wherever they are met with, or in whatever company, their
sound is always the same. It is also intended, that there be _no
superfluous_ letters used in spelling; i. e. no letter that is not
sounded; and this alphabet, by six new letters, provides, that, there
be no distinct sounds in the language, _without letters_ to express
them. As to the difference between _short and long vowels_, it is
naturally expressed by a single vowel where short, a double one
where long; as for "mend," write "mend," but for "remain'd," write
"remeen'd;" for "did" write "did," but for "deed" write "diid," &c.

What in our common alphabet is supposed the third vowel, _i_, as
we sound it, is as a _dipthong_, consisting of two of our vowels
joined; [viz.] _ų_ as sounded in "unto," and _i_ in its true sound.
Any one will be sensible of this who sounds those two vowels _ų i_
quick after each other; the sounds begins _ų_ and ends _ii_. The
true sound of the _i_ is that we now give to _e_ in the words "deed,
keep--[69]."

FOOTNOTES:

[67] Stephenson. Editor.

[68] For the nature and intention of this alphabet, &c. I must refer
to what Dr. Franklin has himself said upon the subject, in answer
to Miss S----n's objections; as the reader may understand the whole
in an hour or two.--It is necessary to add, that the new letters;
used in the course of printing this paper, are exactly copied from
the _manuscript_ in my possession; there being no provision for a
distinction in the character as _written_ or _printed_. I have no
other way therefore of marking the scored parts of the manuscript
(answering to _italics_) than by placing such passages between
inverted commas.--As to _capitals_, I should have provided for them
by means of larger types, but the form of some of them would have
made them too large for the page: however, were the author's general
system ever adopted, nothing would be easier than to remedy this
particular. B. V.

[69] The copy, from which this is printed, ends in the same abrupt
way with the above, followed by a considerable blank space; so that
more perhaps was intended to be added by our author. B. V.


EXAMPLES [_of writing in this Character_.]

_So huen sųm EndԻel, bųi divųin kϖmand, Uiƕ rųiziŋ tempests Իeeks
e gilti Land; (SųtԻ az ϖv leet or peel Britania past,) Kalm and
siriin hi drųivs ƕi fiuriųs blast; And, pliiz'd ƕ' ϖlmųitis ϖrdųrs tu
pųrfϖrm, Rųids in ƕi Huųrluind and dųirekts ƕi Stϖrm._


_So ƕi piur limpid striim, huen fϖul uiɧ steens ϖv rųԻiŋ Tϖrents and
disendiŋ Reens, Uųrks itself kliir; and az it rųns rifųins; Til bųi
digriis, ƕe flotiŋ mirųr Իųins, Riflekts iitԻ flϖur ƕat ϖn its bϖrdųr
groz, And e nu hev'n in its feer Bųzųm Իoz._


  _Kensiŋtųn, Septembųr_ 26, 1768.

  _Diir Sųr_,

_ųi hav transkrųb'd iur alfabet, &c. huitԻ ųi ƕink mųit bi ϖv sųrvis
tu ƕoz, hu uiԻ ta akuųir an akiuret pronųnsieԻųn, if ƕat kuld bi
fiks'd; bųt ųi si meni inkϖnviiniensis, az uel oz difikųltis, ƕat
uuld atend ƕi briŋiŋ iur letųrs and ϖrɧϖgrafi intu kϖmųn ias. ϖϖl ϖur
etimϖlodԻiz uuld be lϖst, kϖnsikuentli ui kuld nϖt asųrteen ƕi miiniŋ
ϖv meni uųrds; ƕi distinkԻųn tu, bituiin uųrds ϖv difųrent miiniŋ
and similar sϖund uuld bi iusles, ųnles ui liviŋ rųiters pųbliԻ nu
iidiԻųns. In Իϖrt ųi biliiv ui mųst let piipil spel ϖn in ƕeer old
ue, (az ui fųind it iisiiest) du ƕi seem ϖurselves._ With ease and
with sincerity I can, in the old way, subscribe myself,

  Dear Sir,

  Your faithful and affectionate Servant,

  M. S.

  Dr. Franklin.


ANSWER TO MISS S****.

  _Diir Madam,_
_ƕi ϖbdԻekԻyn iu meek to rektifųiiŋ ϖur alfabet, "ƕat it uil bi
atended uiƕ inkϖviniensiz and difikųltiz," iz e natural uųn; fϖr it
ϖluaz ϖkųrz huen eni refϖrmeԻųn iz propozed; hueƕųr in rilidԻųn,
gųvernment, lϖz, and iven dϖun az lo az rods and huil karidԻiz.
ƕi tru kuestԻųn ƕen, is nϖt hueƕhųr ƕaer uil bi no difikųltiz ϖr
inkϖnviniensiz, bųt hueƕer ƕi difikųltiz mê nϖt bi sųrmϖunted;
and hueƕeųr ƕi kϖnviniensiz uil nϖt, ϖn ƕi huol, bi gretųr ƕan ƕi
inkϖnviniensiz. In ƕis kes, ƕi difikųltiz er onli in ƕi biginiŋ ϖv ƕi
praktis: huen ƕê er uųns ovųrkųm, ƕi advantedԻez er lastiŋ.--To ųiƕųr
iu ϖr mi, hu spel uel in ƕi prezent mod, ųi imadԻin ƕi difikųlti ϖv
tԻendiŋ ƕat mod fϖr ƕi nu, iz nϖt so grêt, bųt ƕat ui mųit pųrfektli
git ovųr it in a uiiks rųitiŋ.--Az to ƕoz hu du nϖt spel uel, if
ƕi tu difikųltiz er kųmpêrd, viz. ƕat ϖv titԻiŋ ƕem tru speliŋ in
ƕi prezent mod, and ƕat ϖv titԻing ƕem ƕi nu alfabet and ƕi nu
speliŋ akϖrdiŋ to it, ųi am kϖnfident ƕat ƕi latųr uuld bi byi far
ƕi liist. ƕê natųrali fϖl into ƕi nu meɧųd alreadi, az mųtԻ az ƕi
imperfekԻųn ϖv ƕer alfabet uil admit ϖv; ƕêr prezent bad speliŋ iz
onli bad, bikϖz kϖntreri to ƕi prezent bad ruls: ųndųr ƕi nu ruls
it uuld bi gud.--ƕi difikųlti ϖv lųrniŋ to spel uel in ƕi old uê iz
so grêt, ƕat fiu atên it; ɧϖuzands and ɧϖuzands rųitiŋ ϖn to old
edԻ, uiƕϖut ever biiŋ ebil to akuųir it. 'Tiz, bisųidz, e difikųlti
kϖntinuali inkriisiŋ az ƕi sϖund graduali veriz mor and mor frϖm ƕi
speliŋ; and to fϖrenųrs[70] it mêks ƕi lųrniŋ to pronϖns ϖur laŋuedԻ,
az riten in ϖur buks, almost impϖsibil._

_Nϖu az to "ƕi inkϖnviniensiz" iu menԻųn.--ƕi fųrst iz, ƕat "ϖϖl ϖur
etimϖlodԻiz uuld bi lϖst, kϖnsikuentli ui kuld nϖt asųrteen ƕi miiniŋ
ϖv meni uųrds."--etimϖlodԻiz er at present veri ųnsųrteen; bųt sųtԻ
az ƕê er, ƕi old buks uuld stil prizųrv ƕem, and etimolodԻiz uuld
ƕêr fųind ƕem. Uųrds in ƕi kors ϖv tyim, tԻendԻ ƕer miiniŋs, az uel
az ƕer speliŋ and pronųnsieԻųn; and ui du nϖt luk to etimϖlodԻi fϖr
ƕer prezent miiniŋs. If ųi Իuld kϖl e man e Neev and e Vilen, hi uuld
hardli bi satisfųid wiɧ mųi teliŋ him, ƕat uųn ϖv ƕi uųrds oridԻinali
signifųid onli e lad ϖr sųrvant; and ƕi ųƕųr, an ųndųr plϖuman, ϖr ƕi
inhabitant ϖv e viledԻ. It iz frϖm prezent iusedԻ onli, ƕi miiniŋ ϖv
uųrds iz to bi ditųrmined._

_Iur sekųnd inkϖnviniens iz, ƕat "ƕi distinkԻųn bituiin uųrds ϖv
difųrent miiniŋ and similar sϖund uuld bi distrϖųid."--ƕat distinkԻųn
iz ϖlreadi distrϖųid in pronϖunsiŋ ƕem; and ui rilųi ϖn ƕi sens alon
ϖv ƕi sentens to asųrteen, huitԻ ϖv ƕi several uųrds, similar in
sϖund, ui intend. If ƕis iz sųfiԻent in ƕi rapiditi ϖv diskors, it
uil bi mutԻ mor so in riten sentenses, huitԻ mê bi red lezԻurli, and
atended to mor partikularli in kes ϖv difikųlti, ƕan ui kan atend to
e past sentens, huųil e spikųr iz hųryiŋ ųs alϖng uiɧ nu uųns._

_Iur ɧųrd inkϖnviniens iz, ƕat "ϖϖl ƕi buks alredi riten uuld bi
iusles."--ƕis inkϖnviniens uuld onli kųm ϖn graduali, in e kors ϖv
edԻes. Iu and ųi, and ųƕųr nϖu liviŋ ridųrs, uuld hardli fϖrget ƕi
ius ϖv ƕem. Piipil uuld long lųrn to riid ƕi old rųiting, ƕo ƕê
praktist ƕi nu.--And ƕi inkϖnvinens iz nϖt greter, ƕan huat hes
aktuali hapend in a similar kes, in Iteli, Fϖrmerli its inhabitants
ϖϖl spok and rot Latin: az ƕi laŋuedԻ tԻendԻd, ƕi speliŋ fϖlo'd it.
It iz tru ƕat at prezent, e miir ųnlarn'd Italien knϖt riid ƕi Latin
buks; ƕo ƕe er stil red and ųndųrstud bųi meni. Bųt, if ƕi speliŋ
had nevųr bin tԻendԻed, hi uuld nϖu hev fϖund it mųtԻ mor difikųlt
to riid and ryit hiz on laŋuadԻ; fϖr riten uųrds uuld hev had no
rilêԻųn to sϖunds, ƕe uuld onli hev stud fϖr ƕiŋs; so ƕat if hi uuld
ekspres in rųitiŋ ƕi ųidia hi hez, huen hi sϖunds ƕi uųrd_ Vescovo,
_hi mųst iuz ƕi leterz_ Episcopus.--_In Իϖrt, huatever ƕi difikųltiz
and inkϖnviniensiz nϖu er, ƕe uil bi mor iizili sųrmϖunted nϖu, ƕan
hiraftųr; and sųm tųim ϖr ųƕųr, it mųst bi dųn; ϖr ϖur rųitiŋ uil
bikųm ƕi sêm uiƕ ƕi TԻųiniiz[71], az to ƕi difikųlti ϖv lųrniŋ and
iuzing it. And it uuld alredi hev bin sųtԻ, if ui had kϖntinud ƕi
Saksųn speliŋ and rųitiŋ, iuzed bųi our forfaƕers._

  _ųi am, mųi diir frind,_

  _iurs afekԻųnetli,_

  B. FRANKLIN.

  _Lųndųn_,

  _Kreven-striit, Sept. 28, 1768._

FOOTNOTES:

[70] Dr. Franklin used to lay some little stress on this
circumstance, when he occasionally spoke on the subject. "A
dictionary, formed on this model, would have been serviceable to
him, he said, even as an American;" because, from the want of
public examples of pronunciation in his own country, it was often
difficult to learn the proper sound of certain words, which occurred
very frequently in our English writings, and which of course every
American very well understood as to their meaning. B. V.

[71] Chinese.




  _Rules for a Club formerly established in Philadelphia[72]._

  Previous question, to be answered at every meeting.


Have you read over these queries this morning, in order to consider
what you might have to offer the Junto [touching] any one of them?
viz.

1. Have you met with any thing, in the author you last read,
remarkable, or suitable to be communicated to the Junto? particularly
in history, morality, poetry, physic, travels, mechanic arts, or
other parts of knowledge.

2. What new story have you lately heard agreeable for telling in
conversation?

3. Hath any citizen in your knowledge failed in his business lately,
and what have you heard of the cause?

4. Have you lately heard of any citizen's thriving well, and by what
means?

5. Have you lately heard how any present rich man, here or elsewhere,
got his estate?

6. Do you know of any fellow citizen, who has lately done a worthy
action, deserving praise and imitation? or who has lately committed
an error, proper for us to be warned against and avoid?

[7. What unhappy effects of intemperance have you lately observed or
heard? of imprudence? of passion? or of any other vice or folly?

8. What happy effects of temperance? of prudence? of moderation? or
of any other virtue?]

9. Have you or any of your acquaintance been lately sick or wounded?
If so, what remedies were used, and what were their effects?

10. Who do you know that are shortly going voyages or journies, if
one should have occasion to send by them?

11. Do you think of any thing at present, in which the Junto may be
serviceable to _mankind_? to their country, to their friends, or to
themselves?

12. Hath any deserving stranger arrived in town since last meeting,
that you heard of? and what have you heard or observed of his
character or merits? and whether think you, it lies in the power of
the Junto to oblige him, or encourage him as he deserves?

13. Do you know of any deserving young beginner lately set up, whom
it lies in the power of the Junto any way to encourage?

14. Have you lately observed any defect in the laws of your
_country_, [of] which it would be proper to move the legislature for
an amendment? or do you know of any beneficial law that is wanting?

15. Have you lately observed any encroachment on the just liberties
of the people?

16. Hath any body attacked your reputation lately? and what can the
Junto do towards securing it?

17. Is their any man whose friendship you want, and which the Junto,
or any of them, can procure for you?

18. Have you lately heard any member's character attacked, and how
have you defended it?

19. Hath any man injured you, from whom it is in the power of the
Junto to procure redress?

20. In what manner can the Junto, or any of them, assist you in any
of your honourable designs?

21. Have you any weighty affair in hand, in which you think the
advice of the Junto may be of service[73]?

22. What benefits have you lately received from any man not present?

23. Is there any difficulty in matters of opinion, of justice, and
injustice, which you would gladly have discussed at this time?

24. Do you see any thing amiss in the present customs or proceedings
of the Junto, which might be amended?

Any person to be qualified, to stand up, and lay his hand on his
breast, and be asked these questions; viz.

1. Have you any particular disrespect to any present
members?--_Answer._ I have not.

2. Do you sincerely declare, that you love mankind in general; of
what profession or religion soever? _Ans._ I do.

3. Do you think any person ought to be harmed in his body, name
or goods, for mere speculative opinions, or his external way of
worship?--_Ans._ No.

4. Do you love truth for truth's sake, and will you endeavour
impartially to find and receive it yourself and communicate it to
others?--_Ans._ Yes.

FOOTNOTES:

[72] This was an early performance, and carries along with it an
air of singularity, accompanied with such operative good sense and
philanthropy, as characterizes it for Dr. Franklin's. The club, for
which it was written, was held at Philadelphia; and, if I am well
informed, was composed of men considerable for their influence and
discretion; for though the chief measures of Pensylvania usually
received their first formation in this club, it existed for thirty
years without the nature of its institution being publicly known. B.
V.

[73] Queries No. 7 and 8 follow here, in the original. B. V.




  _Questions discussed by the Junto forming the preceding Club[74]._


Is _sound_ an entity or body?

How may the phenomena of vapours be explained?

Is self-interest the rudder that steers mankind, the universal
monarch to whom all are tributaries?

Which is the best form of government, and what was that form which
first prevailed among mankind?

Can any one particular form of government suit all mankind?

What is the reason that the tides rise higher in the Bay of Fundy
than the Bay of Delaware?

Is the emission of paper-money safe?

What is the reason that men of the greatest knowledge not the most
happy?

How may the possession of the Lakes be improved to our advantage?

Why are tumultuous, uneasy sensations, united with our desires?

Whether it ought to be the aim of philosophy to eradicate the
passions?

How may smoaky chimneys be best cured?

Why does the flame of a candle tend upwards in a spire?

Which is least criminal, a _bad_ action joined with a _good_
intention, or a _good_ action with a _bad_ intention?

Is it consistent with the principles of liberty in a free government,
to punish a man as a libeller, when he speaks the truth?

FOOTNOTE:

[74] These questions are from the Eulogium of Dr. Franklin, delivered
before the American Philosophical Society, in 1791, of which the
Junto was the foundation. On the formation of that society, a
book, containing many of the questions discussed by the Junto, was
delivered into Dr. Smith's hands, for the purpose of being digested,
and in due time published among the transactions of that body.
Many of the questions Dr. Smith observes are curious and curiously
handled, and he selects the above as answering the description.
_Editor._




  _Sketch of an English School; for the Consideration of the Trustees
  of the Philadelphia Academy[75]._


It is expected that every scholar, to be admitted into this school,
be at least able to pronounce and divide the syllables in reading,
and to write a legible hand. None to be received, that are under
[___]years of age.


_First, or lowest Class._

Let the first class learn the English Grammar rules, and at the same
time let particular care be taken to improve them in orthography.
Perhaps the latter is best done by pairing the scholars; two of those
nearest equal in their spelling to be put together. Let these strive
for victory; each propounding ten words every day to the other to be
spelled. He that spells truly most of the other's words is victor for
that day; he that is victor most days in a month, to obtain a prize,
a pretty neat book of some kind, useful in their future studies. This
method fixes the attention of children extremely to the orthography
of words, and makes them good spellers very early. It is a shame for
a man to be so ignorant of this little art, in his own language,
as to be perpetually confounding words of like sound and different
significations; the consciousness of which defect makes some men,
otherwise of good learning and understanding, averse to writing even
a common letter.

Let the pieces read by the scholars in this class be short; such as
Croxal's fables, and little stories. In giving the lesson, let it
be read to them; let the meaning of the difficult words in it be
explained to them; and let them con over by themselves before they
are called to read to the master or usher, who is to take particular
care, that they do not read too fast, and that they duly observe the
stops and pauses. A vocabulary of the most usual difficult words
might be formed for their use, with explanations; and they might
daily get a few of those words and explanations by heart, which would
a little exercise their memories; or at least they might write a
number of them in a small book for the purpose, which would help to
fix the meaning of those words in their minds, and at the same time
furnish every one with a little dictionary for his future use.


_The Second Class_

To be taught, reading with attention, and with proper modulations of
the voice, according to the sentiment and the subject.

Some short pieces, not exceeding the length of a Spectator, to be
given this class for lessons (and some of the easier Spectators would
be very suitable for the purpose). These lessons might be given every
night as tasks; the scholars to study them against the morning. Let
it then be required of them to give an account, first of the parts of
speech, and construction of one or two sentences. This will oblige
them to recur frequently to their grammar, and fix its principal
rules in their memory. Next, of the intention of the writer, or
the scope of the piece, the meaning of each sentence, and of every
uncommon word. This would early acquaint them with the meaning and
force of words, and give them that most necessary habit, of reading
with attention.

The master then to read the piece with the proper modulations of
voice, due emphasis, and suitable action, where action is required;
and put the youth on imitating his manner.

Where the author has used an expression not the best, let it be
pointed out; and let his beauties be particularly remarked to the
youth.

Let the lessons for reading be varied, that the youth may be made
acquainted with good styles of all kinds, in prose and verse, and
the proper manner of reading each kind--sometimes a well-told story,
a piece of a sermon, a general's speech to his soldiers, a speech
in a tragedy, some part of a comedy, an ode, a satire, a letter,
blank verse, Hudibrastic, heroic, &c. But let such lessons be
chosen for reading, as contain some useful instruction, whereby the
understanding or morals of the youth may at the same time be improved.

It is required that they should first study and understand the
lessons, before they are put upon reading them properly; to which
end each boy should have an English dictionary, to help him over
difficulties. When our boys read English to us, we are apt to
imagine they understand what they read, because we do, and because
it is their mother tongue. But they often read, as parrots speak,
knowing little or nothing of the meaning. And it is impossible a
reader should give the due modulation to his voice, and pronounce
properly, unless his understanding goes before his tongue, and makes
him master of the sentiment. Accustoming boys to read aloud what
they do not first understand, is the cause of those even set tones,
so common among readers, which, when they have once got a habit of
using, they find so difficult to correct; by which means, among fifty
readers we scarcely find a good one. For want of good reading, pieces
published with a view to influence the minds of men, for their own or
the public benefit, lose half their force. Were there but one good
reader in a neighbourhood, a public orator might be heard throughout
a nation with the same advantages, and have the same effect upon his
audience, as if they stood within the reach of his voice.


_The Third Class_

To be taught speaking properly and gracefully; which is near a-kin
to good reading, and naturally follows it in the studies of youth.
Let the scholars of this class begin with learning the elements of
rhetoric from some short system, so as to be able to give an account
of the most useful tropes and figures. Let all their bad habits of
speaking, all offences against good grammar, all corrupt or foreign
accents, and all improper phrases, be pointed out to them. Short
speeches from the Romans, or other history, or from the parliamentary
debates, might be got by heart, and delivered with the proper action,
&c. Speeches and scenes in our best tragedies and comedies (avoiding
every thing, that could injure the morals of youth) might likewise
be got by rote, and the boys exercised in delivering or acting them:
great care being taken to form their manner after the truest models.

For their farther improvement, and a little to vary their studies,
let them now begin to read history, after having got by heart a short
table of the principal epochs in chronology. They may begin with
Rollin's ancient and Roman histories, and proceed at proper hours, as
they go through the subsequent classes, with the best histories of
our own nation and colonies. Let emulation be excited among the boys,
by giving, weekly, little prizes, or other small encouragements to
those, who are able to give the best account of what they have read,
as to time, places, names of persons, &c. This will make them read
with attention, and imprint the history well in their memories. In
remarking on the history, the master will have fine opportunities of
instilling instruction of various kinds, and improving the morals, as
well as the understandings, of youth.

The natural and mechanic history, contained in the Spectacle de la
Nature, might also be begun in this class, and continued through the
subsequent classes, by other books of the same kind; for, next to
the knowledge of duty, this kind of knowledge is certainly the most
useful, as well as the most entertaining. The merchant may thereby
be enabled better to understand many commodities in trade; the
handicraftsman, to improve his business by new instruments, mixtures
and materials; and frequently hints are given for new manufactures,
or new methods of improving land, that may be set on foot greatly to
the advantage of a country.


_The Fourth Class_

To be taught composition. Writing one's own language well, is
the next necessary accomplishment after good speaking. It is the
writing-master's business, to take care that the boys make fair
characters, and place them straight and even in the lines: but to
form their style, and even to take care that the stops and capitals
are properly disposed, is the part of the English master. The
boys should be put on writing letters to each other on any common
occurrences, and on various subjects, imaginary business, &c.
containing little stories, accounts of their late reading, what
parts of authors please them, and why; letters of congratulation, of
compliment, of request, of thanks, of recommendation, of admonition,
of consolation, of expostulation, excuse, &c. In these, they should
be taught to express themselves clearly, concisely, and naturally,
without affected words or high-flown phrases. All their letters to
pass through the master's hand, who is to point out the faults,
advise the corrections, and commend what he finds right. Some of the
best letters published in our own language, as sir William Temple's,
those of Pope and his friends, and some others, might be set before
the youth as models, their beauties pointed out and explained by the
master, the letters themselves transcribed by the scholar.

Dr. Johnson's Ethices Elementa, or First Principles of Morality,
may now be read by the scholars, and explained by the master, to
lay a solid foundation of virtue and piety in their minds. And as
this class continues the reading of history, let them now, at proper
hours, receive some farther instruction in chronology, and in that
part of geography (from the mathematical master) which is necessary
to understand the maps and globes. They should also be acquainted
with the modern names of the places they find mentioned in ancient
writers. The exercises of good reading, and proper speaking, still
continued at suitable times.


_Fifth Class_

To improve the youth in composition, they may now, besides continuing
to write letters, begin to write little essays in prose, and
sometimes in verse; not to make them poets, but for this reason,
that nothing acquaints a lad so speedily with variety of expression,
as the necessity of finding such words and phrases as will suit the
measure, sound and rhyme of verse, and at the same time well express
the sentiment. These essays should all pass under the master's eye,
who will point out their faults, and put the writer on correcting
them. Where the judgment is not ripe enough for forming new essays,
let the sentiments of a Spectator be given, and required to be
clothed in the scholar's own words; or the circumstances of some good
story, the scholar to find expression. Let them be put sometimes on
abridging a paragraph of a diffuse author: sometimes on dilating or
amplifying what is wrote more closely. And now let Dr. Johnson's
Noetica, or First Principles of Human Knowledge, containing a logic,
or art of reasoning, &c. be read by the youth, and the difficulties,
that may occur to them, be explained by the master. The reading of
history, and the exercises of good reading and just speaking still
continued.


_Sixth Class_

In this class, besides continuing the studies of the preceding in
history, rhetoric, logic, moral and natural philosophy, the best
English authors may be read and explained; as Tillotson, Milton,
Locke, Addison, Pope, Swift, the higher papers in the Spectator and
Guardian, the best translations of Homer, Virgil and Horace, of
Telemachus, travels of Cyrus, &c.

Once a year, let there be public exercises in the hall; the trustees
and citizens present. Then let fine gilt books be given as prizes
to such boys, as distinguish themselves, and excel the others in
any branch of learning, making three degrees of comparison: giving
the best prize to him, that performs best; a less valuable one to
him, that comes up next to the best, and another to the third.
Commendations, encouragement, and advice to the rest; keeping up
their hopes, that, by industry, they may excel another time. The
names of those, that obtain the prize, to be yearly printed in a list.

The hours of each day are to be divided and disposed in such a
manner, as that some classes may be with the writing-master,
improving their hands; others with the mathematical master, learning
arithmetic, accounts, geography, use of the globes, drawing,
mechanics, &c. while the rest are in the English school, under the
English master's care.

Thus instructed, youth will come out of this school fitted for
learning any business, calling, or profession, except such wherein
languages are required: and, though unacquainted with any ancient or
foreign tongue, they will be masters of their own, which is of more
immediate and general use, and withal will have attained many other
valuable accomplishments: the time usually spent in acquiring those
languages, often without success, being here employed in laying such
a foundation of knowledge and ability, as, properly improved, may
qualify them to pass through and execute the several offices of civil
life, with advantage and reputation to themselves and country.

FOOTNOTE:

[75] This piece, which we believe to be an early production of our
author, is taken from the American Museum, Vol. V. p. 473. _Editor._




TO MISS S----N[76], AT WANSTEAD.

  _Advice to Youth in Reading._


  _Craven-street, May 17, 1760._

I send my good girl the books I mentioned to her last night. I beg
her to accept of them as a small mark of my esteem and friendship.
They are written in the familiar easy manner for which the French are
so remarkable, and afford a good deal of philosophic and practical
knowledge, unembarrassed with the dry mathematics, used by more
exact reasoners, but which is apt to discourage young beginners. I
would advise you to read with a pen in your hand, and enter in a
little book short hints of what you find, that is curious, or that
may be useful; for this will be the best method of imprinting such
particulars in your memory, where they will be ready, either for
practice on some future occasion, if they are matters of utility,
or at least to adorn and improve your conversation, if they are
rather points of curiosity. And as many of the terms of science are
such, as you cannot have met with in your common reading, and may
therefore be unacquainted with, I think it would be well for you to
have a good dictionary at hand, to consult immediately when you meet
with a word you do not comprehend the precise meaning of. This may
at first seem troublesome and interrupting; but it is a trouble that
will daily diminish, as you will daily find less and less occasion
for your dictionary as you become more acquainted with the terms; and
in the mean time you will read with more satisfaction, because with
more understanding. When any point occurs, in which you would be glad
to have farther information than your book affords you, I beg you
would not in the least apprehend, that I should think it a trouble
to receive and answer your questions. It will be a pleasure, and no
trouble. For though I may not be able, out of my own little stock of
knowledge, to afford you what you require, I can easily direct you to
the books, where it may most readily be found. Adieu, and believe me
ever, my dear friend,

  Yours affectionately,

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[76] Stevenson. _Editor._




PAPERS

ON

_SUBJECTS OF GENERAL POLITICS_.




PAPERS

ON

_SUBJECTS OF GENERAL POLITICS_.




  _Observations concerning the Increase of Mankind, peopling of
  Countries, &c[77]._

  Written in Pensylvania, 1751.


1. Tables of the proportion of marriages to births, of deaths to
births, of marriages to the number of inhabitants, &c. formed on
observations made upon the bills of mortality, christenings, &c. of
populous cities, will not suit countries; nor will tables, formed on
observations made on full settled old countries, as Europe, suit new
countries, as America.

2. For people increase in proportion to the number of marriages,
and that is greater, in proportion to the ease and convenience of
supporting a family. When families can be easily supported, more
persons marry, and earlier in life.

3. In cities, where all trades, occupations, and offices are full,
many delay marrying, till they can see how to bear the charges of
a family; which charges are greater in cities, as luxury is more
common; many live single during life, and continue servants to
families, journeymen to trades, &c. Hence cities do not, by natural
generation, supply themselves with inhabitants; the deaths are more
than the births.

4. In countries full settled, the case must be nearly the same, all
lands being occupied and improved to the height; those who cannot
get land, must labour for others, that have it; when labourers are
plenty, their wages will be low; by low wages a family is supported
with difficulty; this difficulty deters many from marriage, who
therefore long continue servants and single. Only, as the cities take
supplies of people from the country, and thereby make a little more
room in the country, marriage is a little more encouraged there, and
the births exceed the deaths.

5. Great part of Europe is fully, settled with husbandmen,
manufacturers, &c. and therefore cannot now much encrease in
people. America is chiefly occupied by Indians, who subsist mostly
by hunting. But as the hunter, of all men, requires the greatest
quantity of land from whence to draw his subsistence, (the husbandman
subsisting on much less, the gardener on still less, and the
manufacturer requiring least of all) the Europeans found America as
fully settled, as it well could be by hunters; yet these, having
large tracts, were easily prevailed on to part with portions of
territory to the new comers, who did not much interfere with the
natives in hunting, and furnished them with many things they wanted.

6. Land being thus plenty in America, and so cheap, as that a
labouring man, that understands husbandry, can, in a short time,
save money enough to purchase a piece of new land, sufficient for
a plantation, whereon he may subsist a family; such are not afraid
to marry; for if they even look far enough forward to consider how
their children, when grown up, are to be provided for, they see,
that more land is to be had at rates equally easy, all circumstances
considered.

7. Hence marriages in America are more general, and more generally
early, than in Europe. And if it is reckoned there, that there is
but one marriage _per annum_ among 100 persons, perhaps we may
here reckon two; and if in Europe, they have but four births to a
marriage, (many of their marriages being late) we may here reckon
eight, of which, if one half grow up, and our marriages are made,
reckoning one with another, at twenty years of age, our people must
at least be doubled every twenty years.

8. But notwithstanding this increase, so vast is the territory of
North America, that it will require many ages to settle it fully,
and till it is fully settled, labour will never be cheap here, where
no man continues long a labourer for others, but gets a plantation
of his own; no man continues long a journeyman to a trade, but goes
among those new settlers, and sets up for himself, &c. Hence labour
is no cheaper now, in Pensylvania, than it was thirty years ago,
though so many thousand labouring people have been imported from
Germany and Ireland.

9. The danger, therefore, of these colonies interfering with their
mother country in trades, that depend on labour, manufactures, &c. is
too remote to require the attention of Great Britain.

10. But, in proportion to the increase of the colonies, a vast demand
is growing for British manufactures; a glorious market, wholly in
the power of Britain, in which foreigners cannot interfere, which
will increase, in a short time, even beyond her power of supplying,
though her whole trade should be to her colonies.

       *       *       *       *       *

12. It is an ill-grounded opinion, that, by the labour of slaves,
America may possibly vie in cheapness of manufactures with Britain.
The labour of slaves can never be so cheap here, as the labour of
working men is in Britain. Any one may compute it. Interest of
money is in the colonies from 6 to 10 per cent. Slaves, one with
another, cost 30_l._ sterling per head. Reckon then the interest of
the first purchase of a slave, the insurance or risque on his life,
his clothing and diet, expences in his sickness, and loss of time,
loss by his neglect of business, (neglect is natural to the man,
who is not to be benefited by his own care or diligence) expence of
a driver to keep him at work, and his pilfering from time to time,
almost every slave being, from the nature of slavery, a thief, and
compare the whole amount with the wages of a manufacturer of iron or
wool in England, you will see, that labour is much cheaper there,
than it ever can be by negroes here. Why then will Americans purchase
slaves? Because slaves may be kept as long as a man pleases, or has
occasion for their labour, while hired men are continually leaving
their master (often in the midst of his business) and setting up for
themselves. §8.

13. As the increase of people depends on the encouragement of
marriages, the following things must diminish a nation, viz. 1. The
being conquered; for the conquerors will engross as many offices, and
exact as much tribute or profit on the labour of the conquered, as
will maintain them in their new establishment; and this diminishing
the subsistence of the natives discourages their marriages, and
so gradually diminishes them, while the foreigners increase. 2.
Loss of territory. Thus the Britons, being driven into Wales, and
crouded together in a barren country, insufficient to support such
great numbers, diminished, till the people bore a proportion to the
produce; while the Saxons increased on then abandoned lands, till
the island became full of English. And, were the English now driven
into Wales by some foreign nation, there would, in a few years, be no
more Englishmen in Britain, than there are now people in Wales. 3.
Loss of trade. Manufactures, exported, draw subsistence from foreign
countries for numbers, who are thereby enabled to marry and raise
families. If the nation be deprived of any branch of trade, and no
new employment is found for the people occupied in that branch, it
will soon be deprived of so many people. 4. Loss of food. Suppose
a nation has a fishery, which not only employs great numbers, but
makes the food and subsistence of the people cheaper: if another
nation becomes master of the seas, and prevents the fishery, the
people will diminish in proportion as the loss of employ and dearness
of provision makes it more difficult to subsist a family. 5. Bad
government and insecure property. People not only leave such a
country, and, settling abroad, incorporate with other nations, lose
their native language, and become foreigners; but the industry of
those that remain being discouraged, the quantity of subsistence
in the country is lessened, and the support of a family becomes
more difficult. So heavy taxes tend to diminish a people. 6. The
introduction of slaves. The negroes, brought into the English sugar
islands, have greatly diminished the whites there; the poor are by
this means deprived of employment, while a few families acquire vast
estates, which they spend on foreign luxuries; and, educating their
children in the habit of those luxuries, the same income is needed
for the support of one, that might have maintained one hundred. The
whites, who have slaves, not labouring; are enfeebled, and therefore
not so generally prolific; the slaves being worked too hard, and
ill fed, their constitutions are broken, and the deaths among them
are more than the births; so that a continual supply is needed from
Africa. The northern colonies, having few slaves, increase in whites.
Slaves also pejorate the families that use them; the white children
become proud, disgusted with labour, and, being educated in idleness,
are rendered unfit to get a living by industry.

14. Hence the prince, that acquires new territory, if he finds it
vacant, or removes the natives to give his own people room;--the
legislator, that makes effectual laws for promoting of trade,
increasing employment, improving land by more or better tillage,
providing more food by fisheries, securing property, &c.--and the man
that invents new trades, arts or manufactures, or new improvements in
husbandry, may be properly called _fathers of their nation_, as they
are the cause of the generation of multitudes, by the encouragement
they afford to marriage.

15. As to privileges granted to the married, (such as the _jus
trium liberorum_ among the Romans) they may hasten the filling of
a country, that has been thinned by war or pestilence, or that has
otherwise vacant territory, but cannot increase a people beyond the
means provided for their subsistence.

16. Foreign luxuries, and needless manufactures, imported and used
in a nation, do, by the same reasoning, increase the people of the
nation, that furnishes them, and diminish the people of the nation,
that uses them. Laws, therefore, that prevent such importations,
and, on the contrary, promote the exportation of manufactures to
be consumed in foreign countries, may be called (with respect to
the people that make them) _generative laws_, as, by increasing
subsistence, they encourage marriage. Such laws likewise strengthen
a country doubly, by increasing its own people, and diminishing its
neighbours.

17. Some European nations prudently refuse to consume the
manufactures of East India:--they should likewise forbid them to
their colonies; for the gain to the merchant is not to be compared
with the loss, by this means, of people to the nation.

18. Home luxury in the great increases the nation's manufacturers
employed by it, who are many, and only tends to diminish the families
that indulge in it, who are few. The greater the common fashionable
expence of any rank of people, the more cautious they are of
marriage. Therefore luxury should never be suffered to become common.

19. The great increase of offspring in particular families is not
always owing to greater fecundity of nature, but sometimes to
examples of industry in the heads, and industrious education, by
which the children are enabled to provide better for themselves,
and their marrying early is encouraged from the prospect of good
subsistence.

20. If there be a sect, therefore, in our nation, that regard
frugality and industry as religious duties, and educate their
children therein, more than others commonly do, such sect must
consequently increase more by natural generation than any other sect
in Britain.

21. The importation of foreigners into a country, that has as many
inhabitants as the present employments and provisions for subsistence
will bear, will be in the end no increase of people, unless the
new-comers have more industry and frugality than the natives, and
then they will provide more subsistence, and increase in the country;
but they will gradually eat the natives out.--Nor is it necessary to
bring in foreigners to fill up any occasional vacancy in a country;
for such vacancy (if the laws are good, § 14, 16) will soon be filled
by natural generation. Who can now find the vacancy made in Sweden,
France, or other warlike nations, by the plague of heroism 40 years
ago; in France, by the expulsion of the protestants; in England,
by the settlement of her colonies; or in Guinea by a hundred years
exportation of slaves, that has blackened half America? The thinness
of the inhabitants in Spain is owing to national pride, and idleness,
and other causes, rather than to the expulsion, of the Moors, or to
the making of new settlements.

22. There is, in short, no bound to the prolific nature of plants
or animals, but what is made by their crowding and interfering with
each other's means of subsistence. Was the face of the earth vacant
of other plants, it might be gradually sowed and the overspread
with one kind only, as for instance, with fennel; and were it empty
of other inhabitants, it might, in a few ages, be replenished from
one nation only, as for instance, with Englishmen. Thus there are
supposed to be now upwards of one million of English souls in North
America (though it is thought scarce 80,000 have been brought over
sea) and yet perhaps there is not one the fewer in Britain, but
rather many more, on account of the employment the colonies afford to
manufacturers at home. This million doubling, suppose but once in 25
years, will, in another century, be more than the people of England,
and the greatest number of Englishmen will be on this side the water.
What an accession of power to the British empire by sea as well as
land! What increase of trade and navigation! What numbers of ships
and seamen! We have been here but little more than a hundred years,
and yet the force of our privateers in the late war, united, was
greater, both in men and guns, than that of the whole British navy in
queen Elizabeth's time. How important an affair then to Britain is
the present treaty[78] for settling the bounds between her colonies
and the French! and how careful should she be to secure, room enough,
since on the room depends so much the increase of her people?

23. In fine, a nation well regulated is like a polypus[79], take
away a limb, its place is soon supplied; cut it in two, and each
deficient part shall speedily grow out of the part remaining. Thus,
if you have room and subsistence enough, as you may, by dividing,
make ten polypuses out of one, you may, of one, make ten nations,
equally populous and powerful; or, rather, increase a nation tenfold
in numbers and strength.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[77] This paper and the answer to it are the last we have to extract
from Mr. Collinson's collection. The papers that follow, having notes
with the signature B. V., are from the collection referred to before,
Vol. I, p. 399. _Editor._

[78] In 1751.

[79] A water insect, well-known to naturalists.




R. J.[80] ESQ. OF LONDON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _Remarks on some of the foregoing Observations, showing
  particularly the Effect which manners have on Population._


  DEAR SIR,

It is now near three years since I received your excellent
_Observations on the Increase of Mankind_, &c. in which you have
with so much sagacity and accuracy shown in what manner, and by
what causes, that principal means of political grandeur is best
promoted; and have so well supported those just inferences you have
occasionally drawn, concerning the general state of our American
colonies, and the views and conduct of some of the inhabitants of
Great Britain.

You have abundantly proved, that natural fecundity is hardly to
be considered, because the _vis generandi_, as far as we know,
is unlimited, and because experience shows, that the numbers of
nations is altogether governed by collateral causes, and among these
none of so much force as quantity of subsistence, whether arising
from climate, soil, improvement of tillage, trade, fisheries,
secure property, conquest of new countries, or other favourable
circumstances.

As I perfectly concurred with you in your sentiments on these heads,
I have been very desirous of building somewhat on the foundation you
have there laid; and was induced, by your hints in the twenty-first
section, to trouble you with some thoughts on the influence manners
have always had, and are always likely to have, on the numbers of a
people, and their political prosperity in general.

The end of every individual is its own private good. The rules it
observes in the pursuit of this good are a system of propositions,
almost every one founded in authority, that is, derive their
weight from the credit given to one or more persons, and not from
demonstration.

And this, in the most important as well as the other affairs of
life, is the case even of the wisest and philosophical part of the
human species; and that it should be so is the less strange, when we
consider, that it is perhaps impossible to prove, that _being_, or
life itself, has any other value than what is set on it by authority.

A confirmation of this may be derived from the observation, that, in
every country in the universe, happiness is sought upon a different
plan; and, even in the same country, we see it placed by different
ages, professions, and ranks of men, in the attainment of enjoyments
utterly unlike.

These propositions, as well as others framed upon them, become
habitual by degrees, and, as they govern the determination of the
will, I call them _moral habits_.

There are another set of habits, that have the direction of the
members of the body, that I call therefore _mechanical habits_. These
compose what we commonly call _the arts_, which are more or less
liberal or mechanical, as they more or less partake of assistance
from the operations of the mind.

The _cumulus_ of the moral habits of each individual is the manners
of that individual; the _cumulus_ of the manners of individuals makes
up the manners of a nation.

The happiness of individuals is evidently the end of political
society; and political welfare, or the strength, splendour, and
opulence of the state, have been always admitted, both by political
writers, and the valuable part of mankind in general, to conduce to
this end, and are therefore desirable.

The causes, that advance or obstruct any one of these three objects,
are external or internal. The latter may be divided into physical,
civil, and personal, under which last head I comprehend the moral and
mechanical habits of mankind. The physical causes are principally
climate, soil, and number of subjects; the civil, are government and
laws; and political welfare is always in a ratio composed of the
force of these particular causes; a multitude of external causes,
and all these internal ones, not only control and qualify, but are
constantly acting on, and thereby insensibly, as well as sensibly,
altering one another, both for the better and the worse, and this not
excepting the climate itself.

The powerful efficacy of manners in encreasing a people is manifest
from the instance you mention, the Quakers; among them industry and
frugality multiply and extend the use of the necessaries of life;
to manners of a like kind are owing the populousness of Holland,
Switzerland, China, Japan, and most parts of Indostan, &c. in every
one of which, the force of extent of territory and fertility of soil
is multiplied, or their want compensated by industry and frugality.

Neither nature nor art have contributed much to the production of
subsistence in Switzerland, yet we see frugality preserves and
even increases families, that live on their fortunes, and which,
in England, we call the gentry; and the observation we cannot but
make in the southern part of this kingdom, that those families,
including all superior ones, are gradually becoming extinct,
affords the clearest proof, that luxury (that is, a greater expence
of subsistence than in prudence a man ought to consume) is as
destructive as a proportionable want of it; but in Scotland, as
in Switzerland, the gentry, though one with another they have not
one-fourth of the income, increase in number.

And here I cannot help remarking, by the by, how well founded your
distinction is between the increase of mankind in old and new settled
countries in general, and more particularly in the case of families
of condition. In America, where the expences are more confined, to
necessaries, and those necessaries are cheap, it is common to see
above one hundred persons descended from one living old man. In
England, it frequently happens, where a man has seven, eight, or more
children, there has not been a descendant in the next generation,
occasioned by the difficulties the number of children has brought on
the family, in a luxurious dear country, and which have prevented
their marrying.

That this is more owing to luxury than mere want appears from what I
have said of Scotland, and more plainly from parts of England remote
from London, in most of which the necessaries of life are nearly as
dear, in some dearer than London, yet the people of all ranks marry
and breed up children.

Again; among the lower ranks of life, none produce so few children
as servants. This is, in some measure, to be attributed to their
situation, which hinders marriage, but is also to be attributed to
their luxury and corruption of manners, which are greater than among
any other set of people in England, and is the consequence of a
nearer view of the lives and persons of a superior rank, than any
inferior rank, without a proper education, ought to have.

The quantity of subsistence in England has unquestionably become
greater for many ages; and yet if the inhabitants are more numerous,
they certainly are not so in proportion to our improvement of the
means of support. I am apt to think there are few parts of this
kingdom, that have not been at some former time more populous than
at present. I have several cogent reasons for thinking so of great
part of the counties I am most intimately acquainted with; but as
they were probably not all most populous at the same time, and as
some of our towns are visibly and vastly grown in bulk, I dare not
suppose, as judicious men have done, that England is less peopled
than heretofore.

This growth of our towns is the effect of a change of manners, and
improvement of arts, common to all Europe; and though it is not
imagined, that it has lessened the country growth of necessaries,
it has evidently, by introducing a greater consumption of them, (an
infallible consequence of a nation's dwelling in towns) counteracted
the effects of our prodigious advances in the arts.

But however frugality may supply the place, or prodigality counteract
the effects, of the natural or acquired subsistence of a country,
industry is, beyond doubt, a more efficacious cause of plenty than
any natural advantage of extent or fertility. I have mentioned
instances of frugality and industry united with extent and fertility.
In Spain and Asia Minor, we see frugality joined to extent and
fertility, without industry; in Ireland, we once saw the same;
Scotland had then none of them but frugality. The change in these
two countries is obvious to every one, and it is owing to industry
not yet very widely diffused in either. The effects of industry and
frugality in England are surprising; both the rent and the value of
the inheritance of land depend on them greatly more than on nature,
and this, though there is no considerable difference in the prices of
our markets. Land of equal goodness lets for double the rent of other
land lying in the same county, and there are many years purchase
difference between different counties, where rents are equally well
paid and secure.

Thus manners operate upon the number of inhabitants, but of their
silent effects upon a civil constitution, history, and even our
own experience, yields us abundance of proofs, though they are
not uncommonly attributed to external causes: their support of a
government against external force is so great, that it is a common
maxim among the advocates of liberty, that no free government was
ever dissolved, or overcome, before the manners of its subjects were
corrupted.

The superiority of Greece over Persia was singly owing to their
difference of manners; and that, though all natural advantages were
on the side of the latter, to which I might add the civil ones; for
though the greatest of all civil advantages, liberty, was on the
side of Greece, yet that added no political strength to her, than
as it operated on her manners, and, when they were corrupted, the
restoration of their liberty by the Romans, overturned the remains of
their power.

Whether the manners of ancient Rome were at any period calculated
to promote the happiness of individuals, it is not my design to
examine; but that their manners, and the effects of those manners
on their government and public conduct, founded, enlarged, and
supported, and afterwards overthrew their empire, is beyond all
doubt. One of the effects of their conquest furnishes us with a
strong proof, how prevalent manners are even beyond quantity of
subsistence; for, when the custom of bestowing on the citizens of
Rome corn enough to support themselves and families was become
established, and Egypt and Sicily produced the grain, that fed the
inhabitants of Italy, this became less populous every day, and the
_jus trium liberorum_ was but an expedient, that could not balance
the want of industry and frugality.

But corruption of manners did not only thin the inhabitants of the
Roman empire, it rendered the remainder incapable of defence, long
before its fall, perhaps before the dissolution of the republic; so
that without standing disciplined armies, composed of men, whose
moral habits principally, and mechanical habits secondarily, made
them different from the body of the people, the Roman empire had been
a prey to the barbarians many ages before it was.

By the mechanical habits of the soldiery, I mean their discipline,
and the art of war; and that this is but a secondary quality appears
from the inequality that has in all ages been between raw, though
well disciplined armies, and veterans, and more from the irresistible
force a single moral habit, religion, has conferred on troops,
frequently neither disciplined nor experienced.

The military manners of the noblesse in France, compose the chief
force of that kingdom, and the enterprising manners and restless
dispositions of the inhabitants of Canada have enabled a handful of
men to harass our populous, and, generally, less martial colonies;
yet neither are of the value they seem at first sight, because
overbalanced by the defect they occasion of other habits, that would
produce more eligible political good: and military manners in a
people are not necessary in an age and country where such manners may
be occasionally formed and preserved among men enough to defend the
state; and such a country is Great Britain, where, though the lower
class of people are by no means of a military cast, yet they make
better soldiers than even the noblesse of France.

The inhabitants of this country, a few ages back, were to the
populous and rich provinces of France, what Canada is now to the
British colonies. It is true, there was less disproportion between
their natural strength; but I mean, that the riches of France were a
real weakness, opposed to the military manners founded upon poverty
and a rugged disposition, then the character of the English; But it
must be remembered, that at this time the manners of a people were
not distinct from that of their soldiery, for the use of standing
armies has deprived a military people of the advantages they before
had over others; and though it has been often said, that civil wars
give power, because they render all men soldiers, I believe this has
only been found true in internal wars following civil wars, and not
in external ones; for now, in foreign wars, a small army, with ample
means to support it, is of greater force than one more numerous, with
less. This last fact has often happened between France and Germany.

The means of supporting armies, and consequently the power of
exerting external strength, are best found in the industry and
frugality of the body of a people living under a government and laws,
that encourage commerce: for commerce is at this day almost the only
stimulus, that forces every one to contribute a share of labour for
the public benefit.

But such is the human frame, and the world is so constituted, that
it is a hard matter to possess ones self of a benefit, without
laying ones self open to a loss on some other side; the improvements
of manners of one sort often deprave those of another: thus we see
industry and frugality under the influence of commerce, which I
call a commercial spirit, tend to destroy, as well as support, the
government it flourishes under.

Commerce perfects the arts, but more the mechanical than the liberal,
and this for an obvious reason; it softens and enervates the manners.
Steady virtue and unbending integrity are seldom to be found where
a spirit of commerce pervades every thing; yet the perfection of
commerce is, that every thing should have its price. We every day
see its progress, both to our benefit and detriment here. Things,
that _boni mores_ forbid to be set to sale, are become its objects,
and there are few things indeed _extra commercium_. The legislative
power itself has been _in commercio_, and church livings are seldom
given without consideration, even by sincere Christians, and, for
consideration, not seldom to very unworthy persons. The rudeness of
ancient military times and the fury of more modern enthusiastic ones
are worn off; even the spirit of forensic contention is astonishingly
diminished, all marks of manners softening; but luxury and corruption
have taken their places, and seem the inseparable companions of
commerce and the arts.

I cannot help observing, however, that this is much more the case in
extensive countries, especially at their metropolis, than in other
places. It is an old observation of politicians, and frequently
made by historians, that small states always best preserve their
manners. Whether this happens from the greater room there is for
attention in the legislature, or from the less room there is for
ambition and avarice, it is a strong argument, among others, against
an incorporating union of the colonies in America, or even a federal
one, that may tend to the future reducing them under one government.

Their power, while disunited, is less, but their liberty; as well
as manners, is more secure; and, considering the little danger
of any conquest to be made upon them, I had rather they should
suffer something through disunion, than see them under a general
administration less equitable than that concerted at Albany[81].

I take it, the inhabitants of Pensylvania are both frugal and
industrious beyond those of any province in America. If luxury should
spread, it cannot be extirpated by laws. We are told by Plutarch,
that Plato used to say, _It was a hard thing to make laws for the
Cyrenians, a people abounding in plenty and opulence_.

But from what I set out with, it is evident, if I be not mistaken,
that education only can stem the torrent, and, without checking
either true industry or frugality, prevent the sordid frugality and
laziness of the old Irish, and many of the modern Scotch, (I mean
the inhabitants of that country, those who leave it for another
being generally industrious) or the industry, mixed with luxury, of
this capital, from getting ground, and, by rendering ancient manners
familiar, produce a reconciliation between disinterestedness and
commerce; a thing we often see, but almost always in men of a liberal
education.

To conclude: when we would form a people, soil and climate may be
found at least sufficiently good; inhabitants may be encouraged to
settle, and even supported for a while; a good government and laws
may be framed, and even arts may be established, or their produce
imported: but many necessary moral habits are hardly ever found
among those who voluntary offer themselves in times of quiet at
home, to people new colonies; besides that the moral, as well as
mechanical habits adapted to a mother country are frequently not so
to the new settled one, and to external events, many of which are
always unforeseen. Hence it is we have seen such fruitless attempts
to settle colonies, at an immense public and private expence, by
several of the powers of Europe: and it is particularly observable,
that none of the English colonies became any way considerable, till
the necessary manners were born and grew up in the country, excepting
those to which singular circumstances at home forced manners fit for
the forming a new state.

  I am, sir, &c.

  R.J.

FOOTNOTES:

[80] Richard Jackson, an English barrister. _Editor._

[81] The reader will see an account of this plan in the subsequent
volume. _Editor._




  _Plan, by Messieurs Franklin and Dalrymple, for benefitting distant
  unprovided Countries[82]._


  _Aug. 29, 1771._

The country called in the maps New Zealand has been discovered by the
Endeavour, to be two islands, together as large as Great Britain:
these islands, named Acpy-nomawée and Tovy-poennammoo, are inhabited
by a brave and generous race, who are destitute of _corn_, _fowls_,
and _all quadrupeds_, except _dogs_.

These circumstances being mentioned lately in a company of men of
liberal sentiments, it was observed, that it seemed incumbent on such
a country as this, to communicate to all others the conveniences of
life, which we enjoy.

Dr. Franklin, whose life has ever been directed to promote the true
interest of society, said, "he would with all his heart _subscribe_
to a voyage intended to communicate _in general_ those benefits,
which we enjoy, to countries destitute of them in the remote parts
of the globe." This proposition being warmly adopted by the rest of
the company, Mr. Dalrymple, then present, was induced to offer to
undertake the command on such an expedition.

On mature reflection, this scheme appears the more honourable to the
national character of any which can be conceived, as it is grounded
on the noblest principle of benevolence. Good intentions are often
frustrated by letting them remain indigested; on this consideration
Mr. Dalrymple was induced to put the outlines on paper, which are
now published, that by an early communication there, may be a better
opportunity of collecting all the hints, which can conduce to execute
effectually the benevolent purpose of the expedition, in case it
should meet with general approbation.

On this scheme being shown to Dr. Franklin, he communicated his
sentiments, by way of introduction, to the following effect:

"Britain is said to have produced originally nothing but _sloes_.
What vast advantages have been communicated to her by the fruits,
seeds, roots, herbage, animals, and arts of other countries! We are
by their means become a wealthy and a mighty nation, abounding in all
good things. Does not some _duty_ hence arise from us towards other
countries, still remaining in our former state?

"Britain is now the first maritime power in the world. Her ships are
innumerable, capable by their form, size, and strength, of sailing
all seas. Our seamen are equally bold, skilful, and hardy; dexterous
in exploring the remotest regions, and ready to engage in voyages
to unknown countries, though attended with the greatest dangers.
The inhabitants of those countries, our _fellow men_, have canoes
only; not knowing iron, they cannot build ships; they have little
astronomy, and no knowledge of the compass to guide them; they cannot
therefore come to us, or obtain any of our advantages. From these
circumstances, does not some duty seem to arise from us to them? Does
not Providence, by these distinguishing favours, seem to call on us,
to do something ourselves for the common interest of humanity!

"Those who think it their duty, to ask bread and other blessings
daily from heaven, would they not think it equally a duty, to
communicate of those blessings when they have received them, and show
their gratitude to their great Benefactor by the only means in their
power, promoting the happiness of his other children?

"Ceres is said to have made a journey through many countries to teach
the use of corn, and the art of raising it. For this single benefit
the grateful nations deified her. How much more may Englishmen
deserve such honour, by communicating the knowledge and use not of
corn only, but of all the other enjoyments earth can produce, and
which they are now in possession of. _Communiter bona profundere,
Deum est._

"Many voyages have been undertaken with views of profit or of
plunder, or to gratify resentment; to procure some advantage to
ourselves, or do some mischief to others: but a voyage is now
proposed, to visit a distant people on the other side the globe; not
to cheat them, not to rob them, not to seize their lands, or enslave
their persons; but merely to do them good, and make them, as far as
in our power lies, to live as comfortably as ourselves.

"It seems a laudable wish, that all the nations of the earth were
connected by a knowledge of each other, and a mutual exchange of
benefits: but a commercial nation particularly should wish for a
general civilization of mankind, since trade is always carried on to
much greater extent with people who have the arts and conveniences
of life, than it can be with naked savages. We may therefore hope,
in this undertaking, to be of, some service to our country, as well
as to those poor people, who, however distant from us, are in truth
related to us, and whose interests do, in some degree, concern every
one who can say, _Homo sum, &c._"

_Scheme of a voyage, by subscription_, to convey the conveniences of
life, as fowls, hogs, goats, cattle, corn, iron, &c., to those remote
regions, which are destitute of them, and to bring from thence such
productions, as can be cultivated in this kingdom to the advantage of
society, in a ship under the command of Alexander Dalrymple.

  Catt or bark, from the coal trade,          £
    of 350 tons, estimated at about         2000
  Extra expences, stores, boats, &c.        3000
                                            ----
  To be manned with 60 men at
                     4 per man per month
                  ----
                   240
                    12
                  ----
                  2880 per annum
                     3
                  ----
  Wages and       8640 for three years      8640
  provisions                               -----
                                           13640
                                           -----
  Cargo included, supposed                 15000

The expences of this expedition are calculated for _three_ years: but
the greatest part of the amount of wages will not be wanted till the
ship returns, and a great part of the expence of provisions will be
saved by what is obtained in the course of the voyage, by barter, or
otherwise, though it is proper to make provision for contingencies.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTE:

[82] These proposals were printed upon a sheet of paper some two or
three years ago, and distributed. The parts written by Dr. Franklin
and Mr. Dalrymple are easily distinguished. B. V.




TO DR. PERCIVAL.

  _Concerning the Provision made in China against Famine._


I have somewhere read, that in China an account is yearly taken of
the number of people, and the quantities of provision produced. This
account is transmitted to the emperor, whose ministers can thence
foresee a scarcity, likely to happen in any province, and from what
province it can best be supplied in good time. To facilitate the
collecting of this account, and prevent the necessity of entering
houses and spending time in asking and answering questions, each
house is furnished with a little board, to be hung without the door
during a certain time each year; on which board are marked certain
words, against which the inhabitant is to mark number and quantity,
somewhat in this manner:

   -----------------
  | Men,            |
  | Women,          |
  | Children,       |
  | Rice, or Wheat, |
  | Flesh, &c.      |
   -----------------

All under sixteen are accounted children, and all above, men
and women. Any other particulars, which the government desires
information of, are occasionally marked on the same boards. Thus the
officers, appointed to collect the accounts in each district, have
only to pass before the doors, and enter into their book what they
find marked on the board, without giving the least trouble to the
family. There is a penalty on marking falsely, and as neighbours must
know nearly the truth of each others account, they dare not expose
themselves, by a false one, to each others accusation. Perhaps such a
regulation is scarcely practicable with us[83].

FOOTNOTE:

[83] The above passage is taken from Dr. Percival's Essays, Vol.
III. p. 25, being an extract from a letter written to him, by
Dr. Franklin, on the subject of his observations on the state of
population in Manchester and other adjacent places. B. V.




  _Positions to be examined, concerning national Wealth[84]._


1. All food or subsistence for mankind arise from the earth or waters.

2. Necessaries of life, that are not foods, and all other
conveniences, have their values estimated by the proportion of food
consumed while we are employed in procuring them.

3. A small people, with a large territory, may subsist on the
productions of nature, with no other labour than that of gathering
the vegetables and catching the animals.

4. A large people, with a small territory, finds these insufficient,
and, to subsist, must labour the earth, to make it produce greater
quantities of vegetable food, suitable for the nourishment of men,
and of the animals they intend to eat.

5. From this labour arises a _great increase_ of vegetable and
animal food, and of materials for clothing, as flax, wool, silk,
&c. The superfluity of these is wealth. With this wealth we pay for
the labour employed in building our houses, cities, &c. which are
therefore only subsistence thus metamorphosed.

6. _Manufactures_ are only _another shape_ into which so much
provisions and subsistence are turned, as were equal in value to the
manufactures produced. This appears from hence, that the manufacturer
does not, in fact, obtain from the employer, for his labour, _more_
than a mere subsistence, including raiment, fuel, and shelter: all
which derive their value from the provisions consumed in procuring
them.

7. The produce of the earth, thus converted into manufactures, may be
more easily carried to distant markets than before such conversion.

8. _Fair commerce_ is, where equal values are exchanged for equal,
the expence of transport included. Thus, if it costs A in England
as much labour and charge to raise a bushel of wheat, as it costs B
in France to produce four gallons of wine, then are four gallons of
wine the fair exchange for a bushel of wheat, A and B meeting at half
distance with their commodities to make the exchange. The advantage
of this fair commerce is, that each party increases the number of his
enjoyments, having, instead of wheat alone, or wine alone, the use of
both wheat and wine.

9. Where the labour and expence of producing both commodities are
known to both parties, bargains will generally be fair and equal.
Where they are known to one party only, bargains will often be
unequal, knowledge taking its advantage of ignorance.

10. Thus he, that carries one thousand bushels of wheat abroad to
sell, may not probably obtain so great a profit thereon, as if he had
first turned the wheat into manufactures, by subsisting therewith
the workmen while producing those manufactures: since there are many
expediting and facilitating methods of working, not generally known;
and strangers to the manufactures, though they know pretty well the
expence of raising wheat, are unacquainted with those short methods
of working, and thence, being apt to suppose more labour employed
in the manufactures than there really is, are more easily imposed
on in their value, and induced to allow more for them than they are
honestly worth.

11. Thus the advantage of having manufactures in a country does not
consist, as is commonly supposed, in their highly advancing the
value of rough materials, of which they are formed; since, though
six-pennyworth of flax may be worth twenty shillings when worked into
lace, yet the very cause of its being worth twenty shillings, is,
that, besides the flax, it has cost nineteen shillings and sixpence
in subsistence to the manufacturer. But the advantage of manufactures
is, that under their shape provisions may be more easily carried to a
foreign market; and by their means our traders may more easily cheat
strangers. Few, where it is not made, are judges of the value of
lace. The importer may demand forty, and perhaps get thirty shillings
for that, which cost him but twenty.

12. Finally, there seem to be but three ways for a nation to
acquire wealth. The first is by _war_, as the Romans did, in
plundering their conquered neighbours. This is _robbery_.--The
second by _commerce_, which is generally _cheating_.--The third by
_agriculture_, the only _honest way_, wherein man receives a real
increase of the seed thrown into the ground, in a kind of continual
miracle wrought by the hand of God in his favour, as a reward for his
innocent life, and his virtuous industry.

  B. FRANKLIN.

  _April 4, 1769._

FOOTNOTE:

[84] This article has been inserted in The Repository for select
Papers on Agriculture, Arts, and Manufactures. Vol. I, p. 350. B. V.




  _Political Fragments, supposed either to be written by Dr.
  Franklin, or to contain Sentiments nearly allied to his own[85]._


[§ 1. _Of the Employment of Time, and of Indolence: particularly as
respecting the State._]

All that live must be subsisted. Subsistence costs something. He,
that is industrious, produces, by his industry, something that is an
equivalent, and pays for his subsistence: he is therefore no charge
or burden to society. The indolent are an expence uncompensated.

There can be no doubt but all kinds of employment, that can be
followed without prejudice from interruptions; work, that can be
taken up, and laid down, often in a day, without damage; (such
as spinning, knitting, weaving, &c.) are highly advantageous to
a community; because in them may be collected all the produce of
those fragments of time, that occur in family-business, between the
constant and necessary parts of it, that usually occupy females;
as the time between rising and preparing for breakfast, between
breakfast and preparing for dinner, &c. &c. The amount of all these
fragments is, in the course of a year, very considerable to a single
family; to a state proportionably. Highly profitable therefore it is,
in this case also, to follow that divine direction, _gather up the
fragments that nothing be lost_. Lost time is lost subsistence; it is
therefore lost treasure.

Hereby, in several families, many yards of linen have been produced,
from the employment of those fragments only, in one year, though such
families were just the same in number as when not so employed.

It was an excellent saying of a certain Chinese emperor, _I will, if
possible, have no idleness in my dominions; for if there be one man
idle, some man must suffer cold or hunger_. We take this emperor's
meaning to be, that the labour due to the public by each individual,
not being performed by the indolent, must naturally fall to the share
of others, who must thereby suffer.


[§ 2. _Of Embargoes upon Corn, and of the Poor._]

In inland high countries, remote from the sea, and whose rivers
are small, running _from_ the country, and not _to_ it, as is the
case of Switzerland, great distress may arise from a course of
bad harvests, if public granaries are not provided, and kept well
stored. Anciently too, before navigation was so general, ships so
plenty, and commercial connections so well established, even maritime
countries might be occasionally distressed by bad crops. But such is
now the facility of communication between those countries, that an
unrestrained commerce can scarce ever fail of procuring a sufficiency
for any of them. If indeed any government is so imprudent, as to lay
its hands on imported corn, forbid its exportation, or compel its
sale at limited prices, there the people may suffer some famine from
merchants avoiding their ports. But wherever commerce is known to be
always free, and the merchant absolute master of his commodity, as in
Holland, there will always be a reasonable supply.

When an exportation of corn takes place, occasioned by a higher price
in some foreign countries, it is common to raise a clamour, on the
supposition, that we shall thereby produce a domestic famine. Then
follows a prohibition, founded on the imaginary distress of the poor.
The poor, to be sure, if in distress, should be relieved; but if the
farmer could have a high price for his corn from the foreign demand,
must he, by a prohibition of exportation, be compelled to take a
low price, not of the poor only, but of every one that eats bread,
even the richest? the duty of relieving the poor is incumbent on the
rich; but by this operation the whole burden of it is laid on the
farmer, who is to relieve the rich at the same time. Of the poor too,
those, who are maintained by the parishes, have no right to claim
this sacrifice of the farmer; as, while they have their allowance,
it makes no difference to them, whether bread be cheap or dear.
Those working poor, who now mind business only _five_ or _four_
days in the week, if bread should be so dear, as to oblige them to
work the whole _six_ required by the commandment, do not seem to be
aggrieved, so as to have a right to public redress. There will then
remain, comparatively, only a few families in every district, who,
from sickness, or a great number of children, will be so distressed
by a high price of corn, as to need relief; and these should be taken
care of by particular benefactions, without restraining the farmer's
profit.

Those, who fear, that exportation may so far drain the country of
corn, as to starve ourselves, fear what never did, nor ever can
happen. They may as well, when they view the tide ebbing towards
the sea, fear, that all the water will leave the river. The price
of corn, like water, will find its own level. The more we export,
the dearer it becomes at home; the more is received abroad, the
cheaper it becomes there; and as soon as these prices are equal,
the exportation stops of course. As the seasons vary in different
countries, the calamity of a bad harvest is never universal. If then,
all ports were always open, and all commerce free, every maritime
country would generally eat bread at the medium price, or average
of all the harvests; which would probably be more equal than we can
make it by out artificial regulations, and therefore a more steady
encouragement to agriculture. The nation would all have bread at this
middle price; and that nation, which at any time inhumanely refuses
to relieve the distresses of another nation, deserves no compassion
when in distress itself.


[§ 3. _Of the Effect of Dearness of Provisions upon Working, and upon
Manufactures._]

The common people do not work for pleasure generally, but from
necessity. Cheapness of provisions makes them more idle; less work is
then done, it is then more in demand proportionally, and of course
the price rises. Dearness of provisions obliges the manufacturer to
work more days and more hours; thus more work is done than equals the
usual demand; of course it becomes cheaper, and the manufactures in
consequence.


[§ 4. _Of an open Trade._]

Perhaps, in general, it would be better if government meddled no
farther with trade, than to protect it, and let it take its course.
Most of the statutes or acts, edicts, arrets, and placarts of
parliaments, princes, and states, for regulating, directing, or
restraining of trade, have, we think, been either political blunders,
or jobs obtained by artful men, for private advantage, under pretence
of public good. When Colbert assembled some wise old merchants of
France, and desired their advice and opinion, how he could serve and
promote commerce: their answer, after consultation, was in three
words only, _Laissez nous faire_; "Let us alone."--It is said, by a
very solid writer of the same nation, that he is well advanced in
the science of politics, who knows the full force of that maxim,
_Pas trop gouverner_, "Not to govern too much;" which, perhaps,
would be of more use when applied to trade, than in any other public
concern. It were therefore to be wished, that commerce were as free
between all the nations of the world, as it is between the several
counties of England; so would all, by mutual communication, obtain
more enjoyments. Those counties do not ruin each other by trade,
neither would the nations. No nation was ever ruined by trade, even,
seemingly, the most disadvantageous.

Wherever desirable superfluities are imported, industry is excited,
and thereby plenty is produced. Were only necessaries permitted to be
purchased, men would work no more than was necessary for that purpose.


[§ 5. _Of Prohibitions, with Respect to the Exportation of Gold and
Silver._]

Could Spain and Portugal have succeeded in executing their foolish
laws for _hedging in the cuckoo_, as Locke calls it, and have kept
at home all their gold and silver, those metals would by this time
have been of little more value than so much lead or iron. Their
plenty would have lessened their value. We see the folly of these
edicts: but are not our own prohibitory and restrictive laws, that
are professedly made with intention to bring a balance in our favour
from our trade with foreign nations to be paid in money, and laws
to prevent the necessity of exporting that money, which if they
could be thoroughly executed, would make money as plenty, and of as
little value; I say, are not such laws a kin to those Spanish edicts,
follies of the same family?


[§ 6. _Of the Returns for foreign Articles._]

In fact, the _produce of other countries_ can hardly be obtained,
unless by fraud and rapine, without giving the _produce of our land
or our industry_ in exchange for them. If we have mines of gold and
silver, gold and silver may then be called the produce of our land:
if we have not, we can only fairly obtain those metals by giving for
them the produce of our land or industry. When we have them, they are
then only that produce or industry in another shape; which we may
give, if the trade requires it, and our other produce will not suit,
in exchange for the produce of some other country, that furnishes
what we have more occasion for, or more desire. When we have, to an
inconvenient degree, parted with our gold and silver, our industry
is stimulated afresh to procure more; that, by its means, we may
contrive to procure the same advantage.


[§ 7. _Of Restraints upon Commerce in Time of War._]

When princes make war by prohibiting commerce, each may hurt himself
as much as his enemy. Traders, who by their business are promoting
the common good of mankind, as well as farmers and fishermen, who
labour for the subsistence of all, should never be interrupted, or
molested in their business, but enjoy the protection of all in the
time of war, as well as in time of peace.

This policy, those, whom we are pleased to call Barbarians, have in
a great measure adopted; for the trading subjects of any power with
whom the emperor of Morocco may be at war, are not liable to capture,
when within sight of his land, going or coming; and have otherwise
free liberty to trade and reside in his dominions.

As a maritime power, we presume it is not thought right, that Great
Britain should grant such freedom, except partially; as in the case
of war with France, when tobacco is allowed to be sent thither under
the sanction of passports.


[§ 8. _Exchanges in Trade may be gainful to each Party._]

In transactions of trade, it is not to be supposed, that, like
gaming, what one party _gains_ the other must necessarily _lose_. The
gain to each may be equal. If A has more corn than he can consume,
but wants cattle; and B has more cattle, but wants corn, exchange
is gain to each: hereby the common stock of comforts in life is
increased.


[§9. _Of Paper Credit._]

It is impossible for government to circumscribe, or fix the extent of
paper credit, which must of course fluctuate. Government may as well
pretend to lay down rules for the operations, or the confidence of
every individual in the course of his trade. Any seeming temporary
evil arising, must naturally work its own cure.

FOOTNOTE:

[85] The political fragments, which are here presented to the reader,
were gathered up from the notes, annexed to a pamphlet called The
Principles of Trade, printed for Brotherton and Sewel, London, 1774,
second edition.--The writer of this work speaks of assistance lent to
him, in the following passage in his preface: "Some very respectable
friends have indulged me with their ideas and opinions. It is with
the greatest pleasure we, in this second edition, most gratefully
acknowledge the favour; and must add, that should the public hold
this performance in any estimation, no small share belongs to those
friends." Our author is one of the respectable friends here alluded
to. B. V.




  _On the Price of Corn, and Management of the Poor[86]._


  TO MESSIEURS THE PUBLIC.

I am one of that class of people, that feeds you all, and at present
is abused by you all;--in short, I am a _farmer_.

By your news-papers we are told, that God had sent a very short
harvest to some other countries of Europe. I thought this might be in
favour of Old England; and that now we should get a good price for
our grain, which would bring millions among us, and make us flow in
money: that to be sure is scarce enough.

But the wisdom of government forbad the exportation[87].

Well, says I, then we must be content with the market-price at home.

No, say my lords the mob, you sha'n't have that. Bring your corn to
market if your dare;--we'll sell it for you, for less money, or take
it for nothing.

Being thus attacked by both ends _of the constitution_, the head and
tail _of government_, what am I to do?

Must I keep my corn in the barn, to feed and increase
the breed of rats?--be it so;--they cannot be less thankful than
those I have been used to feed.

Are we farmers the only people to be grudged the profits of our
honest labour?--And why? One of the late scribblers against us gives
a bill of fare of the provisions at my daughter's wedding, and
proclaims to all the world, that we had the insolence to eat beef and
pudding!--Has he not read the precept in the good book, _Thou shalt
not muzzle the mouth of the ox that treadeth out the corn_; or does
he think us less worthy of good living than our oxen?

O, but the manufacturers! the manufacturers! they are to be favoured,
and they must have bread at a cheap rate!

Hark ye, Mr. Oaf:--The farmers live splendidly, you say. And pray,
would you have them hoard the money they get? Their fine clothes
and furniture, do they make them themselves or for one another, and
so keep the money among them? Or, do they employ these your darling
manufacturers, and so scatter it again all over the nation?

The wool would produce me a better price, if it were suffered to
go to foreign markets; but that, Messieurs the Public, your laws
will not permit. It must be kept all at home, that our _dear_
manufacturers may have it the cheaper. And then, having yourselves
thus lessened our encouragement for raising sheep, you curse us for
the scarcity of mutton!

I have heard my grandfather say, that the farmers submitted to the
prohibition on the exportation of wool, being made to expect and
believe, that when the manufacturer bought his wool cheaper, they
should also have their cloth cheaper. But the deuce a bit. It has
been growing dearer and dearer from that day to this. How so? Why,
truly, the cloth is exported; and that keeps up the price.

Now if it be a good principle, that the exportation of a commodity is
to be restrained, that so our people at home may have it the cheaper;
stick to that principle, and go thorough stitch with it. Prohibit the
exportation of your cloth, your leather, and shoes, your ironware,
and your manufactures of all sorts, to make them, all cheaper at
home. And cheap enough they will be, I will warrant you--till people
leave off making them.

Some folks seem to think they ought never to be easy till England
becomes another Lubberland, where it is fancied the streets are paved
with penny-rolls, the houses tiled with pancakes, and chickens, ready
roasted, cry, Come eat me.

I say, when you are sure you have got a good principle, stick to
it, and carry it thorough.--I hear it is said, that though it was
_necessary and right_ for the m----y to advise a prohibition of the
exportation of corn, yet it was _contrary to law_; and also, that
though it was _contrary to law_ for the mob to obstruct waggons,
yet it was _necessary and right_.--Just the same thing to a tittle.
Now they tell me, an act of indemnity ought to pass in favour of
the m----y, to secure them from the consequences of having acted
illegally.--If so, pass another in favour of the mob. Others say,
some of the mob ought to be hanged, by way of example.---If so,--but
I say no more than I have said before, _when you are sure that you
have got a good principle, go through with it_.

You say, poor labourers cannot afford to buy bread at a high price,
unless they had higher wages.--Possibly.--But how shall we farmers be
able to afford our labourers higher wages, if you will not allow us
to get, when we might have it, a higher price for our corn?

By all that I can learn, we should at least have had a guinea a
quarter more, if the exportation had been allowed. And this money
England would have got from foreigners.

But, it seems, we farmers must take so much less, that the poor may
have it so much cheaper.

This operates then as a tax for the maintenance of the poor. A very
good thing, you will say. But I ask, why a partial tax? why laid on
us farmers only? If it be a good thing, pray, Messieurs the Public,
take your share of it, by indemnifying us a little out of your
public treasury. In doing a good thing, there is both honour and
pleasure--you are welcome to your share of both.

For my own part, I am not so well satisfied of the goodness of this
thing. I am for doing good to the poor, but I differ in opinion about
the means. I think the best way of doing good to the poor, is, not
making them easy _in_ poverty, but leading or driving them _out_
of it. In my youth I travelled much, and I observed in different
countries, that the more public provisions were made for the poor,
the less they provided for themselves, and of course became poorer.
And, on the contrary, the less was done for them, the more they did
for themselves, and became richer. There is no country in the world
where so many provisions are established for them; so many hospitals
to receive them when they are sick or lame, founded and maintained
by voluntary charities; so many alms houses for the aged of both
sexes, together with a solemn general law made by the rich to subject
their estates to a heavy tax for the support of the poor. Under all
these obligations, are our poor modest, humble, and thankful? And do
they use their best endeavours to maintain themselves, and lighten
our shoulders of this burthen? On the contrary, I affirm, that
there is no country in the world in which the poor are more idle,
dissolute, drunken, and insolent. The day you passed that act, you
took away from before their eyes the greatest of all inducements to
industry, frugality, and sobriety, by giving them a dependence on
somewhat else than a careful accumulation during youth and health,
for support in age or sickness. In short, you offered a premium for
the encouragement of idleness, and you should not now wonder, that
it has had its effect in the increase of poverty. Repeal that law,
and you will soon see a change in their manners, _Saint Monday_, and
_Saint Tuesday_, will soon cease to be holidays. Six _days shalt thou
labour_, though one of the old commandments long treated as out of
date, will again be looked upon as a respectable precept; industry
will increase, and with it plenty among the lower people; their
circumstances will mend, and more will be done for their happiness
by inuring them to provide for themselves, than could be done by
dividing all your estates among them.

Excuse me, Messieurs the Public, if upon this _interesting_ subject,
I put you to the trouble of reading a little of _my_ nonsense; I am
sure I have lately read a great deal of _yours_, and therefore from
you (at least from those of you who are writers) I deserve a little
indulgence.

  I am yours, &c.

  ARATOR[88].

FOOTNOTES:

[86] The following extracts of a letter signed Columella, and
addressed to the editors of the Repository for select Papers on
Agriculture, Arts, and Manufactures (See Vol. I. p. 352.) will again
serve the purpose of preparing those who read it, for entering upon
this paper.

"GENTLEMEN,

"There is now publishing in France a periodical work, called
Ephemeridis du Citoyen, in which several points, interesting to those
concerned in agriculture, are from time to time discussed by some
able hands. In looking over one of the volumes of this work a few
days ago, I found a little piece written by one of our countrymen,
and which our vigilant neighbours had taken from the London Chronicle
in 1766. The author is a gentleman well known to every man of letters
in Europe, and perhaps there is none, in this age, to whom mankind in
general are more indebted.

"That this piece may not be lost to our own country, I beg you will
give it a place in your Repository: it was written in favour of the
farmers, when they suffered so much abuse in our public papers, and
were also plundered by the mob in many places."

The principles on which this piece is grounded are given more at
large in the Political Fragments, art. 2. B. V.

[87] It is not necessary to repeat in what degree Dr. Franklin
respected the ministers, to whom he alludes.--The embargo upon corn
was but a single measure, which, it is enough to say, an host of
politicians thought well advised, but ill defended. Of the great
and honourable services of the earl of Chatham to his country, Dr.
Franklin has borne the amplest testimony. B. V.

[88] The late Mr. Owen Ruffhead, being some time ago employed in
preparing _a digest of our poor laws_, communicated a copy of it to
Dr. Franklin for his advice. Dr. Franklin recommended, that provision
should be made therein, for the printing on a sheet of paper and
dispersing, in each parish in the kingdom, annual accounts of every
disbursement and receipt of its officers. It is obvious to remark,
how greatly this must tend to check both the officers and the poor,
and to inform and interest the parishioners with respect to parish
concerns.--Some of the American colonies actually practise this
measure with a success which might justify its adoption here. B. V.




TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN, ESQ[89].

  _On Luxury, Idleness, and Industry._

  Written in 1784.


It is wonderful how preposterously the affairs of this world are
managed. Naturally one would imagine, that the interest of a few
individuals should give way to general interest; but individuals
manage their affairs with so much more application, industry, and
address, than the public do theirs, that, general interest most
commonly gives way to particular. We assemble parliaments and
councils, to have the benefit of their collected wisdom; but we
necessarily have, at the same time, the inconvenience of their
collected passions, prejudices, and private interests. By the help of
these, artful men overpower their wisdom, and dupe its possessors:
and if we may judge, by the acts, arrets, and edicts, all the world
over, for regulating commerce, an assembly of great men is the
greatest fool upon earth.

I have not yet, indeed, thought of a remedy for luxury. I am not
sure that in a great state it is capable of a remedy, nor that the
evil is in itself always so great as it is represented. Suppose we
include in the definition of luxury all unnecessary expence, and then
let us consider, whether laws to prevent such expence are possible
to be executed in a great country, and whether, if they could be
executed, our people generally would be happier, or even richer. Is
not the hope of being one day able to purchase and enjoy luxuries, a
great spur to labour and industry? May not luxury therefore produce
more than it consumes, if, without such a spur, people would be,
as they are naturally enough inclined to be, lazy and indolent? To
this purpose I remember a circumstance. The skipper of a shallop,
employed between Cape-May and Philadelphia, had done us some small
service, for which he refused to be paid. My wife, understanding
that he had a daughter, sent her a present of a new-fashioned cap.
Three years after, this skipper being at my house with an old farmer
of Cape-May, his passenger, he mentioned the cap, and how much his
daughter had been pleased with it. "But (said he) it proved a dear
cap to our congregation." "How so?" "When my daughter appeared with
it at meeting, it was so much admired, that all the girls resolved
to get such caps from Philadelphia; and my wife and I computed, that
the whole could not have cost less than a hundred pounds." "True
(said the farmer), but you do not tell all the story. I think the cap
was nevertheless an advantage to us, for it was the first thing that
put our girls upon knitting worsted mittens for sale at Philadelphia,
that they might have wherewithal to buy caps and ribbons there,
and you know that that industry has continued, and is likely to
continue and increase to a much greater value, and answer better
purposes."--Upon the whole, I was more reconciled to this little
piece of luxury, since not only the girls were made happier by having
fine caps, but the Philadelphians by the supply of warm mittens.

In our commercial towns upon the sea-coast, fortunes will
occasionally be made. Some of those who grow rich will be prudent,
live within bounds, and preserve what they have gained for their
posterity: others, fond of showing their wealth, will be extravagant,
and ruin themselves. Laws cannot prevent this: and perhaps it is not
always an evil to the public. A shilling spent idly by a fool, may
be picked up by a wiser person, who knows better what to do with
it. It is therefore not lost. A vain silly fellow builds a fine
house, furnishes it richly, lives in it expensively, and in a few
years ruins himself: but the masons, carpenters, smiths, and other
honest tradesmen, have been by his employ assisted in maintaining and
raising their families; the farmer has been paid for his labour, and
encouraged, and the estate is now in better hands. In some cases,
indeed, certain modes of luxury may be a public evil, in the same
manner as it is a private one. If there be a nation, for instance,
that exports its beef and linen, to pay for the importation of claret
and porter, while a great part of its people live upon potatoes,
and wear no shirts, wherein does it differ from the sot, who lets
his family starve, and sells his clothes to buy drink? Our American
commerce is, I confess, a little in this way. We sell our victuals to
the islands for rum and sugar; the substantial necessaries of life
for superfluities. But we have plenty, and live well nevertheless,
though, by being soberer, we might be richer.

The vast quantity of forest land we have yet to clear, and put
in order for cultivation, will for a long time keep the body of
our nation laborious and frugal. Forming an opinion of our people
and their manners, by what is seen among the inhabitants of the
sea-ports, is judging from an improper sample. The people of
the trading towns may be rich and luxurious, while the country
possesses all the virtues, that tend to promote happiness and public
prosperity. Those towns are not much regarded by the country; they
are hardly considered as an essential part of the states, and the
experience of the last war has shown, that their being in the
possession of the enemy did not necessarily draw on the subjection
of the country, which bravely continued to maintain its freedom and
independence notwithstanding.

It has been computed by some political arithmetician, that if every
man and woman would work for four hours each day on something useful,
that labour would produce sufficient to procure all the necessaries
and comforts of life, want and misery would be banished out of the
world, and the rest of the twenty-four hours might be leisure and
pleasure.

What occasions then so much want and misery? It is the employment
of men and women in works, that produce neither the necessaries
nor conveniences of life, who, with those who do nothing, consume
necessaries raised by the laborious. To explain this.

The first elements of wealth are obtained by labour, from the earth
and waters. I have land, and raise corn. With this, if I feed a
family that does nothing, my corn will be consumed, and at the end of
the year I shall be no richer than I was at the beginning. But if,
while I feed them, I employ them, some in spinning, others in making
bricks, &c. for building, the value of my corn will be arrested and
remain with me, and at the end of the year we may all be better
clothed and better lodged. And if, instead of employing a man I feed
in making bricks, I employ him in fiddling for me, the corn he eats
is gone, and no part of his manufacture remains to augment the wealth
and convenience of the family: I shall therefore be the poorer for
this fiddling man, unless the rest of my family work more, or eat
less, to make up the deficiency he occasions.

Look round the world, and see the millions employed in doing nothing,
or in something that amounts to nothing, when the necessaries and
conveniences of life are in question. What is the bulk of commerce,
for which we fight and destroy each other, but the toil of millions
for superfluities, to the great hazard and loss of many lives, by the
constant dangers of the sea? How much labour is spent in building and
fitting great ships, to go to China and Arabia for tea and coffee,
to the West Indies for sugar, to America for tobacco? These things
cannot be called the necessaries of life, for our ancestors lived
very comfortably without them.

A question may be asked: could all these people now employed in
raising, making, or carrying superfluities, be subsisted by raising
necessaries? I think they might. The world is large, and a great part
of it still uncultivated. Many hundred millions of acres in Asia,
Africa, and America, are still in a forest, and a great deal even
in Europe. On a hundred acres of this forest a man might become a
substantial farmer, and a hundred thousand men, employed in clearing
each his hundred acres, would hardly brighten a spot big enough to be
visible from the moon, unless with Herschel's telescope; so vast are
the regions still in wood.

It is, however, some comfort to reflect, that, upon the whole, the
quantity of industry and prudence among mankind exceeds the quantity
of idleness and folly. Hence the increase of good buildings, farms
cultivated, and populous cities filled with wealth, all over Europe,
which a few ages since were only to be found on the coasts of the
Mediterranean; and this notwithstanding the mad wars continually
raging, by which are often destroyed in one year the works of many
years peace. So that we may hope the luxury of a few merchants on the
coast will not be the ruin of America.

One reflection more, and I will end this long rambling letter. Almost
all the parts of our bodies require some expence. The feet demand
shoes; the legs stockings; the rest of the body clothing; and the
belly a good deal of victuals. Our eyes, though exceedingly useful,
ask, when reasonable, only the cheap assistance of spectacles, which
could not much impair our finances. But the eyes of other people are
the eyes that ruin us. If all but myself were blind, I should want
neither fine clothes, fine houses, nor fine furniture.

FOOTNOTE:

[89] This letter is taken from a periodical publication, that existed
only for a short period, entitled, The Repository, to which it was
communicated by the person to whom it is addressed. _Editor._




  _On Smuggling, and its various Species[90]._


  SIR,

There are many people that would be thought, and even think
themselves, _honest_ men, who fail nevertheless in particular points
of honesty; deviating from that character sometimes by the prevalence
of mode or custom, and sometimes through mere inattention; so that
their _honesty_ is partial only, and not _general_ or universal. Thus
one, who would scorn to over-reach you in a bargain, shall make no
scruple of tricking you a little now and then at cards; another, that
plays with the utmost fairness, shall with great freedom cheat you in
the sale of a horse. But there is no kind of dishonesty, into which
otherwise good people more easily and frequently fall, than that of
defrauding government of its revenues by smuggling, when they have an
opportunity, or encouraging smugglers by buying their goods.

I fell into these reflections the other day, on hearing two gentlemen
of reputation discoursing about a small estate, which one of them
was inclined to sell, and the other to buy; when the seller, in
recommending the place, remarked, that its situation was very
advantageous on this account, that, being on the sea-coast in a
smuggling country, one had frequent opportunities of buying many
of the expensive articles used in a family (such as tea, coffee,
chocolate, brandy, wines, cambrics, Brussels laces, French silks,
and all kinds of India goods), 20, 30, and in some articles 50 _per
cent_ cheaper, than they could be had in the more interior parts, of
traders that paid duty.--The other _honest_ gentlemen allowed this
to be an advantage, but insisted, that the seller, in the advanced
price he demanded on that account, rated the advantage much above its
value. And neither of them seemed to think dealing with smugglers a
practice, that an _honest_ man (provided he got his goods cheap) had
the least reason to be ashamed of.

At a time when the load of our, public debt, and the heavy expence
of maintaining our fleets and armies to be ready for our defence on
occasion, makes it necessary, not only to continue old taxes, but
often to look out for new ones, perhaps it may not be unuseful to
state this matter in a light, that few seem to have considered it in.

The people of Great Britain, under the happy constitution of this
country, have a privilege few other countries enjoy, that of choosing
the third branch of the legislature, which branch has alone the
power of regulating their taxes. Now whenever the government finds
it necessary for the common benefit, advantage, and safety of the
nation, for the security of our liberties, property, religion, and
every thing that is dear to us, that certain sums shall be yearly
raised by taxes, duties, &c. and paid into the public treasury,
thence to be dispensed by government for those purposes; ought not
every _honest man_ freely and willingly to pay his just proportion
of this necessary expence? Can he possibly preserve a right to that
character, if, by any fraud, stratagem, or contrivance, he avoids
that payment in whole or in part.

What should we think of a companion, who, having supped with his
friends at a tavern, and partaken equally of the joys of the evening
with the rest of us, would nevertheless contrive by some artifice
to shift his share of the reckoning upon others, in order to go off
scot-free? If a man who practised this would, when detected, be
deemed and called a scoundrel, what ought he to be called, who can
enjoy all the inestimable benefits of public society, and yet by
smuggling, or dealing with smugglers, contrive to evade paying his
just share of the expence, as settled by his own representatives in
parliament; and wrongfully throw it upon his honester and perhaps
much poorer neighbours? He will perhaps be ready to tell me, that
he does not wrong his neighbours; he scorns the imputation, he only
cheats the king a little, who is very able to bear it. This however
is a mistake. The public treasure is the treasure of the nation,
to be applied to national purposes. And when a duty is laid for a
particular public and necessary purpose, if, through smuggling, that
duty falls short of raising the sum required, and other duties must
therefore be laid to make up the deficiency, all the additional sum
laid by the new duties and paid by other people, though it should
amount to no more than a halfpenny or a farthing per head, is so
much actually picked out of the pockets of those other people by
the smugglers and their abettors and encouragers. Are they then
any better or other than pickpockets? and what mean, low, rascally
pickpockets must those be, that can pick pockets for halfpence and
for farthings?

I would not however be supposed to allow in what I have just said,
that cheating the king is a less offence against honesty, than
cheating the public. The king and the public in this case are
different names for the same thing; but if we consider the king
distinctly it will not lessen the crime: it is no justification of
a robbery, that the person robbed was rich and able to bear it. The
king has as much right to justice as the meanest of his subjects;
and as he is truly the common _father_ of his people, those that rob
him fall under the scripture woe, pronounced against the son _that
robbeth his father, and saith it is no sin_.

Mean as this practice is, do we not daily see people of character and
fortune engaged in it for trifling advantages to themselves?--Is any
lady ashamed to request of a gentleman of her acquaintance, that when
he returns from abroad, he would smuggle her home a piece of silk or
lace from France or Flanders? Is any gentleman ashamed to undertake
and execute the commission?--Not in the least. They will talk of it
freely, even before others whose pockets they are thus contriving to
pick by this piece of knavery.

Among other branches of the revenue, that of the post-office is, by
a late law, appropriated to the discharge of our public debt, to
defray the expences of the state. None but members of parliament,
and a few public officers have now a right to avoid, by a frank, the
payment of postage. When any letter, not written by them or on their
business, is franked by any of them, it is a hurt to the revenue, an
injury which they must now take the pains to conceal by writing the
whole superscription themselves. And yet such is our insensibility
to justice in this particular, that nothing is more common than to
see, even in a reputable company, a _very honest_ gentleman or lady
declare his or her intention to cheat the nation of three-pence by
a frank, and without blushing apply to one of the very legislators
themselves, with a modest request, that he would be pleased to become
an accomplice in the crime, and assist in the perpetration.

There are those who by these practices take a great deal in a year
out of the public purse, and put the money into their own private
pockets. If, passing through a room where public treasure is
deposited, a man takes the opportunity of clandestinely pocketing and
carrying off a guinea, is he not truly and properly a thief? And if
another evades paying into the treasury a guinea he ought to pay in,
and applies it to his own use, when he knows it belongs to the public
as much as that which has been paid in, what difference is there in
the nature of the crime, or the baseness of committing it?

Some laws make the receiving of stolen goods equally penal with
stealing, and upon this principle, that if there were no receivers
there would be few thieves. Our proverb too says truly, that _the
receiver is as bad as the thief_. By the same reasoning, as there
would be few smugglers, if there were none who knowingly encouraged
them by buying their goods, we may say, that the encouragers of
smuggling are as bad as the smugglers; and that, as smugglers are a
kind of thieves, both equally deserve the punishments of thievery.

In this view of wronging the revenue, what must we think of those who
can evade paying for their wheels and their plate, in defiance of law
and justice, and yet declaim against corruption and peculation, as if
their own hands and hearts were pure and unsullied? The Americans
offend us grievously, when, contrary to our laws, they smuggle goods
into their own country: and yet they had no hand in making those
laws. I do not however pretend from thence to justify them. But
I think the offence much greater in those who either directly or
indirectly have been concerned in making the very laws they break.
And when I hear them exclaiming against the Americans, and for every
little infringement of the acts of trade, or obstruction given by a
petty mob to an officer of our customs in that country, calling for
vengeance against the whole people as REBELS and traitors, I cannot
help thinking there are still those in the world who can _see a mote
in their brother's eye, while they do not discern a beam in their
own_; and that the old saying is as true now as ever it was, _one man
may better steal a horse, than another look over the hedge_.

  F. B.

FOOTNOTE:

[90] This letter is extracted from the London Chronicle, for November
24, 1767, and is addressed to the printer of that newspaper. B. V.




  _Observations on War[91]._


By the original law of nations, war and extirpation were the
punishment of injury. Humanizing by degrees, it admitted slavery
instead of death: a farther step was the exchange of prisoners
instead of slavery: another, to respect more the property of private
persons under conquest, and be content with acquired dominion. Why
should not this law of nations go on improving? Ages have intervened
between its several steps: but as knowledge of late increases
rapidly, why should not those steps be quickened? Why should it
not be agreed to, as the future law of nations, that in any war
hereafter the following description of men should be undisturbed,
have the protection of both sides, and be permitted to follow their
employments in security? viz.

1. Cultivators of the earth, because they labour for the subsistence
of mankind.

2. Fishermen, for the same reason.

3. Merchants and traders in unarmed ships, who accommodate different
nations by communicating and exchanging the necessaries and
conveniences of life.

4. Artists and mechanics, inhabiting and working in open towns.

It is hardly necessary to add, that the hospitals of enemies should
be unmolested--they ought to be assisted. It is for the interest of
humanity in general, that the occasions of war, and the inducements
to it, should be diminished. If rapine be abolished, one of the
encouragements to war is taken away; and peace therefore more likely
to continue and be lasting.

The practice of robbing merchants on the high seas--a remnant of
the antient piracy--though it may be accidentally beneficial to
particular persons, is far from being profitable to all engaged in
it, or to the nation that authorises it. In the beginning of a war,
some rich ships are surprized and taken. This encourages the first
adventurers to fit out more armed vessels, and many others to do the
same. But the enemy at the same time become more careful, arm their
merchant ships better, and render them not so easy to be taken:
they go also more under the protection of convoys. Thus, while
the privateers to take them are multiplied, the vessels subject to
be taken, and the chances of profit, are diminished; so that many
cruises are made wherein the expences overgo the gains, and, as is
the case in other lotteries, though particulars have got prizes, the
mass of adventurers are losers, the whole expence of fitting out all
the privateers during a war being much greater than the whole amount
of goods taken.

Then there is the national loss of all the labour of so many men
during the time they have been employed in robbing, who besides
spend what they get in riot, drunkenness, and debauchery, lose their
habits of industry, are rarely fit for any sober business after
a peace, and serve only to increase the number of highwaymen and
housebreakers. Even the undertakers, who have been fortunate, are by
sudden wealth led into expensive living, the habit of which continues
when the means of supporting it cease, and finally ruins them: a just
punishment for their having wantonly and unfeelingly ruined many
honest, innocent traders and their families, whose substance was
employed in serving the common interest of mankind.

FOOTNOTE:

[91] From the American Museum, Vol. VII. p. 101. _Editor._




  _Notes copied from Dr. Franklin's writing in pencil in the margin
  of Judge Foster's celebrated argument in favour of the Impressing
  of Seamen (published in the folio edition of his works)[92]._


Judge Foster, p. 158. "Every man."--The conclusion here, from the
_whole to a part_, does not seem to be good logic. If the alphabet
should say, Let us all fight for the defence of the whole, that is
equal, and may therefore be just. But if they should say, Let A B C
and D go out and fight for us, while we stay at home and sleep in
whole skins, that is not equal, and therefore cannot be just.

_Ib._ "Employ."--If you please. The word signifies engaging a man to
work for me, by offering him such wages as are sufficient to induce
him to prefer my service. This is very different from compelling him
to work on such terms as I think proper.

_Ib._ "This service and employment, &c."--These are false facts. His
employments and service are not the same.--Under the merchant he
goes in an unarmed vessel, not obliged to fight, but to transport
merchandise. In the king's service he is obliged to fight, and to
hazard all the dangers of battle. Sickness on board of king's ships
is also more common and more mortal. The merchant's service too
he can quit at the end of the voyage, not the king's. Also, the
merchant's wages are much higher.

_Ib._ "I am very sensible, &c."--Here are two things put in
comparison that are not comparable: viz. injury to seamen, and
inconvenience to trade. Inconvenience to the whole trade of a nation
will not justify injustice to a single seaman. If the trade would
suffer without his service, it is able and ought to be willing
to offer him such wages, as may induce him to afford his service
voluntarily.

Page 159. "Private mischief must be borne with patience, for
preventing a national calamity."--Where is this maxim in law and
good policy to be found? And how can that be a maxim, which is not
consistent with common sense? If the maxim had been, that private
mischiefs, which prevent a national calamity, ought to be generously
compensated by the nation, one might understand it: but that such
private mischiefs are only to be borne with patience, is absurd!

_Ib._ "The expedient, &c. And, &c." (Paragraphs 2 and 3).--Twenty
ineffectual or inconvenient schemes will not justify one that is
unjust.

_Ib._ "Upon the foot of, &c."--Your reasoning, indeed, like a lie,
stands but upon one _foot_, truth upon two.

Page 160. "Full wages."--Probably the same they had in the merchant's
service.

Page 174. "I hardly admit, &c." (Paragraph 5).--When this author
speaks of impressing, page 158, he diminishes the horror of the
practice as much as possible, by presenting to the mind one sailor
only suffering a "_hardship_" (as he tenderly calls it) in some
"_particular cases_" only, and he places against this private
mischief the inconvenience to the trade of the kingdom.--But if,
as he supposes is often the case, the sailor who is pressed, and
obliged to serve for the defence of trade, at the rate of twenty-five
shillings a month, could get three pounds fifteen shillings in the
merchant's service, you take from him fifty shillings a month; and if
you have a 100,000 in your service, you rob this honest industrious
part of society and their poor families of 250,000_l._ per month, or
three millions a year, and at the same time oblige them to hazard
their lives in fighting for the defence of your trade, to the defence
of which all ought indeed to contribute (and sailors among the rest)
in proportion to their profits by it: but this three millions is more
than their share, if they did not pay with their persons; but when
you force that, methinks you should excuse the other.

But it may be said, to give the king's seamen merchant's wages would
cost the nation too much, and call for more taxes. The question then
will amount to this: whether it be just in a community, that the
richer part should compel the poorer to fight in defence of them
and their properties, for such wages as they think fit to allow,
and punish them if they refuse? Our author tells us that it is
"_legal_." I have not law enough to dispute his authorities, but I
cannot persuade myself that it is equitable. I will, however, own
for the present, that it may be lawful when necessary; but then I
contend, that it may be used so as to produce the same good effects,
_the public security_, without doing so much intolerable injustice
as attends the impressing common seamen.--In order to be better
understood I would premise two things: first, that voluntary seamen
may be had for the service, if they were sufficiently paid. The proof
is, that to serve in the same ship, and incur the same dangers,
you have no occasion to impress captains, lieutenants, second
lieutenants, midshipmen, pursers, nor many other officers. Why, but
that the profits of their places, or the emoluments expected, are
sufficient inducements? The business then is, to find money, by
impressing, sufficient to make the sailors all volunteers, as well as
their officers, and this without any fresh burthen upon trade.--The
second of my premises is, that twenty-five shillings a month, with
his share of the salt beef, pork, and peas-pudding, being found
sufficient for the subsistence of a hard-working seaman, it will
certainly be so for a sedentary scholar or gentleman. I would then
propose to form a treasury, out of which encouragements to seamen
should be paid. To fill this treasury, I would impress a number of
civil officers, who at present have great salaries, oblige them to
serve in their respective offices for twenty-five shillings a month,
with their shares of mess provisions, and throw the rest of their
salaries into the seamen's treasury. If such a press-warrant were
given me to execute, the first I would press should be a recorder
of Bristol, or a Mr. Justice Foster, because I might have need of
his edifying example, to show how much impressing ought to be borne
with; for he would certainly find, that though to be reduced to
twenty-five shillings a month might be a "_private mischief_," yet
that, agreeably to his maxim of law and good policy, it "_ought to
be borne with patience_," for preventing a national calamity. Then
I would press the rest of the judges; and, opening the red book,
I would press every civil officer of government from 50_l._ a year
salary, up to 50,000_l._ which would throw an immense sum into our
treasury: and these gentlemen could not complain, since they would
receive twenty-five shillings a month, and their rations; and this
without being obliged to fight. Lastly, I think I would impress ****

FOOTNOTE:

[92] These notes are taken from the periodical publication mentioned
in p. 424 of the present Vol. _Editor._




TO BENJAMIN VAUGHAN, ESQ[93].

  _On the criminal Laws, and the Practice of Privateering._


  _March 14, 1785._

  MY DEAR FRIEND,

Among the pamphlets you lately sent me, was one, entitled, Thoughts
on Executive Justice. In return for that, I send you a French one on
the same subject, Observations concernant l'Exécution de l'Article
II, de la Déclaration sur le Vol. They are both addressed to the
judges, but written, as you will see, in a very different spirit. The
English author is for hanging _all_ thieves. The Frenchman is for
proportioning punishments to offences.

If we really believe, as we profess to believe, that the law of Moses
was the law of God, the dictate of divine wisdom, infinitely superior
to human; on what principles do we ordain death as the punishment of
an offence, which, according to that law, was only to be punished
by a restitution of fourfold? To put a man to death for an offence,
which does not deserve death, is it not a murder? And, as the French
writer says, _Doit on punir un délit contre la societé, par un crime
contre la nature?_

Superfluous property is the creature of society. Simple and mild laws
were sufficient to guard the property that was merely necessary. The
savage's bow, his hatchet, and his coat of skins, were sufficiently
secured, without law, by the fear of personal resentment and
retaliation. When, by virtue of the first laws, part of the society
accumulated wealth and grew powerful, they enacted others more
severe, and would protect their property at the expence of humanity.
This was abusing their power, and commencing a tyranny. If a savage,
before he entered into society, had been told,--"Your neighbour, by
this means, may become owner of an hundred deer; but if your brother,
or your son, or yourself, having no deer of your own, and being
hungry, should kill one, an infamous death must be the consequence:"
he would probably have preferred his liberty, and his common right
of killing any deer, to all the advantages of society that might be
proposed to him.

That it is better a hundred guilty persons should escape, than that
one innocent person should suffer, is a maxim that has been long
and generally approved; never, that I know of, controverted. Even
the sanguinary author of the Thoughts agrees to it, adding well,
"that the very thought of _injured_ innocence, and much more that
of _suffering_ innocence, must awaken all our tenderest and most
compassionate feelings, and at the same time raise our highest
indignation against the instruments of it." "But," he adds, "there is
no danger of _either_, from a strict adherence to the laws."--Really!
Is it then impossible to make an unjust law? and if the law itself be
unjust, may it not be the very "instrument" which ought "to raise the
author's, and every body's highest indignation?" I see, in the last
newspapers from London, that a woman is capitally convicted at the
Old Bailey, for privately stealing out of a shop some gauze, value
fourteen shillings and three-pence: is there any proportion between
the injury done by a theft, value fourteen shillings and three-pence,
and the punishment of a human creature, by death, on a gibbet? Might
not that woman, by her labour, have made the reparation ordained by
God, in paying fourfold? Is not all punishment, inflicted beyond
the merit of the offence, so much punishment of innocence? In this
light, how vast is the annual quantity, of not only _injured_ but
_suffering_ innocence, in almost all the civilized states of Europe!

But it seems to have been thought, that this kind of innocence may
be punished by way of _preventing_ crimes. I have read, indeed, of a
cruel Turk in Barbary, who, whenever he bought a new Christian slave,
ordered him immediately to be hung up by the legs, and to receive a
hundred blows of a cudgel on the soles of his feet, that the severe
sense of the punishment, and fear of incurring it thereafter, might
prevent the faults, that should merit it. Our author himself would
hardly approve entirely of this Turk's conduct in the government
of slaves; and yet he appears to recommend something like it for
the government of English subjects, when he applauds the reply of
judge Burnet to the convict horse-stealer; who, being asked what
he had to say why judgment of death should not pass against him,
and answering, that it was hard to hang a man for _only_ stealing a
horse, was told by the judge, "Man, thou art not to be hanged _only_
for stealing a horse, but that horses may not be stolen." The man's
answer, if candidly examined, will, I imagine, appear reasonable,
as being founded on the eternal principle of justice and equity,
that punishments should be proportioned to offences; and the judge's
reply brutal and unreasonable, though the writer "wishes all judges
to carry it with them whenever they go the circuit, and to bear
it in their minds, as containing a wise reason for all the penal
statutes, which they are called upon to put in execution. "It at
once illustrates," says he, "the true grounds and reasons of all
capital punishments whatsoever, namely, that every man's property,
as well as his life, may be held sacred and inviolate." Is there
then no difference in value between property and life? If I think
it right, that the crime of murder should be punished with death,
not only as an equal punishment of the crime, but to prevent other
murders, does it follow, that I must approve of inflicting the same
punishment for a little invasion on my property by theft? If I am
not myself so barbarous, so bloody-minded, and revengeful, as to
kill a fellow-creature for stealing from me fourteen shillings and
three-pence, how can I approve of a law that does it? Montesquieu,
who was himself a judge, endeavours to impress other maxims. He must
have known what humane judges feel on such occasions, and what the
effects of those feelings; and, so far from thinking that severe and
excessive punishments prevent crimes, he asserts, as quoted by our
French writer, that

"_L'atrocité des loix en empêche l'exécution._

"_L'orsque la peine est sans mesure, on est souvent obligé de lui
préférer l'impunité._

"_La cause de tous les relâchemens vient de l'impunité des crimes, et
non de la modération des peines._"

It is said by those who know Europe generally, that there are more
thefts committed and punished annually in England, than in all the
other nations put together. If this be so, there must be a cause
or causes for such depravity in our common people. May not one be
the deficiency of justice and morality in our national government,
manifested in our oppressive conduct to subjects, and unjust wars
on our neighbours? View the long-persisted in, unjust, monopolizing
treatment of Ireland, at length acknowledged! View the plundering
government exercised by our merchants in the Indies; the confiscating
war made upon the American colonies; and, to say nothing of those
upon France and Spain, view the late war upon Holland, which was
seen by impartial Europe in no other light than that of a war of
rapine and pillage; the hopes of an immense and easy prey being
its only apparent, and probably its true and real motive and
encouragement. Justice is as strictly due between neighbour nations,
as between neighbour citizens. A highwayman is as much a robber when
he plunders in a gang, as when single; and a nation, that makes
an unjust war, is only a great gang. After employing your people
in robbing the Dutch, strange is it, that, being put out of that
employ by peace, they still continue robbing, and rob one another?
_Piraterie_, as the French call it, or privateering, is the universal
bent of the English nation, at home and abroad, wherever settled. No
less than seven hundred privateers were, it is said, commissioned in
the last war! These were fitted out by merchants, to prey upon other
merchants, who had never done them any injury. Is there probably any
one of those privateering merchants of London, who were so ready to
rob the merchants of Amsterdam, that would not as readily plunder
another London merchant of the next street, if he could do it with
the same impunity! The avidity, the _alieni appetens_, is the same;
it is the fear alone of the gallows that makes the difference. How
then can a nation, which, among the honestest of its people, has so
many thieves by inclination, and whose government encouraged and
commissioned no less than seven hundred gangs of robbers; how can
such a nation have the face to condemn the crime in individuals, and
hang up twenty of them in a morning! It naturally puts one in mind
of a Newgate anecdote. One of the prisoners complained, that in the
night somebody had taken his buckles out of his shoes. "What, the
devil!" says another, "have we then _thieves_ amongst us? It must not
be suffered. Let us search out the rogue, and pump him to death."

There is, however, one late instance of an English merchant, who will
not profit by such ill-gotten gain. He was, it seems, part-owner of
a ship, which the other owners thought fit to employ as a letter of
marque, and which took a number of French prizes. The booty being
shared, he has now an agent here enquiring, by an advertisement in
the Gazette, for those who suffered the loss, in order to make them,
as far as in him lies, restitution. This conscientious man is a
Quaker. The Scotch presbyterians were formerly as tender; for there
is still extant an ordinance of the town-council of Edinburgh, made
soon after the reformation, "forbidding the purchase of prize goods,
under pain of losing the freedom of the burgh for ever, with other
punishment at the will of the magistrate; the practice of making
prizes being contrary to good conscience, and the rule of treating
Christian brethren as we would wish to be treated; and such goods
_are not to be sold by any godly men within this burgh_." The race of
these godly men in Scotland is probably extinct, or their principles
abandoned, since, as far as that nation had a hand in promoting the
war against the colonies, prizes and confiscations are believed to
have been a considerable motive.

It has been for some time a generally received opinion, that a
military man is not to inquire whether a war be just or unjust; he is
to execute his orders. All princes who are disposed to become tyrants
must probably approve of this opinion, and be willing to establish
it; but is it not a dangerous one? since, on that principle, if
the tyrant commands his army to attack and destroy, not only an
unoffending neighbour nation, but even his own subjects, the army
is bound to obey. A negro slave, in our colonies, being commanded
by his master to rob or murder a neighbour, or do any other immoral
act, may refuse, and the magistrate will protect him in his refusal.
The slavery then of a soldier is worse than that of a negro! A
conscientious officer, if not restrained by the apprehension of
its being imputed to another cause, may indeed resign, rather than
be employed in an unjust war; but the private men are slaves for
life; and they are perhaps incapable of judging for themselves. We
can only lament their fate, and still more that of a sailor, who is
often dragged by force from his honest occupation, and compelled to
imbrue his hands in, perhaps, innocent blood. But methinks it well
behoves merchants (men more enlightened by their education, and
perfectly free from any such force or obligation) to consider well
of the justice of a war, before they voluntarily engage a gang of
ruffians to attack their fellow-merchants of a neighbouring nation,
to plunder them of their property, and perhaps ruin them and their
families, if they yield it; or to wound, maim, or murder them, if
they endeavour to defend it. Yet these things are done by Christian
merchants, whether a war be just or unjust; and it can hardly be
just on both sides. They are done by English and American merchants,
who, nevertheless, complain of private theft, and hang by dozens the
thieves they have taught by their own example.

It is high time, for the sake of humanity, that a stop were put to
this enormity. The United States of America, though better situated
than any European nation to make profit by privateering (most of the
trade of Europe, with the West Indies, passing before their doors)
are, as far as in them lies, endeavouring to abolish the practice,
by offering, in all their treaties with other powers, an article,
engaging solemnly, that, in case of future war, no privateer shall
be commissioned on either side; and that unarmed merchant-ships, on
both sides, shall pursue their voyages unmolested[94]. This will be
a happy improvement of the law of nations. The humane and the just
cannot but wish general success to the proposition.

  With unchangeable esteem and affection,

  I am, my dear friend,

  Ever yours.

FOOTNOTES:

[93] From a small collection of Dr. Franklin's papers, printed for
Dilly. _Editor_.

[94] This offer having been accepted by the late king of Prussia, a
treaty of amity and commerce was concluded between that monarch and
the United States, containing the following humane, philanthropic
article; in the formation of which Dr. Franklin, as one of the
American plenipotentiaries, was principally concerned, viz.

ART. XXIII.

If war should arise between the two contracting parties, the
merchants of either country, then residing in the other, shall be
allowed to remain nine months to collect their debts and settle
their affairs, and may depart freely, carrying off all their effects
without molestation or hindrance; and all women and children,
scholars of every faculty, cultivators of the earth, artisans,
manufacturers, and fishermen, unarmed and inhabiting unfortified
towns, villages, or places, and in general all others, whose
occupations are for the common subsistence and benefit of mankind,
shall be allowed to continue their respective employments, and shall
not be molested in their persons, nor shall their houses and goods
be burnt, or otherwise destroyed, nor their fields wasted, by the
armed force of the enemy into whose power, by the events of war, they
may happen to fall; but if any thing is necessary to be taken from
them for the use of such armed force, the same shall be paid for at
a reasonable price. And all merchant and trading vessels employed in
exchanging the products of different places, and thereby rendering
the necessaries, conveniences, and comforts of human life more easy
to be obtained, and more general, shall be allowed to pass free and
unmolested; and neither of the contracting powers shall grant or
issue any commission to any private armed vessels, empowering them to
take or destroy such trading vessels, or interrupt such commerce.




  _A Parable against Persecution, in Imitation of Scripture
  Language[95]._


1. And it came to pass after these things, that Abraham sat in the
door of his tent, about the going down of the sun.

2. And behold a man bent with age, coming from the way of the
wilderness leaning on a staff.

3. And Abraham arose, and met him, and said unto him, Turn in, I pray
thee, and wash thy feet, and tarry all night; and thou shalt arise
early in the morning, and go on thy way.

4. And the man said, Nay; for I will abide under this tree.

5. But Abraham pressed him greatly: so he turned and they went into
the tent: and Abraham baked unleaven bread, and they did eat.

6. And when Abraham saw that the man blessed not God, he said unto
him, Wherefore dost thou not worship the most high God, creator of
heaven and earth?

7. And the man answered and said, I do not worship thy God, neither
do I call upon his name, for I have made to myself a god, which
abideth always in my house, and provideth me with all things.

8. And Abraham's zeal was kindled against the man, and he arose, and
fell upon him, and drove him forth with blows into the wilderness.

9. And God called unto Abraham, saying, Abraham, where is the
stranger?

10. And Abraham answered and said, Lord, he would not worship thee,
neither would he call upon thy name, therefore have I driven him out
from before my face into the wilderness.

11. And God said, Have I borne with him these hundred and ninety and
eight years, and nourished him, and clothed him, notwithstanding his
rebellion against me, and couldst not thou, who art thyself a sinner,
bear with him one night?

12. And Abraham said, Let not the anger of my Lord wax hot against
his servant; lo, I have sinned, forgive me I pray thee.

13. And Abraham arose, and went forth into the wilderness and
diligently sought for the man and found him, and returned with him to
the tent, and when he had entreated him kindly, he sent him away on
the morrow with gifts.

14. And God spake again unto Abraham saying, For this thy sin shall
thy seed be afflicted four hundred years in a strange land.

15. But for thy repentance will I deliver them, and they shall
come forth with power, and with gladness of heart, and with much
substance.[96]

FOOTNOTES:

[95] I have taken this piece from Sketches of the History of Man,
written by lord Kaims, and shall preface it with his lordship's own
words. See Vol. II. p. 472, 473.

"The following Parable against Persecution was communicated to me
by Dr. Franklin of Philadelphia, a man who makes a great figure
in the learned world: and who would still make a greater figure
for benevolence and candour, were virtue as much regarded in this
declining age as knowledge."

       *       *       *       *       *

"The historical style of the Old Testament is here finely imitated;
and the moral must strike every one who is not sunk in stupidity
and superstition. Were it really a chapter of Genesis, one is apt
to think, that persecution could never have shown a bare face among
Jews or Christians. But alas! that is a vain thought. Such a passage
in the Old Testament would avail as little against the rancorous
passions of men, as the following passages in the New Testament,
though persecution cannot be condemned in terms more explicit.
_Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not to doubtful
disputations. For, &c._" B. V.

[96] Dr. Franklin, as I have been told, has often imposed this
parable upon his friends and acquaintance, as part of a chapter of
Genesis. B. V.




  _A Letter concerning Persecution in former Ages, the Maintenance of
  the Clergy, American Bishops, and the State of Toleration in Old
  England and New England compared[97]._


  SIR,

I understand from the public papers, that in the debates on the
bill for relieving the dissenters in the point of subscription to
the church articles, sundry reflections were thrown out against
the people, importing, that they themselves are of a persecuting
intolerant spirit, for that when they had the superiority, they
persecuted the church, and still persecute it in America, where they
compel its members to pay taxes for maintaining the presbyterian or
independent worship, and at the same time refuse them a toleration
in the full exercise of their religion, by the administrations of a
bishop.

If we look back into history for the character of the present sects
in Christianity, we shall find few that have not, in their turns,
been persecutors and complainers of persecution. The primitive
christians thought persecution extremely wrong in the pagans, but
practised it on one another. The first protestants of the church of
England blamed persecution in the Romish church, but practised it
against the puritans: these found it wrong in the bishops, but fell
into the same practice both here and in New England.--To account
for this, we should remember, that the doctrine of _toleration_ was
not then known, or had not prevailed in the world. Persecution was
therefore not so much the fault of the sect as of the times. It was
not in those days deemed wrong _in itself_. The general opinion
was only, that those _who are in error_ ought not to persecute
_the truth_: but the _possessors of truth_ were in the right to
persecute error, in order to destroy it. Thus every sect believing
itself possessed of _all truth_, and that every tenet differing from
theirs was _error_, conceived, that when the power was in their
hands, persecution was a duty required of them by that God whom they
supposed to be offended with heresy.--By degrees, more moderate _and
more modest_ sentiments have taken place in the christian world;
and among protestants particularly, all disclaim persecution, none
vindicate it, and few practise it.--We should then cease to reproach
each other with what was done by our ancestors, but judge of the
present character of sects or churches by their _present conduct_
only[98].

Now to determine on the justice of this charge against the present
dissenters, particularly those in America, let us consider the
following facts. They went from England to establish a new country
for themselves, _at their own expence_, where they might enjoy
the free exercise of religion in their own way. When they had
purchased the territory of the natives, they granted the lands out
in townships, requiring for it neither purchase-money nor quit-rent,
but this condition only to be complied with, that the freeholders
should support a gospel-minister (meaning probably one of the then
governing sects) and a free-school, within the township. Thus,
what is commonly called presbyterianism became the _established
religion_ of that country. All went on well in this way, while the
same religious opinions were general, the support of minister and
school being raised by a proportionate tax on the lands. But, in
process of time, some becoming quakers[99], some baptists, and of
late years, some returning to the church of England (through the
laudable endeavours and a _proper application_[100] of their funds
by the society for propagating the gospel), objections were made
to the payment of a tax appropriated to the support of a church
they disapproved and had forsaken. The civil magistrates, however,
continued for a time to collect and apply the tax according to the
original laws, which remained in force; and they did it the more
freely as thinking it just and equitable, that the holders of lands
should pay what was contracted to be paid when they were granted, as
the only consideration for the grant, and what had been considered by
all subsequent purchasers as a perpetual incumbrance on the estate,
bought therefore at a proportionally cheaper rate; a payment which,
it was thought, no honest man ought to avoid, under pretence of his
having changed his religious persuasion: and this, I suppose, is one
of the best grounds of demanding tythes of dissenters now in England.
But the practice being clamoured against by the episcopalians as
persecution, the legislature of the province of Massachusets Bay,
near thirty years since, passed an act for their relief, requiring,
indeed, the tax to be paid as usual, but directing that the several
sums, levied from members of the church of England, should be paid
over to the minister of that church with whom such members usually
attended divine worship; which minister had power given him to
receive, and, on occasion, _to recover the same by law_.

It seems that legislature considered, that the end of the
tax was to secure and improve the morals of the people, and promote
their happiness, by supporting among them the public worship of God
and the preaching of the gospel; that where particular people fancied
a particular mode, that mode might probably, therefore, be of most
use to those people, and that if the good was done, it was not so
material in what mode or by whom it was done. The consideration, that
their brethren, the dissenters in England, were still compelled to
pay tythes to the clergy of the church, had not weight enough with
the legislature to prevent this moderate act, which still continues
in full force; and I hope no uncharitable conduct of the church
toward the dissenters will ever provoke them to repeal it.----

With regard to _a bishop_, I know not upon what ground the
dissenters, either here or in America, are charged with refusing the
benefit of such an officer to the church in that country. _Here_
they seem to have naturally no concern in the affair. _There_ they
have no power to prevent it, if government should think fit to send
one. They would probably _dislike_, indeed, to see an order of
men established among them, from whose persecutions their fathers
fled into that wilderness, and whose future domination they might
possibly fear, _not knowing that their natures are changed_.--But the
non-appointment of bishops for America seems to arise from another
quarter. The same wisdom of government, probably, that prevents the
sitting of convocations, and forbids, by _noli prosequi's_, the
persecution of dissenters for non-subscription, avoids establishing
bishops, where the minds of people are not yet prepared to receive
them cordially, lest the public peace should be endangered.

And now let us see how this _persecution-account_ stands between the
parties.

In New England, where the legislative bodies are almost to a man
dissenters from the church of England:

1. There is no test to prevent churchmen holding offices.

2. The sons of churchmen have the full benefit of the universities.

3. The taxes for support of public worship, when paid by churchmen,
are given to the episcopal minister.

In Old England:

1. Dissenters are excluded from all offices of profit and honour.

2. The benefits of education in the universities are appropriated to
the sons of churchmen.

3. The clergy of the dissenters receive none of the tythes paid by
their people, who must be at the additional charge of maintaining
their own separate worship.--

But it is said, that the dissenters of America _oppose_ the
introduction of a bishop.

In fact, it is not alone the dissenters there that give the
opposition (if _not encouraging_ must be termed _opposing_) but
the laity in general dislike the project, and some even of the
clergy. The inhabitants of Virginia are almost all episcopalians,
the church is fully established there, and the council and general
assembly are, perhaps to a man, its members: yet, when lately at
a meeting of the clergy, a resolution was taken to apply for a
bishop, against which several however protested; assembly of the
province, at the next meeting, expressed their disapprobation of the
thing in the strongest manner, by unanimously ordering the thanks
of the house to the protesters; for many of the American laity of
the church think it some advantage--whether their own young men
come to England for ordination, and improve themselves at the same
time by conversation with the learned here--or the congregations
are supplied by Englishmen, who have had the benefit of education
in English universities, and are ordained before they came abroad.
They do not, therefore, see the necessity of a bishop merely for
ordination; and confirmation is among them deemed a ceremony of no
very great importance, since few seek it in England, where bishops
are in plenty.--These sentiments prevail with many churchmen there,
not to promote a design which they think must sooner or later saddle
them with great expences to support it.--As to the dissenters, their
minds might probably be more conciliated to the measure, if the
bishops here should, in their wisdom and goodness, think fit to set
their sacred character in a more friendly light, by dropping their
opposition to the dissenters' application for relief in subscription,
and declaring their willingness that dissenters should be capable of
offices, enjoy the benefit of education in the universities, and the
privilege of appropriating their tythes to the support of their own
clergy. In all these points of toleration, they appear far behind
the present dissenters of New England, and it may seem to some a
step below the dignity of bishops, to follow the example of such
inferiors. I do not, however, despair of their doing it some time
or other, since nothing of the kind is too hard for _true christian
humility_.

  I am, sir, yours, &c.

  A NEW-ENGLAND-MAN.

FOOTNOTES:

[97] The above letter first appeared in one of the public papers on
June 3, 1772, and seems to have been addressed to the printer. The
spirited writer of the _Two letters to the prelates_ republished
it in an appendix to that pamphlet, without, however, naming Dr.
Franklin as the author, but expressing it to be the production "of a
gentleman highly respected in the literary world." B. V.

[98] "Toleration in religion, though obvious to common understanding,
was not however the production of reason, but of commerce. The
advantage of toleration for promoting commerce was discovered long
before by the Portuguese. They were too zealous Catholics to venture
so bold a measure in Portugal; but it was permitted in Goa, and the
inquisition in that town was confined to Roman Catholics." Lord
Kaim's Sketches of the History of Man, Vol. II. p. 474. B. V.

[99] "No person appeared in New England who professed the opinion
of the Quakers, until 1656, (i. e. about 36 years after the first
settling of the colony), when Mary Fisher and Ann Austin came from
Barbadoes; and soon after, nine others arrived in the ship Speedwell
from London." They were successful in their preaching, and the
provincial government, wishing to keep the colony free from them,
attempted to send away such as they discovered, and prevent the
arrival of others. Securities, fines, banishment, imprisonment, and
corporal punishments were instituted for this purpose, but with so
little effect, that at last "a law was made for punishing with death,
all such as should _return_ into the jurisdiction _after banishment_.
A few were hanged!" See the history of the British dominions, 4to,
1773, p. 118, 120. B. V.

[100] They were to spread the gospel, and maintain a learned and
orthodox clergy, where ministers were wanted or ill-provided,
administering God's word and sacraments, and preventing atheism,
infidelity, popery, and idolatry. B. V.




  _On the Slave Trade[101]._


Reading in the newspapers the speech of Mr. Jackson in congress,
against meddling with the affair of slavery, or attempting to mend
the condition of slaves, it put me in mind of a similar speech, made
about one hundred years since, by Sidi Mehemet Ibrahim, a member
of the divan of Algiers, which may be seen in Martin's account of
his consulship, 1687. It was against granting the petition of the
sect called erika, or purists, who prayed for the abolition of
piracy and slavery, as being unjust.--Mr. Jackson does not quote it;
perhaps he has not seen it. If therefore, some of its reasonings are
to be found in his eloquent speech, it may only show, that men's
interests operate, and are operated on, with surprising similarity,
in all countries and climates, whenever they are under similar
circumstances. The African speech, as translated, is as follows:

"Alla Bismillah, &c. God is great, and Mahomet is his prophet.

"Have these erika considered the consequences of granting their
petition? If we cease our cruises against the christians, how shall
we be furnished with the commodities their countries produce,
and which are so necessary for us? If we forbear to make slaves
of their people, who, in this hot climate, are to cultivate our
lands? Who are to perform the common labours of our city, and of
our families? Must we not then be our own slaves? And is there not
more compassion and more favour due to us mussulmen, than to those
christian dogs?--We have now above fifty thousand slaves in and near
Algiers. This number, if not kept up by fresh supplies, will soon
diminish, and be gradually annihilated. If, then, we cease taking
and plundering the infidel ships, and making slaves of the seamen
and passengers, our lands will become of no value, for want of
cultivation; the rents of houses in the city will sink one half; and
the revenues of government, arising from the share of prizes, must be
totally destroyed.--And for what? To gratify the whim of a whimsical
sect, who would have us not only forbear making more slaves, but even
manumit those we have. But who is to indemnify their masters for the
loss? Will the state do it? Is our treasury sufficient? Will the
erika do it? Can they do it? Or would they, to do what they think
justice to the slaves, do a greater injustice to the owners? And if
we set our slaves free, what is to be done with them? Few of them
will return to their native countries; they know too well the greater
hardships they must there be subject to. They will not embrace our
holy religion: they will not adopt our manners: our people will not
pollute themselves by intermarrying with them. Must we maintain them
as beggars in our streets; or suffer our properties to be the prey
of their pillage? for men, accustomed to slavery, will not work for
a livelihood, when not compelled.--And what is there so pitiable
in their present condition? Were they not slaves in their own
countries? Are not Spain, Portugal, France, and the Italian states,
governed by despots, who hold all their subjects in slavery, without
exception? Even England treats her sailors as slaves, for they are,
whenever the government pleases, seized and confined in ships of war,
condemned not only to work, but to fight for small wages, or a mere
subsistence, not better than our slaves are allowed by us. Is their
condition then made worse by their falling into our hands? no; they
have only exchanged one slavery for another; and I may say a better:
for here they are brought into a land, where the sun of islamism
gives forth its light, and shines in full splendor, and they have an
opportunity of making themselves acquainted with the true doctrine,
and thereby saving their immortal souls. Those who remain at home
have not that happiness. Sending the slaves home then, would be
sending them out of light into darkness.

"I repeat the question, what is to be done with them? I have heard
it suggested, that they may be planted in the wilderness, where
there is plenty of land for them to subsist on, and where they may
flourish as a free state.--But they are, I doubt, too little disposed
to labour without compulsion, as well as too ignorant to establish
good government: and the wild Arabs would soon molest and destroy, or
again enslave them. While serving us, we take care to provide them
with every thing; and they are treated with humanity. The labourers
in their own countries are, as I am informed, worse fed, lodged,
and clothed. The condition of most of them is therefore already
mended, and requires no farther improvement. Here their lives are in
safety. They are not liable to be impressed for soldiers, and forced
to cut one another's christian throats, as in the wars of their
own countries. If some of the religious mad bigots, who now tease
us with their silly petitions, have, in a fit of blind zeal, freed
their slaves, it was not generosity, it was not humanity, that moved
them to the action; it was from the conscious burthen of a load of
sins, and hope, from the supposed merits of so good a work, to be
excused from damnation.--How grossly are they mistaken, in imagining
slavery to be disavowed by the Alcoran! Are not the two precepts, to
quote no more, "Masters, treat your slaves with kindness--Slaves,
serve your masters with cheerfulness and fidelity," clear proofs to
the contrary? Nor can the plundering of infidels be in that sacred
book forbidden; since it is well known from it, that God has given
the world, and all that it contains, to his faithful mussulmen, who
are to enjoy it, of right, as fast as they can conquer it. Let us
then hear no more of this detestable proposition, the manumission
of christian slaves, the adoption of which would, by depreciating
our lands and houses, and thereby depriving so many good citizens
of their properties, create universal discontent, and provoke
insurrections, to the endangering of government and producing general
confusion. I have, therefore, no doubt that this wise council will
prefer the comfort and happiness of a whole nation of true believers,
to the whim of a few erika, and dismiss their petition."

The result was, as Martin tells us, that the divan came to this
resolution: "That the doctrine, that the plundering and enslaving the
christians is unjust, is at best problematical; but that it is the
interest of this state to continue the practice is clear; therefore,
let the petition be rejected."----And it was rejected accordingly.

And since like motives are apt to produce, in the minds of men,
like opinions and resolutions, may we not venture to predict, from
this account, that the petitions to the parliament of England for
abolishing the slave-trade, to say nothing of other legislatures and
the debates upon them, will have a similar conclusion.

  HISTORICUS.

  _March 23, 1790._

FOOTNOTE:

[101] American Museum, Vol. IX. p. 336. _Editor._




  _Account of the highest Court of Judicature in Pensylvania, viz.
  The Court of the Press[102]._

  _Power of this Court._


It may receive and promulgate accusations of all kinds, against all
persons and characters among the citizens of the state, and even
against all inferior courts; and may judge, sentence, and condemn to
infamy, not only private individuals, but public bodies, &c. with or
without enquiry or hearing, at the court's discretion.


_Whose Favour, or for whose Emolument this Court is established._

In favour of about one citizen in five hundred, who, by education, or
practice in scribbling, has acquired a tolerable style as to grammar
and construction, so as to bear printing; or who is possessed of a
press and a few types. This five hundredth part of the citizens have
the privilege of accusing and abusing the other four hundred and
ninety-nine parts, at their pleasure; or they may hire out their
pens and press to others, for that purpose.


_Practice of this Court._

It is not governed by any of the rules of the common courts of
law. The accused is allowed no grand jury to judge of the truth of
the accusation before it is publicly made; nor is the name of the
accuser made known to him; nor has he an opportunity of confronting
the witnesses against him, for they are kept in the dark, as in the
Spanish court of inquisition. Nor is there any petty jury of his
peers sworn to try the truth of the charges. The proceedings are also
sometimes so rapid, that an honest good citizen may find himself
suddenly and unexpectedly accused, and in the same morning judged and
condemned, and sentence pronounced against him, that he is a rogue
and a villain. Yet if an officer of this court receives the slightest
check for misconduct in this his office, he claims immediately the
rights of a free citizen by the constitution, and demands to know his
accuser, to confront the witnesses, and to have a fair trial by a
jury of his peers.


_Foundation of its Authority._

It is said to be founded on an article in the state constitution,
which establishes the liberty of the press--a liberty which every
Pennsylvanian would fight and die for, though few of us, I believe,
have distinct ideas of its nature and extent. It seems, indeed,
somewhat like the liberty of the press, that felons have, by the
common law of England, before conviction; that is, to be either
pressed to death or hanged. If, by the liberty of the press, were
understood merely the liberty of discussing the propriety of public
measures and political opinions, let us have as much of it as you
please; but if it means the liberty of affronting, calumniating, and
defaming one another, I, for my part, own myself willing to part with
my share of it, whenever our legislators shall please so to alter the
law; and shall cheerfully consent to exchange my liberty of abusing
others, for the privilege of not being abused myself.


_By whom this Court is commissioned or constituted._

It is not by any commission from the supreme executive council, who
might previously judge of the abilities, integrity, knowledge, &c.
of the persons to be appointed to this great trust, of deciding upon
the characters and good fame of the citizens: for this court is above
that council, and may accuse, judge, and condemn it at pleasure.
Nor is it hereditary, as is the court of dernier resort in the
peerage of England. But any man who can procure pen, ink, and paper,
with a press, a few types, and a huge pair of blacking balls, may
commissionate himself, and his court is immediately established in
the plenary possession and exercise of its rights. For if you make
the least complaint of the judge's conduct, he daubs his blacking
balls in your face wherever he meets you; and, besides tearing your
private character to splinters, marks you out for the odium of the
public, as an enemy to the liberty of the press.


_Of the natural Support of this Court._

Its support is founded in the depravity of such minds, as have not
been mended by religion, nor improved by good education.

    There is a lust in man no charm can tame,
    Of loudly publishing his neighbour's shame.

Hence,

    On eagles' wings, immortal scandals fly,
    While virtuous actions are but born and die.----DRYDEN.

Whoever feels pain in hearing a good character of his neighbour, will
feel a pleasure in the reverse. And of those who, despairing to rise
to distinction by their virtues, are happy if others can be depressed
to a level with themselves, there are a number sufficient in every
great town to maintain one of these courts by their subscription. A
shrewd observer once said, that in walking the streets of a slippery
morning, one might see where the good-natured people lived, by the
ashes thrown on the ice before the doors: probably he would have
formed a different conjecture of the temper of those whom he might
find engaged in such subscriptions.


_Of the Checks proper to be established against the Abuses of Power
in those Courts._

Hitherto there are none. But since so much has been written and
published on the federal constitution; and the necessity of checks,
in all other parts of good government, has been so clearly and
learnedly explained, I find myself so far enlightened as to suspect
some check may be proper in this part also: but I have been at a
loss to imagine any, that may not be construed an infringement of
the sacred liberty of the press. At length, however, I think I have
found one, that, instead of diminishing general liberty, shall
augment it; which is, by restoring to the people a species of liberty
of which they have been deprived by our laws, I mean the liberty of
the cudgel! In the rude state of society, prior to the existence
of laws, if one man gave another ill-language, the affronted person
might return it by a box on the ear; and if repeated, by a good
drubbing; and this without offending against any law: but now the
right of making such returns is denied, and they are punished as
breaches of the peace, while the right of abusing seems to remain in
full force; the laws made against it being rendered ineffectual by
the liberty of the press.

My proposal then is, to leave the liberty of the press untouched, to
be exercised in its full extent, force, and vigour, but to permit the
liberty of the cudgel to go with it, _pari passu_. Thus, my fellow
citizens, if an impudent writer attacks your reputation--dearer
perhaps to you than your life, and puts his name to the charge, you
may go to him as openly, and break his head. If he conceals himself
behind the printer, and you can nevertheless discover who he is, you
may, in like manner, way-lay him in the night, attack him behind, and
give him a good drubbing. If your adversary hires better writers than
himself to abuse you more effectually, you may hire brawny porters,
stronger than yourself, to assist you in giving him a more effectual
drubbing. Thus far goes my project, as to _private_ resentment and
retribution. But if the public should ever happen to be affronted, as
it ought to be, with the conduct of such writers, I would not advise
proceeding immediately to these extremities, but that we should in
moderation content ourselves with tarring and feathering, and tossing
them in a blanket.

If, however, it should be thought, that this proposal of mine may
disturb the public peace, I would then humbly recommend to our
legislators to take up the consideration of both liberties, that of
the press, and that of the cudgel; and by an explicit law mark their
extent and limits: and at the same time that they secure the person
of a citizen from assaults, they would likewise provide for the
security of his reputation.




ADVERTISEMENT.


_The works of Dr. Franklin have been often partially collected, never
before brought together in one uniform publication._

_The first collection was made by Mr. Peter Collinson in the year
1751. It consisted of letters, communicated by the author to the
editor, on one subject, electricity, and formed a pamphlet only,
of which the price was half-a-crown. It was enlarged in 1752, by a
second communication on the same subject, and in 1754, by a third,
till, in 1766, by the addition of letters and papers on other
philosophical subjects, it amounted to a quarto volume of 500 pages._

_Ten years after, in 1779, another collection was made, by a
different editor, in one volume, printed both in quarto and octavo,
of papers not contained in the preceding collection, under the title
of Political, Miscellaneous, and Philosophical Pieces._

_In 1787, a third collection appeared in a thin octavo volume,
entitled Philosophical and Miscellaneous Papers._

_And lastly, in 1793, a fourth was published, in two volumes,
crown octavo, consisting of Memoirs of Dr. Franklin's Life, and
Essays humourous, moral and literary, chiefly in the Manner of the
Spectator._

_In the present volumes will be found all the different collections
we have enumerated, together with the various papers of the same
author, that have been published in separate pamphlets, or inserted
in foreign collections of his works, or in the Transactions of our
own or of foreign philosophical societies, or in our own or foreign
newspapers and magazines, as far as discoverable by the editor, who
has been assisted in the research by a gentleman in America. Among
these papers some, we conceive, will be new to the English reader on
this side of the Atlantic; particularly a series of essays entitled
The Busy-Body, written, as Dr. Franklin tells us in his Life, when he
was an assiduous imitator of Addison; and a pamphlet, entitled Plain
Truth, with which he is said to have commenced his political career
as a writer. We hoped to have been enabled to add, what would have
been equally new, and still more acceptable, a genuine copy of the
Life of our author, as written by himself; but in this hope we are
disappointed, and we are in consequence obliged to content ourselves
with a translation, which has been already before the public, from
a copy in the French language, coming no farther down than the year
1731; and a continuation of his history from that period, by the late
Dr. Stuber of Philadelphia._

_The character of Dr. Franklin, as a philosopher, a politician,
and a moralist, is too well known to require illustration, and
his writings, from their interesting nature, and the fascinating
simplicity of their style, are too highly esteemed, for any apology
to be necessary for so large a collection of them, unless it should
be deemed necessary by the individual to whom Dr. Franklin in his
will consigned his manuscripts: and to him our apology will consist
in a reference to his own extraordinary conduct._

_In bequeathing his papers, it was no doubt the intention of the
testator, that the world should have the chance of being benefited
by their publication. It was so understood by the person in
question, his grandson, who, accordingly, shortly after the
death of his great relative, hastened to London, the best mart
for literary property, employed an amanuensis for many months in
copying, ransacked our public libraries that nothing might escape,
and at length had so far prepared the works of Dr. Franklin for the
press, that proposals were made by him to several of our principal
booksellers for the sale of them. They were to form three quarto
volumes, and were to contain all the writings, published and
unpublished, of Franklin, with Memoirs of his Life, brought down by
himself to the year 1757, and continued to his death by the legatee.
They were to be published in three different languages, and the
countries corresponding to those languages, France, Germany, and
England, on the same day. The terms asked for the copyright of the
English edition were high, amounting to several thousand pounds,
which occasioned a little demur; but eventually they would no doubt
have been obtained. Nothing more however was heard of the proposals
or the work, in this its fair market. The proprietor, it seems,
had found a bidder of a different description in some emissary of
government, whose object was to withhold the manuscripts from the
world, not to benefit it by their publication; and they thus either
passed into other hands, or the person to whom they were bequeathed
received a remuneration for suppressing them. This at least has been
asserted, by a variety of persons, both in this country and America,
of whom some were at the time intimate with the grandson, and not
wholly unacquainted with the machinations of the ministry; and the
silence, which has been observed for so many years respecting the
publication, gives additional credibility to the report._

_What the manuscripts contained, that should have excited the
jealousy of government, we are unable, as we have never seen them,
positively to affirm; but, from the conspicuous part acted by the
author in the American revolution and the wars connected with it, it
is by no means difficult to guess; and of this we are sure, from his
character, that no disposition of his writings could have been more
contrary to his intentions or wishes._

_We have only to add, that in the present collection, which is
probably all that will ever be published of the works of this
extraordinary man, the papers are methodically arranged, the moral
and philosophical ones according to their subjects, the political
ones, as nearly as may be, according to their dates; that we have
given, in notes, the authorities for ascribing the different pieces
to Franklin; that where no title existed, to indicate the nature of a
letter or paper, we have prefixed a title; and lastly, that we have
compiled an index to the whole, which is placed at the beginning,
instead of, as is usual, at the end of the work, to render the
volumes more equal._

_April 7, 1806._




  CONTENTS.


  VOL. I.

                                                                  _Page._

  LIFE of Dr. FRANKLIN 1

  LETTERS AND PAPERS ON ELECTRICITY.

  Introductory Letter.                                               169

  Wonderful effect of points.--Positive and negative
  electricity.--Electrical kiss.--Counterfeit spider.--Simple and
  commodious electrical machine.                                     170

  Observations on the Leyden bottle, with experiments proving the
  different electrical state of its different surfaces.              179

  Further experiments confirming the preceding observations.--Leyden
  bottle analysed.--Electrical battery.--Magical Picture.--Electrical
  wheel or jack.--Electrical feast.                                  187

  Observations and suppositions, towards forming a new hypothesis,
  for explaining the several phenomena of thunder-gusts.             203

  Introductory letter to some additional papers.                     216

  Opinions and conjectures, concerning the properties and effects
  of the electrical matter, and the means of preserving buildings,
  ships, &c. from lightning, arising from experiments and
  observations made at Philadelphia, 1749.--Golden fish.--Extraction
  of effluvial virtues by electricity impracticable.                 217

  Additional experiments: proving that the Leyden bottle has no more
  electrical fire in it when charged, than before: nor less when
  discharged: that in discharging, the fire does not issue from the
  wire and the coating at the same time, as some have thought, but
  that the coating always receives what is discharged by the wire,
  or an equal quantity: the outer surface being always in a negative
  state of electricity, when the inner surface is in a positive
  state.                                                             245

  Accumulation of the electrical fire proved to be in the electrified
  glass.--Effect of lightning on the needle of compasses,
  explained.--Gunpowder fired by the electric flame.                 247

  Unlimited nature of the electric force.                            250

  The terms, electric per se, and non-electric, improper.--New
  relation between metals and water.--Effects of air in electrical
  experiments.--Experiment for discovering more of the qualities of
  the electric fluid.                                                252

  Mistake, that only metals and water were conductors,
  rectified.--Supposition of a region of electric fire above our
  atmosphere.--Theorem concerning light.--Poke-weed a cure for
  cancers.                                                           256

  New experiments.--Paradoxes inferred from them.--Difference in
  the electricity of a globe of glass charged, and a globe of
  sulphur.--Difficulty of ascertaining which is positive and which
  negative.                                                          261

  Probable cause of the different attractions and repulsions of the
  two electrified globes mentioned in the two preceding letters.     264

  Reasons for supposing, that the glass globe charges positively,
  and the sulphur negatively.--Hint respecting a leather globe for
  experiments when travelling.                                     _ibid._

  Electrical kite.                                                   267

  Hypothesis, of the sea being the grand source of lightning,
  retracted.--Positive, and sometimes negative, electricity of the
  clouds discovered.--New experiments and conjectures in support of
  this discovery.--Observations recommended for ascertaining the
  direction of the electric fluid.--Size of rods for conductors to
  buildings.--Appearance of a thunder-cloud described.               269

  Additional proofs of the positive and negative state of electricity
  in the clouds.--New method of ascertaining it.                     284

  Electrical experiments, with an attempt to account for their
  several phenomena, &c.                                             286

  Experiments made in pursuance of those made by Mr. Canton, dated
  December 6, 1753; with explanations, by Mr. Benjamin Franklin.     294

  Turkey killed by electricity.--Effect of a shock on the operator
  in making the experiment.                                          299

  Differences in the qualities of glass.--Account of Domien, an
  electrician and traveller.--Conjectures respecting the pores of
  glass.--Origin of the author's idea of drawing down lightning.--No
  satisfactory hypothesis respecting the manner in which clouds
  become electrified.--Six men knocked down at once by an electrical
  shock.--Reflections on the spirit of invention.                    301

  Beccaria's work on electricity.--Sentiments of Franklin on pointed
  rods, not fully understood in Europe.--Effect of lightning on the
  church of Newbury, in New England.--Remarks on the subject.        309

  Notice of another packet of letters.                               313

  Extract of a letter from a gentleman in Boston, to Benjamin
  Franklin, Esq. concerning the crooked direction, and the source of
  lightning, and the swiftness of the electric fire.                 314

  Observations on the subjects of the preceding letter.--Reasons for
  supposing the sea to be the grand source of lightning.--Reasons for
  doubting this hypothesis.--Improvement in a globe for raising the
  electric fire.                                                     320

  Effect of lightning on captain Waddel's compass, and the Dutch
  church at New York.                                                324

  Proposal of an experiment to measure the time taken up by an
  Electric spark, in moving through any given space.                 327

  Experiments on boiling water, and glass heated by boiling
  water.--Doctrine of repulsion in electrised bodies
  doubted.--Electricity of the atmosphere at different
  heights.--Electrical horse-race.--Electrical thermometer.--In
  what cases the electrical fire produces heat.--Wire lengthened by
  electricity.--Good effect of a rod on the house of Mr. West, of
  Philadelphia.                                                      331

  Answer to some of the foregoing subjects.--How long the Leyden
  bottle may be kept charged.--Heated glass rendered permeable by the
  electric fluid.--Electrical attraction and repulsion.--Reply to
  other subjects in the preceding paper.--Numerous ways of kindling
  fire.--Explosion of water.--Knobs and points.                      343

  Accounts from Carolina (mentioned in the foregoing letter) of the
  effects of lightning on two of the rods commonly affixed to houses
  there, for securing them against lightning.                        361

  Mr. William Maine's account of the effects of the lightning on his
  rod, dated at Indian Land, in South Carolina, Aug. 28, 1760.       362

  On the electricity of the tourmalin.                               369

  New observation relating to electricity in the atmosphere.         373

  Flash of lightning that struck St. Bride's steeple.                374

  Best method of securing a powder magazine from lightning.          375

  Of lightning, and the methods (now used in America) of securing
  buildings and persons from its mischievous effects.                377

  St. Bride's steeple.--Utility of electrical conductors to
  Steeples.--Singular kind of glass tube.                            382

  Experiments, observations, and facts, tending to support the
  opinion of the utility of long pointed rods, for securing
  buildings from damage by strokes of lightning.                     383

  On the utility of electrical conductors.                           400

  On the effects of electricity in paralytic cases.                  401

  Electrical experiments on amber.                                   403

  On the electricity of the fogs in Ireland.                         405

  Mode of ascertaining, whether the power, giving a shock to those
  who touch either the Surinam eel, or the torpedo, be electrical.   408

  On the analogy between magnetism and electricity.                  410

  Concerning the mode of rendering meat tender by electricity.       413

  Answer to some queries concerning the choice of glass for the
  Leyden experiment.                                                 416

  Concerning the Leyden bottle.                                      418


  APPENDIX.

  No. 1. Account of experiments made in electricity at Marly.        420

  A more particular account of the same, &c.                         422

  Letter of Mr. W. Watson, F. R. S. to the Royal Society, concerning
  the electrical experiments in England upon thunder-clouds.         427

  No. 2. Remarks on the Abbé Nollet's Letters to Benjamin Franklin,
  Esq. of Philadelphia, on electricity.                              430




  LIST OF THE PLATES


  PLATE I.     Electrical Experiments                   facing page  182

  PLATE II.    Electrical Air Thermometer                            336

  PLATE III.   Cavendish Experiment                                  348

  PLATE IV.    Lightning Rod Experiments                             388




  _ERRATA._


  _Page._  _Line._

    2         10:                  for true, read me.
    5          5:                  for was born, read who was born.
   20          1:                  for Tryon, read Tyron's.
  _ib._        7 from the bottom:  for put to blush, read put to the blush.
  _ib._        4 from the bottom:  for myself, read by myself.
   15          4:                  for collection, read works.
   21          9 from the bottom:  for or, read nor.
   25          4 from the bottom:  for pasquenades, read pasquinades.
   28          7:                  dele the.
  _ib._       12:                  for printer, read a printer.
   28          3 from the bottom:  for my old favourite work, Bunyan's
                                   Voyages, read my old favourite Bunyan.
   40          5:                  for money, read in money.
   44          3:                  for Bernet, read Burnet.
  _ib._       17:                  for unabled, read unable.
   50         19:                  for ingenuous, read ingenious.
   67          5:                  dele bridge.
   80          3 from the bottom:  for into, read into which.
  235         21:                  substitute + for *.
  264          2:                  for course read cause.




  LIFE
  OF
  _DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN._




_LIFE_ OF DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, &c. &c.


  MY DEAR SON,

I have amused myself with collecting some little anecdotes of my
family. You may remember the enquiries I made, when you were with
me in England, among such of my relations as were then living; and
the journey I undertook for that purpose. To be acquainted with the
particulars of my parentage and life, many of which are unknown to
you, I flatter myself will afford the same pleasure to you as to me.
I shall relate them upon paper: it will be an agreeable employment
of a week's uninterrupted leisure, which I promise myself during
my present retirement in the country. There are also other motives
which induce me to the undertaking. From the bosom of poverty and
obscurity, in which I drew my first breath, and spent my earliest
years, I have raised myself to a state of opulence and to some degree
of celebrity in the world. A constant good fortune has attended me
through every period of life to my present advanced age; and my
descendants may be desirous of learning what were the means of which
I made use, and which, thanks to the assisting hand of providence,
have proved so eminently successful. They may also, should they ever
be placed in a similar situation, derive some advantage from my
narrative.

When I reflect, as I frequently do, upon the felicity I have enjoyed,
I sometimes say to myself, that, were the offer made me, I would
engage to run again, from beginning to end, the same career of life.
All I would ask, should be the privilege of an author, to correct,
in a second edition, certain errors of the first. I could wish,
likewise if it were in my power, to change some trivial incidents
and events for others more favourable. Were this, however, denied
me, still would I not decline the offer. But since a repetition of
life cannot take place, there is nothing which, in my opinion, so
nearly resembles it, as to call to mind all its circumstances, and,
to render their remembrance more durable, commit them to writing. By
thus employing myself, I shall yield to the inclination, so natural
in old men, to talk of themselves and their exploits, and may freely
follow my bent, without being tiresome to those who, from respect
to my age, might think themselves obliged to listen to me; as they
will be at liberty to read me or not as they please. In fine--and I
may as well avow it, since nobody would believe me were I to deny
it--I shall perhaps, by this employment, gratify my vanity. Scarcely
indeed have I ever read or heard the introductory phrase, "_I may
say without vanity_," but some striking and characteristic instance
of vanity has immediately followed. The generality of men hate
vanity in others, however strongly they may be tinctured with it
themselves: for myself, I pay obeisance to it wherever I meet with
it, persuaded that it is advantageous, as well to the individual whom
it governs, as to those who are within the sphere of its influence.
Of consequence, it would in many cases, not be wholly absurd, that a
man should count his vanity among the other sweets of life, and give
thanks to providence for the blessing.

And here let me with all humility acknowledge, that to divine
providence I am indebted for the felicity I have hitherto enjoyed.
It is that power alone which has furnished me with the means I
have employed, and that has crowned them with success. My faith in
this respect leads me to hope, though I cannot count upon it, that
the divine goodness will still be exercised towards me, either by
prolonging the duration of my happiness to the close of life, or by
giving me fortitude to support any melancholy reverse, which may
happen to me, as to so many others. My future fortune is unknown
but to Him in whose hand is our destiny, and who can make our very
afflictions subservient to our benefit.

One of my uncles, desirous, like myself, of collecting anecdotes
of our family, gave me some notes, from which I have derived many
particulars respecting our ancestors. From these I learn, that
they had lived in the same village (Eaton in Northamptonshire,)
upon a freehold of about thirty acres, for the space at least of
three hundred years. How long they had resided there prior to that
period, my uncle had been unable to discover; probably ever since
the institution of surnames, when they took the appellation of
Franklin, which had formerly been the name of a particular order of
individuals.[1]

This petty estate would not have sufficed for their subsistence, had
they not added the trade of blacksmith, which was perpetuated in the
family down to my uncle's time, the eldest son having been uniformly
brought up to this employment: a custom which both he and my father
observed with respect to their eldest sons.

In the researches I made at Eaton, I found no account of their
births, marriages, and deaths, earlier than the year 1555; the
parish register not extending farther back than that period. This
register informed me, that I was the youngest son of the youngest
branch of the family, counting five generations. My grandfather,
Thomas, who was born in 1598, lived at Eaton till he was too old to
continue his trade, when he retired to Banbury in Oxfordshire, where
his son John, who was a dyer, resided, and with whom my father was
apprenticed. He died, and was buried there: we saw his monument in
1758. His eldest son lived in the family house at Eaton, which he
bequeathed, with the land belonging to it, to his only daughter; who,
in concert with her husband, Mr. Fisher of Wellingborough, afterwards
sold it to Mr. Estead, the present proprietor.

My grandfather had four surviving sons, Thomas, John, Benjamin, and
Josias. I shall give you such particulars of them as my memory will
furnish, not having my papers here, in which you will find a more
minute account, if they are not lost during my absence.

Thomas had learned the trade of a blacksmith under his father; but
possessing a good natural understanding, he improved it by study,
at the solicitation of a gentleman of the name of Palmer, who was
at that time the principal inhabitant of the village, and who
encouraged, in like manner, all my uncles to cultivate their minds.
Thomas thus rendered himself competent to the functions of a country
attorney; soon became an essential personage in the affairs of the
village; and was one of the chief movers of every public enterprise,
as well relative to the county as the town of Northampton. A variety
of remarkable incidents were told us of him at Eaton. After enjoying
the esteem and patronage of Lord Halifax, he died, January 6, 1702,
precisely four years before I was born. The recital that was made
us of his life and character, by some aged persons of the village,
struck you, I remember, as extraordinary, from its analogy to what
you knew of myself. "Had he died," said you, "just four years later,
one might have supposed a transmigration of souls."

John, to the best of my belief, was brought up to the trade of a
wool-dyer.

Benjamin served his apprenticeship in London to a silk-dyer. He was
an industrious man: I remember him well; for, while I was a child,
he joined my father at Boston, and lived for some years in the house
with us. A particular affection had always subsisted between my
father and him; and I was his godson. He arrived to a great age. He
left behind him two quarto volumes of poems in manuscript, consisting
of little fugitive pieces addressed to his friends. He had invented
a short-hand, which he taught me, but having never made use of it,
I have now forgotten it. He was a man of piety, and a constant
attendant on the best preachers, whose sermons he took a pleasure in
writing down according, to the expeditory method he had devised. Many
volumes were thus collected by him. He was also extremely fond of
politics, too much so, perhaps, for his situation. I lately found in
London a collection which he had made of all the principal pamphlets
relative to public affairs, from the year 1641 to 1717. Many volumes
are wanting, as appears by the series of numbers; but there still
remain eight in folio, and twenty-four in quarto and octavo. The
collection had fallen into the hands of a second-hand bookseller,
who, knowing me by having sold me some books, brought it to me. My
uncle, it seems, had left it behind him on his departure for America,
about fifty years ago. I found various notes of his writing in the
margins. His grandson, Samuel, is now living at Boston.

Our humble family had early embraced the Reformation. They remained
faithfully attached during the reign of Queen Mary, when they were
in danger of being molested on account of their zeal against popery.
They had an English bible, and, to conceal it the more securely,
they conceived the project of fastening it, open, with pack-threads
across the leaves, on the inside of the lid of the close-stool. When
my great-grandfather wished to read to his family, he reversed the
lid of the close-stool upon his knees, and passed the leaves from one
side to the other, which were held down on each by the pack-thread.
One of the children was stationed at the door, to give notice if
he saw the proctor (an officer of the spiritual court) make his
appearance: in that case, the lid was restored to its place, with the
Bible concealed under it as before. I had this anecdote from my uncle
Benjamin.

The whole family preserved its attachment to the Church of England
till towards the close of the reign of Charles II. when certain
ministers, who had been ejected as nonconformists, having held
conventicles in Northamptonshire, they were joined by Benjamin and
Josias, who adhered to them ever after. The rest of the family
continued in the episcopal church.

My father, Josias, married early in life. He went, with his wife and
three children, to New England, about the year 1682. Conventicles
being at that time prohibited by law, and frequently disturbed,
some considerable persons of his acquaintance determined to go
to America, where they hoped to enjoy the free exercise of their
religion, and my father was prevailed on to accompany them.

My father had also by the same wife, four children born in America,
and ten others by a second wife, making in all seventeen. I remember
to have seen thirteen seated together at his table, who all arrived
to years of maturity, and were married. I was the last of the sons,
and the youngest child, excepting two daughters. I was born at
Boston in New England. My mother, the second wife, was Abiah Folger,
daughter of Peter Folger, one of the first colonists of New England,
of whom Cotton Mather makes honourable mention, in his Ecclesiastical
History of that province, as "_a pious and learned Englishman_," if
I rightly recollect his expressions. I have been told of his having
written a variety of little pieces; but there appears to be only one
in print, which I met with many years ago. It was published in the
year 1675, and is in familiar verse, agreeably to the taste of the
times and the country. The author addresses himself to the governors
for the time being, speaks for liberty of conscience, and in favour
of the anabaptists, quakers, and other sectaries, who had suffered
persecution. To this persecution he attributes the war with the
natives, and other calamities which afflicted the country, regarding
them as the judgments of God in punishment of so odious an offence,
and he exhorts the government to the repeal of laws so contrary to
charity. The poem appeared to be written with a manly freedom and a
pleasing simplicity. I recollect the six concluding lines, though
I have forgotten the order of words of the two first; the sense of
which was, that his censures were dictated by benevolence, and that,
of consequence, he wished to be known as the author; because, said
he, I hate from my very soul dissimulation:

    From Sherburn,[2] where I dwell,
        I therefore put my name,
    Your friend, who means you well,

        PETER FOLGER.

My brothers were all put apprentices to different trades. With
respect to myself, I was sent, at the age of eight years, to a
grammar-school. My father destined me for the church, and already
regarded me as the chaplain of the family. The promptitude with which
from my infancy I had learned to read, for I do not remember to have
been ever without this acquirement, and the encouragement of his
friends, who assured him that I should one day certainly become a man
of letters, confirmed him in this design. My uncle Benjamin approved
also of the scheme, and promised to give me all his volumes of
sermons, written, as I have said, in the short-hand of his invention,
if I would take the pains to learn it.

I remained, however, scarcely a year at the grammar-school, although,
in this short interval, I had risen from the middle to the head of my
class, from thence to the class immediately above, and was to pass,
at the end of the year, to the one next in order. But my father,
burdened with a numerous family, found that he was incapable, without
subjecting himself to difficulties, of providing for the expences
of a collegiate education; and considering besides, as I heard
him say to his friends, that persons so educated were often poorly
provided for, he renounced his first intentions, took me from the
grammar-school, and sent me to a school for writing and arithmetic,
kept by a Mr. George Brownwell, who was a skilful master, and
succeeded very well in his profession by employing gentle means only,
and such as were calculated to encourage his scholars. Under him I
soon acquired an excellent hand; but I failed in arithmetic, and made
therein no sort of progress.

At ten years of age, I was called home to assist my father in his
occupation, which was that of a soap-boiler and tallow-chandler;
a business to which he had served no apprenticeship, but which he
embraced on his arrival in New England, because he found his own,
that of dyer, in too little request to enable him to maintain his
family, I was accordingly employed in cutting the wicks, filling the
moulds, taking care of the shop, carrying messages, &c.

This business displeased me, and I felt a strong inclination for a
sea life; but my father set his face against it. The vicinity of the
water, however, gave me frequent opportunities, of venturing myself
both upon and within it, and I soon acquired the art of swimming, and
of managing a boat. When embarked with other children, the helm was
commonly deputed to me, particularly on difficult occasions; and, in
every other project, I was almost always the leader of the troop,
whom I sometimes involved in embarrassments. I shall give an instance
of this, which demonstrates an early disposition of mind for public
enterprises, though the one in question was not conducted by justice.

The mill-pond was terminated on one side by a marsh, upon the borders
of which we were accustomed to take our stand, at high water, to
angle for small fish. By dint of walking, we had converted the place
into a perfect quagmire. My proposal was to erect a wharf that
should afford us firm footing; and I pointed out to my companions
a large heap of stones, intended for the building a new house near
the marsh, and which were well adapted for our purpose. Accordingly,
when the workmen retired in the evening, I assembled a number of my
play-fellows, and by labouring diligently, like ants, sometimes four
of us uniting our strength to carry a single stone, we removed them
all, and constructed our little quay. The workmen were surprised the
next morning at not finding their stones; which had been conveyed
to our wharf. Enquiries were made respecting the authors of this
conveyance; we were discovered; complaints were exhibited against us;
and many of us underwent correction on the part of our parents; and
though I strenuously defended the utility of the work, my father at
length convinced me, that nothing which was not strictly honest could
be useful.

It will not, perhaps, be uninteresting to you to know what a sort of
man my father was. He had an excellent constitution, was of a middle
size, but well made and strong, and extremely active in whatever he
undertook. He designed with a degree of neatness, and knew a little
of music. His voice was sonorous and agreeable; so that when he sung
a psalm or hymn, with the accompaniment of his violin, as was his
frequent practice in an evening, when the labours of the day were
finished, it was truly delightful to hear him. He was versed also in
mechanics, and could, upon occasion, use the tools of a variety of
trades. But his greatest excellence was a sound understanding and
solid judgment, in matters of prudence, both in public and private
life. In the former, indeed, he never engaged, because his numerous
family, and the mediocrity of his fortune, kept him unremittingly
employed in the duties of his profession. But I well remember,
that the leading men of the place used frequently to come and ask
his advice respecting the affairs of the town, or of the church to
which he belonged, and that they paid much deference to his opinion.
Individuals were also in the habit of consulting him in their private
affairs, and he was often chosen arbiter between contending parties.

He was fond of having at his table, as often as possible,
some friends or well-informed neighbours, capable of rational
conversation, and he was always careful to introduce useful or
ingenious topics of discourse, which might tend to form the minds
of his children. By this means he early attracted our attention
to what was just, prudent, and beneficial in the conduct of life.
He never talked of the meats which appeared upon the table, never
discussed whether they were well or ill dressed, of a good or bad
flavour, high-seasoned or otherwise, preferable or inferior to this
or that dish of a similar kind. Thus accustomed, from my infancy, to
the utmost inattention as to these objects, I have been perfectly
regardless of what kind of food was before me; and I pay so little
attention to it even now, that it would be a hard matter for me
to recollect, a few hours after I had dined, of what my dinner
had consisted. When travelling, I have particularly experienced
the advantage of this habit; for it has often happened to me to
be in company with persons, who, having a more delicate, because
a more exercised taste, have suffered in many cases considerable
inconvenience; while, as to myself, I have had nothing to desire.

My mother was likewise possessed of an excellent constitution. She
suckled all her ten children, and I never heard either her or my
father complain of any other disorder than that of which they died:
my father at the age of eighty-seven, and my mother at eighty-five.
They are buried together at Boston, where, a few years ago, I placed
a marble over their grave, with this inscription:

                           "Here lie
  JOSIAS FRANKLIN and ABIAH his wife: They lived together with reciprocal
  affection for fifty-nine years; and without private fortune,
  without lucrative employment, by assiduous labour and honest industry,
  decently supported a numerous family, and educated with success,
  thirteen children, and seven grand children. Let this example, reader,
  encourage thee diligently to discharge the duties of thy calling, and to
  rely on the support of divine providence,
                     He was pious and prudent,
                     She discreet and virtuous.
  Their youngest son, from a sentiment of filial duty, consecrates
                            this stone
                         to their memory."

I perceive, by my rambling digressions, that I am growing old. But
we do not dress for a private company as for a formal ball. This
deserves, perhaps, the name of negligence.

To return. I thus continued employed in my father's trade for
the space of two years; that is to say, till I arrived at twelve
years of age. About this time my brother John, who had served his
apprenticeship in London, having quitted my father, and being
married and settled in business on his own account at Rhode Island,
I was destined, to all appearance to supply his place, and be
a candle-maker all my life: but my dislike of this occupation
continuing, my father was apprehensive, that, if a more, agreeable
one were not offered me, I might play the truant and escape to
sea; as, to his extreme mortification, my brother Josias had done.
He therefore took me sometimes to see masons, coopers, braziers,
joiners, and other mechanics, employed at their work; in order to
discover the bent of my inclination, and fix it if he could upon
some occupation that might retain me on shore. I have since, in
consequence of these visits, derived no small pleasure from seeing
skilful workmen handle their tools; and it has proved of considerable
benefit to have acquired thereby sufficient knowledge to be able
to make little things for myself, when I have had no mechanic at
hand, and to construct small machines for my experiments, while the
idea I have conceived has been fresh and strongly impressed on my
imagination.

My father at length decided that I should be a cutler, and I was
placed for some days upon trial with my cousin Samuel, son of my
uncle Benjamin, who had learned this trade in London, and had
established himself at Boston. But the premium he required for my
apprenticeship displeasing my father, I was recalled home.

From my earliest years I had been passionately fond of reading, and I
laid out in books all the money I could procure. I was particularly
pleased with accounts of voyages. My first acquisition was Bunyan's
works in small separate volumes. These I afterwards sold in order
to buy an historical collection by R. Burton, which consisted of
small cheap volumes, amounting in all to about forty or fifty. My
father's little library was principally made up of books of practical
and polemical theology. I read the greatest part of them. I have
since often regretted that at a time when I had so great a thirst
for knowledge, more eligible books had not fallen into my hands, as
it was then a point decided that I should not be educated for the
church. There was also among my father's books, Plutarch's Lives,
in which I read continually, and I still regard as advantageously
employed the time devoted to them. I found besides a work of De
Foe's, entitled an Essay on Projects, from which, perhaps, I derived
impressions that have since influenced some of the principal events
of my life.

My inclination for books at last determined my father to make me
a printer, though he had already a son in that profession. My
brother had returned from England in 1717, with a press and types,
in order to establish a printing-house at Boston. This business
pleased me much better than that of my father, though I had still a
predilection for the sea. To prevent the effects which might result
from this inclination, my father was impatient to see me engaged
with my brother. I held back for some time; at length, however, I
suffered myself to be persuaded, and signed my indentures, being then
only twelve years of age. It was agreed that I should serve as an
apprentice to the age of twenty-one, and should receive journeyman's
wages only during the last year.

In a very short time I made great proficiency in this business, and
became very serviceable to my brother. I had now an opportunity of
procuring better books. The acquaintance I necessarily formed with
booksellers' apprentices, enabled me to borrow a volume now and then,
which I never failed to return punctually and without injury. How
often has it happened to me to pass the greater part of the night
in reading by my bed-side, when the book had been lent me in the
evening, and was to be returned the next morning, lest it might be
missed or wanted!

At length, Mr. Matthew Adams, an ingenious tradesman, who had a
handsome collection of books, and who frequented our printing-house,
took notice of me. He invited me to see his library, and had the
goodness to lend me any books I was desirous of reading. I then took
a strange fancy for poetry, and composed several little pieces. My
brother, thinking he might find his account in it, encouraged me, and
engaged me to write two ballads. One, called the Light-house Tragedy,
contained an account of the shipwreck of captain Worthilake and his
two daughters; the other was a sailor's song on the capture of the
noted pirate called _Teach_, or _Blackbeard_. They were wretched
verses in point of style, mere blind-men's ditties. When printed, he
dispatched me about the town to sell them. The first had a prodigious
run, because the event was recent, and had made a great noise.

My vanity was flattered by this success; but my father checked my
exultation, by ridiculing my productions, and telling me that
versifiers were always poor. I thus escaped the misfortune of being
a very wretched poet. But as the faculty of writing prose has been
of great service to me in the course of my life, and principally
contributed to my advancement, I shall relate by what means, situated
as I was, I acquired the small skill I may possess in that way.

There was in the town another young man, a great lover of books,
of the name of John Collins, with whom I was intimately connected.
We frequently engaged in dispute, and were indeed so fond of
argumentation, that nothing was so agreeable to us as a war of words.
This contentious temper, I would observe by the bye, is in danger of
becoming a very bad habit; and frequently renders a man's company
insupportable, as being no otherwise capable of indulgence than by
an indiscriminate contradiction. Independently of the acrimony and
discord it introduces into conversation, it is often productive of
dislike, and even hatred, between persons to whom friendship is
indispensibly necessary. I acquired it by reading, while I lived with
my father, books of religious controversy. I have since remarked,
that men of sense seldom fall into this error: lawyers, fellows of
universities, and persons of every profession educated at Edinburgh,
excepted.

Collins and I fell one day into an argument, relative to the
education of women; namely, whether it was proper to instruct them in
the sciences, and whether they were competent to the study. Collins
supported the negative, and affirmed that the task was beyond their
capacity. I maintained the opposite opinion, a little perhaps for
the pleasure of disputing. He was naturally more eloquent than I;
words flowed copiously from his lips; and frequently I thought
myself vanquished, more by his volubility than by the force of his
arguments. We separated without coming to an agreement upon this
point, and as we were not to see each other again for some time, I
committed my thoughts to paper, made a fair copy, and sent it him.
He answered, and I replied. Three or four letters had been written
by each, when my father chanced to light upon my papers and read
them. Without entering into the merits of the cause, he embraced the
opportunity of speaking to me upon my manner of writing. He observed,
that though I had the advantage of my adversary in correct spelling
and pointing, which I owed to my occupation, I was greatly his
inferior in elegance of expression, in arrangement, and perspicuity.
Of this he convinced me by several examples. I felt the justice of
his remarks, became more attentive to language, and resolved to make
every effort to improve my style.

Amidst these resolves an odd volume of the Spectator fell into my
hands. This was a publication I had never seen. I bought the volume,
and read it again and again. I was enchanted with it, thought the
style excellent, and wished it were in my power to imitate it. With
this view I selected some of the papers, made short summaries of the
sense of each period, and put them for a few days aside. I then,
without looking at the book, endeavoured to restore the essays to
their due form, and to express each thought at length, as it was in
the original, employing the most appropriate words that occurred to
my mind. I afterwards compared my Spectator with the original; I
perceived some faults, which I corrected: but I found that I wanted
a fund of words, if I may so express myself, and a facility of
recollecting and employing them, which I thought I should by that
time have acquired, had I continued to make verses. The continual
need of words of the same meaning, but of different lengths for the
measure, or of different sounds for the rhyme, would have obliged me
to seek for a variety of synonymes, and have rendered me master of
them. From this belief, I took some of the tales of the Spectator and
turned them into verse; and after a time, when I had sufficiently
forgotten them, I again converted them into prose.

Sometimes also I mingled all my summaries together; and a few weeks
after, endeavoured to arrange them in the best order, before I
attempted to form the periods and complete the essays. This I did
with a view of acquiring method in the arrangement of my thoughts.
On comparing afterwards my performance with the original, many
faults were apparent, which I corrected; but I had sometimes the
satisfaction to think, that, in certain particulars of little
importance, I had been fortunate enough to improve the order of
thought or the style; and this encouraged me to hope that I should
succeed, in time, in writing decently in the English language, which
was one of the great objects of my ambition.

The time which I devoted to these exercises, and to reading, was
the evening after my day's labour was finished, the morning before
it began, and Sundays when I could escape attending divine service.
While I lived with my father, he had insisted on my punctual
attendance on public worship, and I still indeed considered it as a
duty, but a duty which I thought I had no time to practise.

When about sixteen years of age, a work of Tyron's fell into my
hands, in which he recommends vegetable diet. I determined to observe
it. My brother being a bachelor, did not keep house, but boarded
with his apprentices in a neighbouring family. My refusing to eat
animal food was found inconvenient, and I was often scolded for my
singularity. I attended to the mode in which Tryon prepared some of
his dishes, particularly how to boil potatoes and rice, and make
hasty puddings. I then said to my brother, that if he would allow
me per week half what he paid for my board, I would undertake to
maintain myself. The offer was instantly embraced, and I soon found
that of what he gave me, I was able to save half. This was a new fund
for the purchase of books; and other advantages resulted to me from
the plan. When my brother and his workmen left the printing-house
to go to dinner, I remained behind; and dispatching my frugal meal,
which frequently consisted of a biscuit only, or a slice of bread and
a bunch of raisins, or a bun from the pastry-cook's, with a glass of
water, I had the rest of the time, till their return, for study; and
my progress therein was proportioned to that clearness of ideas, and
quickness of conception, which are the fruit of temperance in eating
and drinking.

It was about this period, that having one day been put to the blush
for my ignorance in the art of calculation, which I had twice failed
to learn while at school, I took Cocker's Treatise of Arithmetic, and
went through it by myself with the utmost ease. I also read a book of
navigation by Seller and Sturmy, and made myself master of the little
geometry it contains, but I never proceeded far in this science.
Nearly at the same time I read Locke on the Human Understanding, and
the Art of Thinking, by Messrs. du Port Royal.

While labouring to form and improve my style, I met with an English
Grammar, which I believe was Greenwood's, having at the end of it
two little essays on rhetoric and logic. In the latter I found a
model of disputation, after the manner of Socrates. Shortly after I
procured Xenophon's work, entitled Memorable Things of Socrates, in
which are various examples of the same method. Charmed to a degree of
enthusiasm with this mode of disputing, I adopted it, and renouncing
blunt contradiction, and direct and positive argument, I assumed
the character of an humble questioner. The perusal of Shaftsbury
and Collins had made me a sceptic; and being previously so as to
many doctrines of Christianity, I found Socrates's method to be
both safest for myself, as well as the most embarrassing to those
against whom I employed it. It soon afforded me singular pleasure; I
incessantly practised it; and became very adroit in obtaining, even
from persons of superior understanding, concessions of which they did
not foresee the consequence. Thus I involved them in difficulties
from which they were unable to extricate themselves, and sometimes
obtained victories, which neither my cause nor my arguments merited.

This method I continued to employ for some years; but I afterwards
abandoned it by degrees, retaining only the habit of expressing
myself with modest diffidence, and never making use, when I
advanced any proposition which might be controverted, of the words
_certainly_, _undoubtedly_, or any others that might give the
appearance of being obstinately attached to my opinion. I rather
said, I imagine, I suppose, or it appears to me, that such a thing
is so or so, for such and such reasons; or it is so, if I am not
mistaken. This habit has, I think, been of considerable advantage
to me, when I have had occasion to impress my opinion on the minds
of others, and persuade them to the adoption of the measures I have
suggested. And since the chief ends of conversation are, to inform or
be informed, to please or to persuade, I could wish that intelligent
or well-meaning men would not themselves diminish the power they
possess of being useful, by a positive and presumptuous manner of
expressing themselves, which scarcely ever fails to disgust the
hearer, and is only calculated to excite opposition, and defeat every
purpose for which the faculty of speech has been bestowed on man. In
short, if you wish to inform, a positive and dogmatical manner of
advancing your opinion may provoke contradiction, and prevent your
being heard with attention. On the other hand, if, with a desire of
being informed, and of benefiting by the knowledge of others, you
express yourselves as being strongly attached to your own opinions,
modest and sensible men, who do not love disputation, will leave you
in tranquil possession of your errors. By following such a method,
you can rarely hope to please your auditors, conciliate their
good-will, or work conviction on those whom you may be desirous of
gaining over to your views. Pope judiciously observes,

    Men must be taught, as if you taught them not,
    And things unknown propos'd--as things forgot.

And in the same poem he afterwards advises us

    To speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence.

He might have added to these lines, one that he has coupled
elsewhere, in my opinion, with less propriety. It is this:

    For want of modesty is want of sense.

If you ask why I say with _less propriety_, I must give you the two
lines together:

    Immodest words admit of _no defence_,
    For want of decency is want of sense.

Now want of sense, when a man has the misfortune to be so
circumstanced, is it not a kind of excuse for want of modesty?
And would not the verses have been more accurate if they had been
constructed thus:

    Immodest words admit _but this defence_,
    That want of decency is want of sense.

But I leave the decision of this to better judges than myself.

In 1720, or 1721, my brother began to print a new public paper. It
was the second that made its appearance in America, and was entitled,
"The New England Courant." The only one that existed before was the
"Boston News Letter." Some of his friends, I remember, would have
dissuaded him from this undertaking, as a thing that was not likely
to succeed; a single newspaper being, in their opinion, sufficient
for all America. At present, however, in 1771, there are no less than
twenty-five. But he carried his project into execution, and I was
employed in distributing the copies to his customers, after having
assisted in composing and working them off.

Among his friends he had a number of literary characters, who,
as an amusement, wrote short essays for the paper, which gave it
reputation and increased the sale. These gentlemen frequently came
to our house. I heard the conversation that passed, and the accounts
they gave of the favourable reception of their writings with the
public. I was tempted to try my hand among them; but, being still a
child as it were, I was fearful that my brother might be unwilling
to print in his paper any performance of which he should know me to
be the author. I therefore contrived to disguise my hand, and having
written an anonymous piece, I placed it at night under the door of
the printing-house, where it was found the next morning. My brother
communicated it to his friends, when they came as usual to see him,
who read it, commented upon it within my hearing, and I had the
exquisite pleasure to find that it met with their approbation, and
that in the various conjectures they made respecting the author, no
one was mentioned who did not enjoy a high reputation in the country
for talents and genius. I now supposed myself fortunate in my judges,
and began to suspect that they were not such excellent writers as I
had hitherto supposed them. Be this as it may, encouraged by this
little adventure, I wrote, and sent to press in the same way, many
other pieces, which were equally approved: keeping the secret till my
slender stock of information and knowledge for such performances was
pretty completely exhausted, when I made myself known.

My brother, upon this discovery, began to entertain a little more
respect for me; but he still regarded himself as my master, and
treated me as an apprentice. He thought himself entitled to the same
services from me, as from any other person. On the contrary, I
conceived that in many instances, he was too rigorous, and that, on
the part of a brother, I had a right to expect greater indulgence.
Our disputes were frequently brought before my father; and either
my brother was generally wrong, or I was the better pleader of the
two, for judgment was commonly given in my favour. But my brother
was passionate, and often had recourse to blows--a circumstance
which I took in very ill part. This severe and tyrannical treatment
contributed, I believe, to imprint on my mind that aversion to
arbitrary power, which during my whole life I have ever preserved. My
apprenticeship became insupportable to me, and I continually sighed
for an opportunity of shortening it, which at length unexpectedly
offered.

An article inserted in our paper, upon some political subject which
I have now forgotten, gave offence to the assembly. My brother was
taken into custody, censured, and ordered into confinement for a
month, because, as I presume, he would not discover the author. I was
also taken up, and examined before the council; but though I gave
them no satisfaction, they contented themselves with reprimanding,
and then dismissed me; considering me probably as bound, in quality
of apprentice, to keep my master's secrets.

The imprisonment of my brother kindled my resentment, notwithstanding
our private quarrels. During its continuance, the management of the
paper was entrusted to me, and I was bold enough to insert some
pasquinades against the governors, which highly pleased my brother,
while others began to look upon me in an unfavourable point of view,
considering me as a young wit inclined to satire and lampoon.

My brother's enlargement was accompanied with an arbitrary order
from the house of the assembly, "That James Franklin should no
longer print the newspaper entitled 'The New England Courant.'"
In this conjuncture, we held a consultation of our friends at the
printing-house, in order to determine what was proper to be done.
Some proposed to evade the order, by changing the title of the paper:
but my brother, foreseeing inconveniences that would result from this
step, thought it better that it should be in future printed in the
name of Benjamin Franklin; and to avoid the censure of the assembly,
who might charge him with still printing the paper himself under
the name of his apprentice, it was resolved that my old indentures
should be given up to me, with a full and entire discharge written
on the back, in order to be produced upon an emergency; but that, to
secure to my brother the benefit of my service, I should sign a new
contract, which should be kept secret during the remainder of the
term. This was a very shallow arrangement. It was, however, carried
into immediate execution, and the paper continued, in consequence,
to make its appearance for some months in my name. At length a new
difference arising between my brother and me, I ventured to take
advantage of my liberty, presuming that he would not dare to produce
the new contract. It was undoubtedly dishonourable to avail myself
of this circumstance, and I reckon this action as one of the first
errors of my life; but I was little capable of estimating it at its
true value, embittered as my mind had been by the recollection of the
blows I had received. Exclusively of his passionate treatment of me,
my brother was by no means a man of an ill temper, and perhaps my
manners had too much impertinence not to afford it a very natural
pretext.

When he knew that it was my determination to quit him, he wished
to prevent my finding employment elsewhere. He went to all the
printing-houses in the town, and prejudiced the masters against
me--who accordingly refused to employ me. The idea then suggested
itself to me of going to New York, the nearest town in which there
was a printing-office. Farther reflection confirmed me in the design
of leaving Boston, where I had already rendered myself an object of
suspicion to the governing party. It was probable, from the arbitrary
proceedings of the assembly in the affair of my brother, that, by
remaining, I should soon have been exposed to difficulties, which I
had the greater reason to apprehend, as, from my indiscreet disputes
upon the subject of religion, I began to be regarded by pious souls
with horror, either as an apostate or an atheist. I came, therefore,
to a resolution: but my father, in this instance siding with my
brother, presumed that if I attempted to depart openly, measures
would be taken to prevent me. My friend Collins undertook to favour
my flight. He agreed for my passage with the captain of a New York
sloop, to whom he represented me as a young man of his acquaintance,
who had an affair with a girl of bad character, whose parents wished
to compel me to marry her, and that of consequence I could neither
make my appearance, nor go off publicly. I sold part of my books
to procure a small sum of money, and went privately on board the
sloop. By favour of a good wind, I found myself in three days at New
York, nearly three hundred miles from my home, at the age only of
seventeen years, without knowing an individual in the place, and
with very little money in my pocket.

The inclination I had felt for a sea-faring life had entirely
subsided, or I should now have been able to gratify it; but having
another trade, and believing myself to be a tolerable workman, I
hesitated not to offer my services to old Mr. William Bradford, who
had been the first printer in Pennsylvania, but had quitted that
province on account of a quarrel with George Keith, the governor.
He could not give me employment himself, having little to do, and
already as many persons as he wanted; but he told me that his son,
a printer at Philadelphia, had lately lost his principal workman,
Aquilla Rose, who was dead, and that if I would go thither, he
believed that he would engage me. Philadelphia was a hundred miles
farther. I hesitated not to embark in a boat in order to repair, by
the shortest cut of the sea, to Amboy, leaving my trunk and effects
to come after me by the usual and more tedious conveyance. In
crossing the bay we met with a squall, which shattered to pieces our
rotten sails, prevented us from entering the Kill, and threw us upon
Long Island.

During the squall, a drunken Dutchman, who like myself was a
passenger in the boat, fell into the sea. At the moment that he was
sinking, I seized him by the fore-top, saved him, and drew him on
board. This immersion sobered him a little, so that he fell asleep,
after having taken from his pocket a volume, which he requested me to
dry. This volume I found to be my old favourite Bunyan, in Dutch, a
beautiful impression on fine paper, with copper-plate engravings--a
dress in which I had never seen it in its original language. I
have since learned that it has been translated into almost all the
languages of Europe, and next to the Bible, I am persuaded, it is
one of the books which has had the greatest spread. Honest John is
the first, that I know of, who has mixed narrative and dialogue
together; a mode of writing very engaging to the reader, who in the
most interesting passages, finds himself admitted as it were into the
company, and present at the conversation. De Foe has imitated it with
success in his Robinson Crusoe, his Moll Flanders, and other works;
as also Richardson in his Pamela, &c.

In approaching the island, we found that we had made a part of the
coast where it was not possible to land, on account of the strong
breakers produced by the rocky shore. We cast anchor and veered the
cable towards the shore. Some men, who stood upon the brink, halloed
to us, while we did the same on our part; but the wind was so high,
and the waves so noisy, that we could neither of us hear each other.
There were some canoes upon the bank, and we called out to them, and
made signs to prevail on them to come and take us up; but either they
did not understand us, or they deemed our request impracticable, and
withdrew. Night came on, and nothing remained for us but to wait
quietly the subsiding of the wind; till when, we determined, that is,
the pilot and I, to sleep if possible. For that purpose we went below
the hatches along with the Dutchman, who was drenched with water. The
sea broke over the boat, and reached us in our retreat, so that we
were presently as completely drenched as he.

We had very little repose during the whole night: but the wind
abating the next day, we succeeded in reaching Amboy before it was
dark, after having passed thirty hours without provisions, and with
no other drink than a bottle of bad rum, the water upon which we
rowed being salt. In the evening I went to bed with a very violent
fever. I had somewhere read that cold water, drank plentifully, was a
remedy in such cases. I followed the prescription, was in a profuse
sweat for the greater part of the night, and the fever left me. The
next day I crossed the river in a ferryboat, and continued my journey
on foot. I had fifty miles to walk, in order to reach Burlington,
where I was told I should find passage-boats that would convey me to
Philadelphia. It rained hard the whole day, so that I was wet to the
skin. Finding myself fatigued about noon, I stopped at a paltry inn,
where I passed the rest of the day and the whole night, beginning
to regret that I had quitted my home. I made besides so wretched
a figure, that I was suspected to be some runaway servant. This I
discovered by the questions that were asked me; and I felt that I
was every moment in danger of being taken up as such. The next day,
however, I continued my journey, and arrived in the evening at an
inn, eight or ten miles from Burlington, that was kept by one Dr.
Brown.

This man entered into conversation with me while I took some
refreshment, and perceiving that I had read a little, he expressed
towards me considerable interest and friendship. Our acquaintance
continued during the remainder of his life. I believe him to have
been what is called an itinerant doctor; for there was no town in
England, or indeed in Europe, of which he could not give a particular
account. He was neither deficient in understanding or literature,
but he was a sad infidel; and, some years after, wickedly undertook
to travesty the Bible, in burlesque verse, as Cotton has travestied
Virgil. He exhibited, by this means, many facts in a very ludicrous
point of view, which would have given umbrage to weak minds, had his
work been published, which it never was.

I spent the night at his house, and reached Burlington the next
morning. On my arrival, I had the mortification to learn that
the ordinary passage-boats had sailed a little before. This was
on a Saturday, and there would be no other boat till the Tuesday
following. I returned to the house of an old woman in the town who
had sold me some gingerbread to eat on my passage, and I asked
her advice. She invited me to take up my abode with her till an
opportunity offered for me to embark. Fatigued with having travelled
so far on foot, I accepted her invitation. When she understood that
I was a printer, she would have persuaded me to stay at Burlington,
and set up my trade; but she was little aware of the capital that
would be necessary for such a purpose! I was treated while at her
house with true hospitality. She gave me with the utmost good-will,
a dinner of beef-steaks, and would accept of nothing in return but a
pint of ale.

Here I imagined myself to be fixed till the Tuesday in the ensuing
week; but walking out in the evening by the river side, I saw a
boat with a number of persons in it approach. It was going to
Philadelphia, and the company took me in. As there was no wind, we
could only make way with our oars. About midnight, not perceiving
the town, some of the company were of opinion that we must have
passed it, and were unwilling to row any farther; the rest not
knowing where we were, it was resolved that we should stop. We
drew towards the shore, entered a creek, and landed near some old
palisades, which served us for fire-wood, it being a cold night in
October. Here we stayed till day, when one of the company found
the place in which we were to be Cooper's creek, a little above
Philadelphia; which in reality we perceived the moment we were out of
the creek. We arrived on Sunday about eight or nine o'clock in the
morning, and landed on Market-street wharf.

I have entered into the particulars of my voyage, and shall in like
manner describe my first entrance into this city, that you may be
able to compare beginnings so little auspicious, with the figure I
have since made.

On my arrival at Philadelphia I was in my working dress, my best
cloaths being to come by sea. I was covered with dirt; my pockets
were filled with shirts and stockings; I was unacquainted with a
single soul in the place, and knew not where to seek for a lodging.
Fatigued with walking, rowing, and having passed the night without
sleep, I was extremely hungry, and all my money consisted of a
Dutch dollar, and about a shilling's worth of coppers, which I gave
to the boatmen for my passage. As I had assisted them in rowing,
they refused it at first; but I insisted on their taking it. A man
is sometimes more generous when he has little, than when he has
much money; probably because, in the first case, he is desirous of
concealing his poverty.

I walked towards the top of the street, looking eagerly on both
sides, till I came to Market-street, where I met a child with a
loaf of bread. Often had I made my dinner on dry bread. I enquired
where he had bought it, and went straight to the baker's shop which
he pointed out to me. I asked for some biscuits, expecting to find
such as we had at Boston; but they made, it seems, none of that sort
at Philadelphia. I then asked for a three-penny loaf; they made no
loaves of that price. Finding myself ignorant of the prices, as well
as of the different kinds of bread, I desired him to let me have
three penny-worth of bread of some kind or other. He gave me three
large rolls. I was surprised at receiving so much: I took them,
however, and having no room in my pockets, I walked on with a roll
under each arm, eating the third. In this manner I went through
Market-street to Fourth-street, and passed the house of Mr. Read, the
father of my future wife. She was standing at the door, observed me,
and thought with reason, that I made a very singular and grotesque
appearance.

I then turned the corner, and went through Chesnut-street, eating my
roll all the way; and having made this round, I found myself again on
Market-street wharf, near the boat in which I arrived. I stepped into
it to take a draught of the river water; and finding myself satisfied
with my first roll, I gave the other two to a woman and her child,
who had come down the river with us in the boat, and was waiting to
continue her journey. Thus refreshed, I regained the street, which
was now full of well-dressed people, all going the same way. I joined
them, and was thus led to a large Quaker's meeting-house near the
market-place. I sat down with the rest, and after looking round
me for some time, hearing nothing said, and being drowsy from my
last night's labour and want of rest, I fell into a sound sleep. In
this state I continued till the assembly dispersed, when one of the
congregation had the goodness to wake me. This was consequently the
first house I entered, or in which I slept, at Philadelphia.

I began again to walk along the street by the river side; and looking
attentively in the face of every one I met, I at length perceived a
young quaker whose countenance pleased me. I accosted him, and begged
him to inform me where a stranger might find a lodging. We were then
near the sign of the three Mariners. They receive travellers here,
said he, but it is not a house that bears a good character; if you
will go with me, I will shew you a better one. He conducted me to
the Crooked-billet, in Water-street. There I ordered something for
dinner, and during my meal a number of curious questions were put
to me; my youth and appearance exciting the suspicion of my being a
runaway. After dinner my drowsiness returned, and I threw myself upon
a bed without taking off my cloaths, and slept till six o'clock in
the evening, when I was called to supper. I afterwards went to bed at
a very early hour, and did not awake till the next morning.

As soon as I got up I put myself in as decent a trim as I could,
and went to the house of Andrew Bradford the printer. I found his
father in the shop, whom I had seen at New York. Having travelled
on horseback, he had arrived at Philadelphia before me. He
introduced me to his son, who received me with civility, and gave
me some breakfast; but told me he had no occasion at present for a
journeyman, having lately procured one. He added, that there was
another printer newly settled in the town, of the name of Keimer,
who might perhaps employ me; and that in case of refusal, I should be
welcome to lodge at his house, and he would give me a little work now
and then, till something better should offer.

The old man offered to introduce me to the new printer. When we were
at his house: "Neighbour," said he, "I bring you a young man in the
printing business; perhaps you may have need of his services."

Keimer asked me some questions, put a composing stick in my hand
to see how I could work, and then said, that at present he had
nothing for me to do, but that he should soon be able to employ me.
At the same time taking old Bradford for an inhabitant of the town
well-disposed towards him, he communicated his project to him, and
the prospect he had of success. Bradford was careful not to discover
that he was the father of the other printer; and from what Keimer
had said, that he hoped shortly to be in possession of the greater
part of the business of the town, led him by artful questions, and by
starting some difficulties, to disclose all his views, what his hopes
were founded upon, and how he intended to proceed. I was present, and
heard it all. I instantly saw that one of the two was a cunning old
fox, and the other a perfect novice. Bradford left me with Keimer,
who was strangely surprised when I informed him who the old man was.

I found Keimer's printing materials to consist of an old damaged
press, and a small fount of worn-out English letters, with which
he himself was at work upon an elegy on Aquila Rose, whom I have
mentioned above, an ingenious young man, and of an excellent
character, highly esteemed in the town, secretary to the assembly,
and a very tolerable poet. Keimer also made verses, but they were
indifferent ones. He could not be said to write in verse, for his
method was to set the lines as they flowed from his muse; and as he
worked without copy, had but one set of letter-cases, and the elegy
would probably occupy all his types, it was impossible for any one
to assist him. I endeavoured to put his press in order, which he had
not yet used, and of which indeed he understood nothing: and having
promised to come and work off his elegy as soon as it should be
ready, I returned to the house of Bradford, who gave me some trifle
to do for the present, for which I had my board and lodging.

In a few days Keimer sent for me to print off his elegy. He had now
procured another set of letter-cases, and had a pamphlet to re-print,
upon which he set me to work.

The two Philadelphia printers appeared destitute of every
qualification necessary in their profession. Bradford had not
been brought up to it, and was very illiterate. Keimer, though
he understood a little of the business, was merely a compositor,
and wholly incapable of working at the press. He had been one of
the French prophets; and knew how to imitate their supernatural
agitations. At the time of our first acquaintance he professed no
particular religion, but a little of all upon occasion. He was
totally ignorant of the world, and a great knave at heart, as I had
afterwards, an opportunity of experiencing.

Keimer could not endure that, working with him, I should lodge at
Bradford's. He had indeed a house, but it was unfurnished; so that
he could not take me in. He procured me a lodging at Mr. Read's, his
landlord, whom I have already mentioned. My trunk and effects being
now arrived, I thought of making, in the eyes of Miss Read, a more
respectable appearance than when chance exhibited me to her view,
eating my roll, and wandering in the streets.

From this period I began to contract acquaintance with such young
people of the town as were fond of reading, and spent my evenings
with them agreeably, while at the same time I gained money by my
industry, and, thanks to my frugality, lived contented. I thus forgot
Boston as much as possible, and wished every one to be ignorant of
the place of my residence, except my friend Collins, to whom I wrote,
and who kept my secret.

An incident however arrived, which sent me home much sooner than
I had proposed. I had a brother-in-law, of the name of Robert
Holmes, master of a trading sloop from Boston to Delaware. Being at
Newcastle, forty miles below Philadelphia, he heard of me, and wrote
to inform me of the chagrin which my sudden departure from Boston
had occasioned my parents, and of the affection which they still
entertained for me, assuring me that, if I would return, every thing
should be adjusted to my satisfaction; and he was very pressing in
his entreaties. I answered his letter, thanked him for his advice,
and explained the reasons which had induced me to quit Boston, with
such force and clearness, that he was convinced I had been less to
blame than he had imagined.

Sir William Keith, governor of the province, was at Newcastle at
the time. Captain Holmes, being by chance in his company when he
received my letter, took occasion to speak of me, and showed it him.
The governor read it, and appeared surprised when he learned my age.
He thought me, he said, a young man of very promising talents, and
that, of consequence, I ought to be encouraged; that there were at
Philadelphia none but very ignorant printers, and that if I were to
set up for myself, he had no doubt of my success; that, for his own
part, he would procure me all the public business, and would render
me every other service in his power. My brother-in-law related all
this to me afterwards at Boston; but I knew nothing of it at the
time; when one day Keimer and I being at work together near the
window, we saw the governor and another gentleman, colonel French, of
Newcastle, handsomely dressed, cross the street, and make directly
for our house. We heard them at the door, and Keimer believing it
to be a visit to himself, went immediately down: but the governor
enquired for me, came up stairs, and, with a condescension and
politeness to which I had not at all been accustomed, paid me many
compliments, desired to be acquainted with me, obligingly reproached
me for not having made myself known to him on my arrival in the town,
and wished me to accompany him to a tavern, where he and colonel
French were going to taste some excellent Madeira wine.

I was, I confess, somewhat surprised, and Keimer appeared
thunderstruck. I went, however, with the governor and the colonel to
a tavern at the corner of Third-street, where, while we were drinking
the Madeira, he proposed to me to establish a printing-house. He set
forth the probabilities of success, and himself, and colonel French
assured me that I should have their protection and influence in
obtaining the printing of the public papers of both governments; and
as I appeared to doubt whether my father would assist me in this
enterprize, Sir William said that he would give me a letter to him,
in which he would represent the advantages of the scheme, in a light
which he had no doubt would determine him. It was thus concluded that
I should return to Boston by the first vessel, with the letter of
recommendation, from the governor to my father. Meanwhile the project
was to be kept secret, and I continued to work for Keimer as before.

The governor sent every now and then to invite me to dine with him. I
considered this as a very great honour; and I was the more sensible
of it, as he conversed with me in the most affable, familiar, and
friendly manner imaginable.

Towards the end of April 1724, a small vessel was ready to sail for
Boston. I took leave of Keimer, upon the pretext of going to see my
parents. The governor gave me a long letter, in which he said many
flattering things of me to my father; and strongly recommended the
project of my settling at Philadelphia, as a thing which could not
fail to make my fortune.

Going down the bay we struck on a flat, and sprung a leak. The
weather was very tempestuous, and we were obliged to pump without
intermission; I took my turn. We arrived, however, safe and sound at
Boston, after about a fortnight's passage.

I had been absent about seven complete months, and my relations,
during that interval, had received no intelligence of me; for my
brother-in-law, Holmes, was not yet returned, and had not written
about me. My unexpected appearance surprized the family; but they
were all delighted at seeing me again, and, except my brother,
welcomed me home. I went to him at the printing-house. I was better
dressed than I had ever been while in his service: I had a complete
suit of clothes, new and neat, a watch in my pocket, and my purse was
furnished with nearly five pounds sterling in money. He gave me no
very civil reception; and having eyed me from head to foot, resumed
his work.

The workmen asked me with eagerness where I had been, what sort of a
country it was, and how I liked it. I spoke in the highest terms of
Philadelphia, the happy life we led there, and expressed my intention
of going back again. One of them asking what sort of money we had,
I displayed before them a handful of silver, which I drew from my
pocket. This was a curiosity to which they were not accustomed, paper
being the current money at Boston. I failed not after this to let
them see my watch; and at last, my brother continuing sullen and
out of humour, I gave them a shilling to drink, and took my leave.
This visit stung my brother to the soul; for when, shortly after, my
mother spoke to him of a reconciliation, and a desire to see us upon
good terms, he told her that I had so insulted him before his men,
that he would never forget or forgive it: in this, however, he was
mistaken.

The governor's letter appeared to excite in my father some surprize;
but he said little. After some days, captain Holmes being returned,
he showed it him, asking him if he knew Keith, and what sort of a
man he was: adding, that, in his opinion, it proved very little
discernment to think of setting up a boy in business, who for three
years to come would not be of an age to be ranked in the class of
men. Holmes said every thing he could in favour of the scheme; but my
father firmly maintained its absurdity, and at last gave a positive
refusal. He wrote, however, a civil letter to Sir William, thanking
him for the protection he had so obligingly offered me, but refusing
to assist me for the present, because he thought me too young to be
entrusted with the conduct of so important an enterprise, and which
would require so considerable a sum of money.

My old comrade Collins, who was a clerk in the post-office, charmed
with the account I gave of my new residence, expressed a desire of
going thither; and while I waited my father's determination, he set
off before me by land for Rhode Island, leaving his books, which
formed a handsome collection in mathematics and natural philosophy,
to be conveyed with mine to New York, where he purposed to wait for
me.

My father, though he could not approve Sir William's proposal, was
yet pleased that I had obtained so advantageous a recommendation as
that of a person of his rank, and that my industry and economy had
enabled me to equip myself so handsomely in so short a period. Seeing
no appearance of accommodating matters between my brother and me, he
consented to my return to Philadelphia, advised me to be civil to
every body, to endeavour to obtain general esteem, and avoid satire
and sarcasm, to which he thought I was too much inclined; adding,
that with perseverance and prudent economy, I might, by the time I
became of age, save enough to establish myself in business; and that
if a small sum should then be wanting, he would undertake to supply
it.

This was all I could obtain from him, except some trifling presents,
in token of friendship from him and my mother. I embarked once more
for New York, furnished at this time with their approbation and
blessing. The sloop having touched at Newport in Rhode Island, I
paid a visit to my brother John, who had for some years been settled
there, and was married. He had always been attached to me, and he
received me with great affection. One of his friends, whose name
was Vernon, having a debt of about thirty-six pounds due to him in
Pennsylvania, begged me to receive it for him, and to keep the money
till I should hear from him: accordingly he gave me an order for that
purpose. This affair occasioned me, in the sequel, much uneasiness.

At Newport we took on board a number of passengers; among whom
were two young women, and a grave and sensible quaker lady with
her servants. I had shown an obliging forwardness in rendering the
quaker some trifling services, which led her, probably, to feel an
interest in my welfare; for when she saw a familiarity take place,
and every day increase, between the two young women and me, she took
me aside and said: "Young man, I am in pain for thee. Thou hast no
parent to watch over thy conduct, and thou seemest to be ignorant of
the world, and the snares to which youth is exposed. Rely upon what
I tell thee: those are women of bad characters; I perceive it in
all their actions. If thou dost not take care, they will lead thee
into danger. They are strangers to thee, and I advise thee, by the
friendly interest I take in thy preservation, to form no connection
with them." As I appeared at first not to think quite so ill of them
as she did, she related many things she had seen and heard, which
had escaped my attention, but which convinced me that she was in the
right. I thanked her for her obliging advice, and promised to follow
it.

When we arrived at New York, they informed me where they lodged,
and invited me to come and see them. I did not however go, and it
was well I did not; for the next day, the captain missing a silver
spoon and some other things which had been taken from the cabin, and
knowing these women to be prostitutes, procured a search-warrant,
found the stolen goods upon them, and had them punished. And thus,
after having been saved from one rock concealed under water, upon
which the vessel struck during our passage, I escaped another of a
still more dangerous nature.

At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arrived some time
before. We had been intimate from our infancy, and had read the same
books together; but he had the advantage of being able to devote
more time to reading and study, and an astonishing disposition for
mathematics, in which he left me far behind him. When at Boston, I
had been accustomed to pass with him almost all my leisure hours. He
was then a sober and industrious lad; his knowledge had gained him a
very general esteem, and he seemed to promise to make an advantageous
figure in society. But, during my absence, he had unfortunately
addicted himself to brandy, and I learned, as well from himself as
from the report of others, that every day since his arrival at New
York he had been intoxicated, and had acted in a very extravagant
manner. He had also played, and lost all his money; so that I was
obliged to pay his expences at the inn, and to maintain him during
the rest of his journey; a burthen that was very inconvenient to me.

The governor of New York, whose name was Burnet, hearing the captain
say, that a young man who was a passenger in his ship had a great
number of books, begged him to bring me to his house. I accordingly
went, and should have taken Collins with me, had he been sober. The
governor treated me with great civility, shewed me his library,
which was a very considerable one, and we talked for some time upon
books and authors. This was the second governor who had honoured me
with his attention, and to a poor boy, as I was then, these little
adventures did not fail to be pleasing.

We arrived at Philadelphia. On the way I received Vernon's money,
without which we should have been unable to have finished our journey.

Collins wished to get employment as a merchant's clerk, but either
his breath or his countenance betrayed his bad habit; for, though he
had recommendations he met with no success, and continued to lodge
and eat with me, and at my expence. Knowing that I had Vernon's
money, he was continually asking me to lend him some of it, promising
to repay me as soon as he should get employment. At last he had drawn
so much of this money, that I was extremely alarmed at what might
become of me, should he fail to make good the deficiency. His habit
of drinking did not at all diminish, and was a frequent source of
discord between us; for when he had drank a little too much, he was
very head-strong.

Being one day in a boat together on the Delaware, with some other
young persons, he refused to take his turn in rowing. You shall row
for me, said he, till we get home.--No, I replied, we will not row
for you.--You shall, said he, or remain upon the water all night. As
you please.--Let us row, said the rest of the company; what signifies
whether he assists or not. But, already angry with him for his
conduct in other respects, I persisted in my refusal. He then swore
that he would make me row, or would throw me out of the boat; and he
made up to me. As soon as he was within my reach, I took him by the
collar, gave him a violent thrust, and threw him head foremost into
the river. I knew that he was a good swimmer, and was therefore under
no apprehensions for his life. Before he could turn himself, we were
able, by a few strokes of our oars, to place ourselves out of his
reach; and whenever he touched the boat, we asked him if he would row
striking his hands at the same time with the oars, to make him let go
his hold. He was nearly suffocated with rage, but obstinately refused
making any promise to row. Perceiving, at length, that his strength
began to be exhausted, we took him into the boat, and conveyed
him home in the evening completely drenched. The utmost coldness
subsisted between us after this adventure. At last the captain of
a West-India ship, who was commissioned to procure a tutor for the
children of a gentleman at Barbadoes, meeting with Collins, offered
him the place. He accepted it, and took his leave of me, promising to
discharge the debt he owed me with the first money he should receive;
but I have heard nothing of him since.

The violation of the trust reposed in me by Vernon, was one of the
first great errors of my life; and it proves that my father was not
mistaken when he supposed me too young to be intrusted with the
management of important affairs. But Sir William, upon reading his
letter, thought him too prudent. There was a difference, he said,
between individuals: years of maturity were not always accompanied
with discretion, neither was youth in every instance devoid of
it. Since your father, added he, will not set you up in business,
I will do it myself. Make out a list of what will be wanted from
England, and I will send for the articles. You shall repay me when
you can. I am determined to have a good printer here, and I am sure
you will succeed. This was said with so much seeming cordiality,
that I suspected not for an instant the sincerity of the offer. I
had hitherto kept the project, with which Sir William had inspired
me, of settling in business, a secret at Philadelphia, and I still
continued to do so. Had my reliance on the governor been known,
some friend better acquainted with his character than myself, would
doubtless have advised me not to trust him; for I afterwards learned
he was universally known to be liberal of promises, which he had no
intention to perform. But having never solicited him, how could I
suppose his offers to be deceitful?--On the contrary, I believed him
to be the best man in the world.

I gave him an inventory of a small printing-office, the expence
of which I had calculated at about a hundred pounds sterling. He
expressed his approbation; but asked, if my presence in England, that
I might choose the characters myself, and see that every article
was good in its kind, would not be an advantage? You will also be
able, said he, to form some acquaintance there, and establish a
correspondence with stationers and booksellers. This I acknowledged
was desirable. That being the case, added he, hold yourself in
readiness to go with the Annis. This was the annual vessel, and the
only one, at that time, which made regular voyages between the ports
of London and Philadelphia. But the Annis was not to sail for some
months. I therefore continued to work with Keimer, unhappy respecting
the sum which Collins had drawn from me, and almost in continual
agony at the thoughts of Vernon, who fortunately made no demand of
his money till several years after.

In the account of my first voyage from Boston to Philadelphia,
I omitted, I believe, a trifling circumstance, which will not,
perhaps, be out of place here. During a calm which stopped us above
Block Island, the crew employed themselves in fishing for cod, of
which they caught a great number. I had hitherto adhered to my
resolution of not eating any thing that had possessed life; and I
considered on this occasion, agreeably to the maxims of my master
Tryon, the capture of every fish as a sort of murder, committed
without provocation, since these animals had neither done, nor were
capable of doing the smallest injury to any one that should justify
the measure. This mode of reasoning I conceived to be unanswerable.
Meanwhile, I had formerly been extremely fond of fish; and when one
of these cod was taken out of the frying-pan, I thought its flavour
delicious. I hesitated some time between principle and inclination,
till at last recollecting, that when the cod had been opened, some
small fish were found in its belly, I said to myself, if you eat one
another, I see no reason why we may not eat you. I accordingly dined
on the cod with no small degree of pleasure, and have since continued
to eat like the rest of mankind, returning only occasionally to
my vegetable plan. How convenient does it prove to be a _rational
animal_, that knows how to find or invent a plausible pretext for
whatever it has an inclination to do!

I continued to live upon good terms with Keimer, who had not the
smallest suspicion of my projected establishment. He still retained
a portion of his former enthusiasm; and, being fond of argument, we
frequently disputed together. I was so much in the habit of using my
Socratic method, and had so frequently puzzled him by my questions,
which appeared at first very distant from the point in debate, yet
nevertheless led to it by degrees, involving him in difficulties and
contradictions from which he was unable to extricate himself, that he
became at last ridiculously cautious, and would scarcely answer the
most plain and familiar question without previously asking me--What
would you infer from that? Hence he formed so high an opinion of my
talents for refutation, that he seriously proposed to me to become
his colleague in the establishment of a new religious sect. He was to
propagate the doctrine by preaching, and I to refute every opponent.

When he explained to me his tenets, I found many absurdities which
I refused to admit, unless he would agree in turn to adopt some of
my opinions. Keimer wore his beard long, because Moses had somewhere
said, "Thou shalt not mar the corners of thy beard." He likewise
observed the Sabbath; and these were with him two very essential
points. I disliked them both: but I consented to adopt them,
provided he would agree to abstain from animal food. I doubt, said
he, whether my constitution will be able to support it. I assured
him on the contrary he would find himself the better for it. He was
naturally a glutton, and I wished to amuse myself by starving him. He
consented to make trial of this regimen, if I would bear him company;
and in reality we continued it for three months. A woman in the
neighbourhood prepared and brought us our victuals, to whom I gave a
list of forty dishes; in the composition of which there were entered
neither flesh nor fish. This fancy was the more agreeable to me as it
turned to good account; for the whole expence of our living did not
exceed for each eighteen pence a week.

I have since that period observed several Lents with the greatest
strictness, and have suddenly returned again to my ordinary diet,
without experiencing the smallest inconvenience; which has led me to
regard as of no importance the advice commonly given, of introducing
gradually such alterations of regimen.

I continued it cheerfully, but poor Keimer suffered terribly.
Tired of the project, he sighed for the fleshpots of Egypt. At
length he ordered a roast pig, and invited me and two of our female
acquaintance to dine with him; but the pig being ready a little too
soon, he could not resist the temptation, and eat it all up before we
arrived.

During the circumstances I have related, I had paid some attentions
to Miss Read. I entertained for her the utmost esteem and affection;
and I had reason to believe that these sentiments were mutual. But
we were both young, scarcely more than eighteen years of age; and
as I was on the point of undertaking a long voyage, her mother
thought it prudent to prevent matters being carried top far for the
present, judging that, if marriage was our object, there would be
more propriety in it after my return, when, as at least I expected, I
should be established in my business. Perhaps, also, she thought my
expectations were not so well founded as I imagined.

My most intimate acquaintance at this time were Charles Osborne,
Joseph Watson, and James Ralph: young men who were all fond of
reading. The two first were clerks to Mr. Charles Brockdon, one
of the principal attornies in the town, and the other clerk to a
merchant. Watson was an upright, pious, and sensible young man: the
others were somewhat more loose in their principles of religion,
particularly Ralph, whose faith, as well as that of Collins, I had
contributed to shake; each of whom made me suffer a very adequate
punishment. Osborne was sensible, and sincere and affectionate in
his friendships, but too much inclined to the critic in matters of
literature. Ralph was ingenious and shrewd, genteel in his address,
and extremely eloquent. I do not remember to have met with a more
agreeable speaker. They were both enamoured of the muses, and had
already evinced their passion by some small poetical productions.

It was a custom with us to take a charming walk on Sundays, in the
woods that border the Skuylkil. Here we read together, and afterwards
conversed on what we read. Ralph was disposed to give himself up
entirely to poetry. He flattered himself that he should arrive at
great eminence in the art, and even acquire a fortune. The sublimest
poets, he pretended, when they first began to write, committed as
many faults as himself. Osborne endeavoured to dissuade him, by
assuring him that he had no genius for poetry, and advised him to
stick to the trade in which he had been brought up. In the road of
commerce, said he, you will be sure, by diligence and assiduity,
though you have no capital, of so far succeeding as to be employed
as a factor; and may thus, in time, acquire the means of setting
up for yourself. I concurred in these sentiments, but at the same
time expressed my approbation of amusing ourselves sometimes with
poetry, with a view to improve our style. In consequence of this it
was proposed, that, at our next meeting, each of us should bring a
copy of verses of his own composition. Our object in this competition
was to benefit each other by our mutual remarks, criticisms, and
corrections; and as style and expression were all we had in view, we
excluded every idea of invention, by agreeing that our task should be
a version of the eighteenth psalm, in which is described the descent
of the Deity.

The time of our meeting drew near, when Ralph called upon me, and
told me that his performance was ready. I informed him that I had
been idle, and, not much liking the task, had done nothing. He shewed
me his piece, and asked me what I thought of it. I expressed myself
in terms of warm approbation; because it really appeared to have
considerable merit. He then said, Osborne will never acknowledge
the smallest degree of excellence in any production of mine. Envy
alone dictates to him a thousand animadversions. Of you he is not so
jealous: I wish, therefore, you would take the verses, and produce
them as your own. I will pretend not to have had leisure to write
any thing. We shall then see in what manner he will speak of them.
I agreed to this little artifice, and immediately transcribed the
verses to prevent all suspicion.

We met. Watson's performance was the first that was read; it had
some beauties, but many faults. We next read Osborne's, which was
much better. Ralph did it justice, remarking a few imperfections,
and applauding such parts as were excellent. He had himself nothing
to show. It was now my turn. I made some difficulty; seemed as if
I wished to be excused; pretended that I had had no time to make
corrections, &c. No excuse, however, was admissible, and, the piece
must be produced. It was read, and re-read. Watson and Osborne
immediately resigned the palm, and united in applauding it. Ralph
alone made a few remarks, and proposed some alterations; but I
defended my text. Osborne agreed with me, and told Ralph that he was
no more able to criticise than he was able to write.

When Osborne was alone with me, he expressed himself still more
strongly in favour of what he considered as my performance. He
pretended that he had put some restraint upon himself before,
apprehensive of my construing his commendation into flattery. But
who would have supposed, said he, Franklin to be capable of such a
composition? What painting--what energy--what fire! He has surpassed
the original. In his common conversation he appears not to have a
choice of words; he hesitates, and is at a loss--and yet, good God,
how he writes!

At our next meeting Ralph discovered the trick we had played Osborne,
who was rallied without mercy.

By this adventure Ralph was fixed in his determination of becoming a
poet. I left nothing unattempted to divert him from his purpose; but
he persevered, till at last the reading of Pope[3] effected his cure:
he became, however, a very tolerable prose-writer. I shall speak more
of him hereafter; but as I shall probably have no farther occasion
to mention the other two, I ought to observe here that Watson died a
few years after in my arms. He was greatly regretted, for he was the
best of our society. Osborne went to the islands, where he gained
considerable reputation as a barrister, and was getting money; but he
died young. We had seriously engaged, that whoever died first should
return (if possible) and pay a friendly visit to the survivor, to
give him an account of the other world--but he has never fulfilled
his engagement.

The governor appeared to be fond of my company, and frequently
invited me to his house. He always spoke of his intention of
settling me in business, as a point that was decided. I was to take
with me letters of recommendation to a number of his friends, and
particularly a letter of credit, in order to obtain the necessary sum
for the purchase of my press, types, and paper. He appointed various
times for me to come for these letters, which would certainly be
ready, and when I came, always put me off to another day.

These successive delays continued till the vessel, whose departure
had been several times deferred, was on the point of setting sail;
when I again went to Sir William's house, to receive my letters and
take leave of him. I saw his secretary, Dr. Bard, who told me that
the governor was extremely busy writing, but that he would be down at
Newcastle before the vessel, and that the letters would be delivered
to me there.

Ralph, though he was married and had a child, determined to accompany
me in this voyage. His object was supposed to be the establishing a
correspondence with some mercantile houses, in order to sell goods
by commission; but I afterwards learned that, having reason to be
dissatisfied with the parents of his wife, he proposed to himself to
leave her on their hands, and never return to America again.

Having taken leave of my friends, and interchanged promises of
fidelity with Miss Read, I quitted Philadelphia. At Newcastle the
vessel came to anchor. The governor was arrived, and I went to his
lodgings. His secretary received me with great civility, told me on
the part of the governor that he could not see me then, as he was
engaged in affairs of the utmost importance, but that he would send
the letters on board, and that he wished me, with all his heart, a
good voyage, and speedy return. I returned, somewhat astonished, to
the ship, but still without entertaining the slightest suspicion.

Mr. Hamilton, a celebrated barrister of Philadelphia, had taken a
passage to England for himself and his son, and, in conjunction with
Mr. Denham, a quaker, and Messrs. Oniam and Russel, proprietors of a
forge in Maryland, had agreed for the whole cabin, so that Ralph and
I were obliged to take up our lodging with the crew. Being unknown
to every body in the ship, we were looked upon as of the common
order of people: but Mr. Hamilton and his son, (it was James, who
was afterwards governor,) left us at Newcastle, and returned to
Philadelphia, where he was recalled at a very great expence, to plead
the cause of a vessel that had been seized; and just as we were about
to sail, colonel French came on board, and shewed me many civilities.
The passengers upon this paid me more attention, and I was invited,
together with my friend Ralph, to occupy the place in the cabin which
the return of the Mr. Hamiltons had made vacant; an offer which we
very readily accepted.

Having learned that the dispatches of the governor had been brought
on board by colonel French, I asked the captain for the letters that
were to be entrusted to my care. He told me that they were all put
together in the bag, which he could not open at present; but before
we reached England, he would give me an opportunity of taking them
out. I was satisfied with this answer, and we pursued our voyage.

The company in the cabin were all very sociable, and we were
perfectly well off as to provisions, as we had the advantage of the
whole of Mr. Hamilton's, who had laid in a very plentiful stock.
During the passage, Mr. Denham contracted a friendship for me, which
ended only with his life: in other respects the voyage was by no
means an agreeable one, as we had much bad weather.

When we arrived in the river, the captain was as good as his word,
and allowed me to search in the bag for the governor's letters. I
could not find a single one with my name written on it, as committed
to my care; but I selected six or seven, which I judged from the
direction to be those that were intended for me; particularly one to
Mr. Basket the king's printer, and another to a stationer, who was
the first person I called upon. I delivered him the letter as coming
from governor Keith. "I have no acquaintance (said he) with any such
person;" and opening the letter, "Oh, it is from Riddlesden!" he
exclaimed. "I have lately discovered him to be a very arrant knave,
and wish to have nothing to do either with him or his letters." He
instantly put the letter into my hand, turned upon his heel, and left
me, to serve some customers.

I was astonished at finding these letters were not from the governor.
Reflecting, and putting circumstances together, I then began to doubt
his sincerity. I rejoined my friend Denham, and related the whole
affair to him. He let me at once into Keith's character, told me
there was not the least probability of his having written a single
letter; that no one who knew him ever placed any reliance on him, and
laughed at my credulity in supposing that the governor would give me
a letter of credit, when he had no credit for himself. As I showed
some uneasiness respecting what step I should take, he advised me to
try to get employment in the house of some printer. You may there,
said he, improve yourself in business, and you will be able to settle
yourself the more advantageously when you return to America.

We knew already as well as the stationer, attorney Riddlesden to be
a knave. He had nearly ruined the father of Miss Read, by drawing
him in to be his security. We learned from his letter, that he was
secretly carrying on an intrigue, in concert with the governor, to
the prejudice of Mr. Hamilton, who it was supposed would by this
time be in Europe. Denham, who was Hamilton's friend, was of opinion
that he ought to be made acquainted with it; and in reality, the
instant he arrived in England, which was very soon after, I waited on
him, and, as much from good-will to him, as from resentment against
the governor, put the letter into his hands. He thanked me very
sincerely, the information it contained being of consequence to him;
and from that moment bestowed on me his friendship, which afterwards
proved on many occasions serviceable to me.

But what are we to think of a governor who could play so scurvy a
trick, and thus grossly deceive a poor young lad, wholly destitute of
experience? It was a practice with him. Wishing to please every body,
and having little to bestow, he was lavish of promises. He was in
other respects sensible and judicious, a very tolerable writer, and
a good governor for the people; though not so for the proprietaries,
whose instructions he frequently disregarded. Many of our best laws
were his work, and established during his administration.

Ralph and I were inseparable companions. We took a lodging together
at three and sixpence a-week, which was as much as we could afford.
He met with some relations in London, but they were poor, and not
able to assist him. He now, for the first time, informed me of his
intention to remain in England, and that he had no thoughts of ever
returning to Philadelphia. He was totally without money; the little
he had been able to raise having barely sufficed for his passage. I
had still fifteen pistoles remaining; and to me he had from time to
time recourse, while he tried to get employment.

At first, believing himself possessed of talents for the stage,
he thought of turning actor; but Wilkes, to whom he applied,
frankly advised him to renounce the idea, as it was impossible
he should succeed. He next proposed to Roberts, a bookseller in
Paternoster-row, to write a weekly paper in the manner of the
Spectator, upon terms to which Roberts would not listen. Lastly, he
endeavoured to procure employment as a copyist, and applied to the
lawyers and stationers about the Temple; but he could find no vacancy.

As to myself, I immediately got engaged at Palmer's, at that time
a noted printer in Bartholomew-close, with whom I continued nearly
a year. I applied very assiduously to my work; but I expended with
Ralph almost all that I earned. Plays, and other places of amusement
which we frequented together, having exhausted my pistoles, we lived
after this from hand to mouth. He appeared to have entirely forgotten
his wife and child, as I also, by degrees, forgot my engagements
with Miss Read, to whom I never wrote more than one letter, and that
merely to inform her that I was not likely to return soon. This
was another grand error of my life, which I should be desirous of
correcting were I to begin my career again.

I was employed at Palmer's on the second edition of Woolaston's
Religion of Nature. Some of his arguments appearing to me not to
be well-founded, I wrote a small metaphysical treatise, in which
I animadverted on those passages. It was entitled a "Dissertation
on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain." I dedicated it to my
friend Ralph, and printed a small number of copies. Palmer upon this
treated me with more consideration, and regarded me as a young man of
talents; though he seriously took me to task for the principles of my
pamphlet, which he looked upon as abominable. The printing of this
work was another error of my life.

While I lodged in Little Britain I formed acquaintance with a
bookseller of the name of Wilcox, whose shop was next door to me.
Circulating libraries were not then in use. He had an immense
collection of books of all sorts. We agreed that, for a reasonable
retribution, of which I have now forgotten the price, I should have
free access to his library, and take what books I pleased, which I
was to return when I had read them. I considered this agreement as a
very great advantage; and I derived from it as much benefit as was in
my power.

My pamphlet falling into the hands of a surgeon, of the name
of Lyons, author of a book entitled, "Infallibility of Human
Judgment," was the occasion of a considerable intimacy between us.
He expressed great esteem for me, came frequently to see me, in
order to converse upon metaphysical subjects, and introduced me to
Dr. Mandeville, author of the Fable of the Bees, who had instituted
a club at a tavern in Cheapside, of which he was the soul: he was
a facetious and very amusing character. He also introduced me, at
Batson's coffee-house, to Dr. Pemberton, who promised to give me
an opportunity of seeing Sir Isaac Newton, which I very ardently
desired; but he never kept his word.

I had brought some curiosities with me from America; the principal of
which was a purse made of the asbestos, which fire only purifies.
Sir Hans Sloane hearing of it, called upon me, and invited me to his
house in Bloomsbury-square, where, after showing me every thing that
was curious, he prevailed on me to add this piece to his collection;
for which he paid me very handsomely.

There lodged in the same house with us a young woman, a milliner,
who had a shop by the side of the Exchange. Lively and sensible,
and having received an education somewhat above her rank, her
conversation was very agreeable. Ralph read plays to her every
evening. They became intimate. She took another lodging, and he
followed her. They lived for some time together; but Ralph being
without employment, she having a child, and the profits of her
business not sufficing for the maintenance of three, he resolved
to quit London, and try a country school. This was a plan in which
he thought himself likely to succeed; as he wrote a fine hand, and
was versed in arithmetic and accounts. But considering the office
as beneath him, and expecting some day to make a better figure in
the world, when he should be ashamed of its being known that he had
exercised a profession so little honourable, he changed his name,
and did me the honour to assume mine. He wrote to me soon after his
departure, informing me that he was settled at a small village in
Berkshire. In his letter he recommended Mrs. T***, the milliner,
to my care, and requested an answer, directed to Mr. Franklin,
school-master, at N***.

He continued to write to me frequently, sending me large fragments
of an epic poem he was composing, and which he begged of me to
criticise and correct. I did so, but not without endeavouring to
prevail on him to renounce this pursuit. Young had just published one
of his Satires. I copied and sent him a great part of it; in which
the author demonstrates the folly of cultivating the muses, from the
hope, by their instrumentality, of rising in the world. It was all to
no purpose; paper after paper of his poem continued to arrive every
post.

Meanwhile Mrs. T*** having lost, on his account, both her friends
and her business, was frequently in distress. In this dilemma she had
recourse to me; and to extricate her from difficulties, I lent her
all the money I could spare. I felt a little too much fondness for
her. Having at that time no ties of religion, and taking advantage of
her necessitous situation, I attempted liberties, (another error of
my life,) which she repelled with becoming indignation. She informed
Ralph of my conduct; and the affair occasioned a breach between
us. When he returned to London, he gave me to understand that he
considered all the obligations he owed me as annihilated by this
proceeding; whence I concluded that I was never to expect the payment
of what money I had lent him, or advanced on his account. I was the
less afflicted at this, as he was wholly unable to pay me; and as, by
losing his friendship, I was relieved at the same time from a very
heavy burden.

I now began to think of laying by some money. The printing-house of
Watts, near Lincoln's-Inn-Fields, being a still more considerable
one than that in which I worked, it was probable I might find it
more advantageous to be employed there. I offered myself, and was
accepted; and in this house I continued during the remainder of my
stay in London.

On my entrance I worked at first as a pressman, conceiving that I had
need of bodily exercise, to which I had been accustomed in America,
where the printers work alternately as compositors and at the press.
I drank nothing but water. The other workmen, to the number of about
fifty, were great drinkers of beer. I carried occasionally a large
form of letters in each hand, up and down stairs, while the rest
employed both hands to carry one. They were surprised to see, by this
and many other examples, that the _American Aquatic_, as they used
to call me, was stronger than those who drank porter. The beer-boy
had sufficient employment during the whole day in serving that house
alone. My fellow pressman drank every day a pint of beer before
breakfast, a pint with bread and cheese for breakfast, one between
breakfast and dinner, one at dinner, one again about six o'clock in
the afternoon, and another after he had finished his day's work. This
custom appeared to me abominable; but he had need, he said, of all
this beer, in order to acquire strength to work.

I endeavoured to convince him that the bodily strength furnished by
the beer, could only be in proportion to the solid part of the barley
dissolved in the water of which the beer was composed; that there was
a larger portion of flour in a penny loaf, and that consequently if
he ate this loaf, and drank a pint of water with it, he would derive
more strength from it than from a pint of beer. This reasoning,
however, did not prevent him from drinking his accustomed quantity
of beer, and paying every Saturday night a score of four or five
shillings a-week for this cursed beverage; an expence from which I
was wholly exempt. Thus do these poor devils continue all their lives
in a state of voluntary wretchedness and poverty.

At the end of a few weeks, Watts having occasion for me above stairs
as a compositor, I quitted the press. The compositors demanded of me
garnish money a-fresh. This I considered as an imposition, having
already paid below. The master was of the same opinion, and desired
me not to comply. I thus remained two or three weeks out of the
fraternity. I was consequently looked upon as excommunicated; and
whenever I was absent, no little trick that malice could suggest
was left unpractised upon me. I found my letters mixed, my pages
transposed, my matter broken, &c. &c. all which was attributed to
the spirit that haunted the chapel,[4] and tormented those who were
not regularly admitted. I was at last obliged to submit to pay,
notwithstanding the protection of the master; convinced of the folly
of not keeping up a good understanding with those among whom we are
destined to live.

After this I lived in the utmost harmony with my fellow-labourers,
and soon acquired considerable influence among them. I proposed
some alterations in the laws of the chapel, which I carried without
opposition. My example prevailed with several of them to renounce
their abominable practice of bread and cheese with beer; and they
procured, like me, from a neighbouring house, a good basin of warm
gruel, in which was a small slice of butter, with toasted bread and
nutmeg. This was a much better breakfast, which did not cost more
than a pint of beer, namely, three halfpence, and at the same time
preserved the head clearer. Those who continued to gorge themselves
with beer, often lost their credit with the publican, from neglecting
to pay their score. They had then recourse to me, to become security
for them; _their light_, as they used to call it, _being out_.
I attended at the pay-table every Saturday evening, to take up
the little sum which I had made myself answerable for; and which
sometimes amounted to nearly thirty shillings a-week.

This circumstance, added to my reputation of being a tolerable good
_gabber_, or, in other words, skilful in the art of burlesque, kept
up my importance in the chapel. I had besides recommended myself to
the esteem of my master by my assiduous application to business,
never observing Saint Monday. My extraordinary quickness in composing
always procured me such work as was most urgent, and which is
commonly best paid; and thus my time passed away in a very pleasant
manner.

My lodging in Little Britain being too far from the printing-house,
I took another in Duke-street, opposite the Roman Catholic chapel.
It was at the back of an Italian warehouse. The house was kept by a
widow, who had a daughter, a servant, and a shop-boy; but the latter
slept out of the house. After sending to the people with whom I
lodged in Little Britain, to enquire into my character, she agreed to
take me in at the same price, three and sixpence a-week; contenting
herself, she said, with so little, because of the security she should
derive, as they were all women, from having a man lodger in the
house.

She was a woman rather advanced in life, the daughter of a clergyman.
She had been educated a Protestant; but her husband, whose memory she
highly revered, had converted her to the Catholic religion. She had
lived in habits of intimacy with persons of distinction; of whom she
knew various anecdotes as far back as the time of Charles II. Being
subject to fits of the gout, which often confined her to her room,
she was sometimes disposed to see company. Hers was so amusing to me,
that I was glad to pass the evening with her as often as she desired
it. Our supper consisted only of half an anchovy a piece, upon a
slice of bread and butter, with half a pint of ale between us. But
the entertainment was in her conversation.

The early hours I kept, and the little trouble I occasioned in the
family, made her loth to part with me; and when I mentioned another
lodging I had found, nearer the printing-house, at two shillings
a week, which fell in with my plan of saving, she persuaded me to
give it up, making herself an abatement of two shillings: and thus
I continued to lodge with her, during the remainder of my abode in
London, at eighteen pence a week.

In a garret of the house there lived, in the most retired manner, a
lady seventy years of age, of whom I received the following account
from my landlady. She was a Roman Catholic. In her early years she
had been sent to the continent, and entered a convent with the
design of becoming a nun; but the climate not agreeing with her
constitution, she was obliged to return to England, where, as there
were no monasteries, she made a vow to lead a monastic life, in
as rigid a manner as circumstances would permit. She accordingly
disposed of all her property to be applied to charitable uses,
reserving to herself only twelve pounds a year; and of this small
pittance she gave a part to the poor, living on water gruel, and
never making use of fire but to boil it. She had lived in this garret
a great many years, without paying rent to the successive Catholic
inhabitants that had kept the house; who indeed considered her abode
with them as a blessing. A priest came every day to confess her. I
have asked her, said my landlady, how, living as she did, she could
find so much employment for a confessor? To which she answered, that
it was impossible to avoid vain thoughts.

I was once permitted to visit her. She was cheerful and polite, and
her conversation agreeable. Her apartment was neat; but the whole
furniture consisted of a mattress, a table, on which were a crucifix
and a book, a chair, which she gave me to sit on, and over the
mantle-piece a picture of St. Veronica displaying her handkerchief,
on which was seen the miraculous impression of the face of Christ,
which she explained to me with great gravity. Her countenance was
pale, but she had never experienced sickness; and I may adduce her as
another proof how little is sufficient to maintain life and health.

At the printing house I contracted an intimacy with a sensible
young man of the name of Wygate, who, as his parents were in good
circumstances, had received a better education than is common among
printers. He was a tolerable Latin scholar, spoke French fluently,
and was fond of reading. I taught him, as well as a friend of his,
to swim, by taking them twice only into the river; after which they
stood in need of no farther assistance. We one day made a party to go
by water to Chelsea, in order to see the College, and Don Soltero's
curiosities. On our return, at the request of the company, whose
curiosity Wygate had excited, I undressed myself, and leaped into
the river. I swam from near Chelsea the whole way to Blackfriars,
exhibiting, during my course, a variety of feats of activity and
address, both upon the surface of the water, as well as under it.
This sight occasioned much astonishment and pleasure to those to
whom it was new. In my youth I took great delight in this exercise.
I knew, and could execute, all the evolutions and positions of
Thevenot; and I added to them some of my own invention, in which I
endeavoured to unite gracefulness and utility. I took a pleasure in
displaying them all on this occasion, and was highly flattered with
the admiration they excited.

Wygate, besides his being desirous of perfecting himself in this art,
was the more attached to me from there being, in other respects, a
conformity in our tastes and studies. He at length proposed to me to
make the tour of Europe with him, maintaining ourselves at the same
time by working at our profession. I was on the point of consenting,
when I mentioned it to my friend Mr. Denham, with whom I was glad
to pass an hour whenever I had leisure. He dissuaded me from the
project, and advised me to think of returning to Philadelphia, which
he was about to do himself. I must relate in this place a trait of
this worthy man's character.

He had formerly been in business at Bristol, but failing, he
compounded with his creditors, and departed for America, where, by
assiduous application as a merchant, he acquired in a few years
a very considerable fortune. Returning to England in the same
vessel with myself, as I have related above, he invited all his
old creditors to a feast. When assembled, he thanked them for the
readiness with which they had received his small composition; and,
while they expected nothing more than a simple entertainment, each
found under his plate, when it came to be removed, a draft upon a
banker for the residue of his debt, with interest.

He told me that it was his intention to carry back with him to
Philadelphia a great quantity of goods, in order to open a store;
and he offered to take me with him in the capacity of clerk, to
keep his books, in which he would instruct me, copy letters, and
superintend the store. He added, that as soon as I had acquired a
knowledge of mercantile transactions, he would improve my situation,
by sending me with a cargo of corn and flour to the American islands,
and by procuring me other lucrative commissions; so that, with good
management and economy, I might in time begin business with advantage
for myself.

I relished these proposals. London began to tire me; the agreeable
hours I had passed at Philadelphia presented themselves to my mind,
and I wished to see them revive. I consequently engaged myself to Mr.
Denham, at a salary of fifty pounds a year. This was, indeed less
than I earned as a compositor, but then I had a much fairer prospect.
I took leave therefore, as I believed for ever, of printing, and gave
myself up entirely to my new occupation, spending all my time either
in going from house to house with Mr. Denham to purchase goods, or
in packing them up, or in expediting the workmen, &c. &c. When every
thing, however, was on board, I had at last a few days leisure.

During this interval, I was one day sent for by a gentleman, whom I
knew only by name. It was Sir William Wyndham. I went to his house.
He had by some means heard of my performances between Chelsea and
Blackfriars, and that I had taught the art of swimming to Wygate and
another young man in the course of a few hours. His two sons were on
the point of setting out on their travels; he was desirous that they
should previously learn to swim, and offered me a very liberal reward
if I would undertake to instruct them. They were not yet arrived
in town, and the stay I should make was uncertain; I could not
therefore accept his proposal. I was led, however, to suppose from
this incident, that if I had wished to remain in London, and open a
swimming school, I should perhaps have gained a great deal of money.
This idea struck me so forcibly that, had the offer been made sooner,
I should have dismissed the thought of returning as yet to America.
Some years after, you and I had a more important business to settle
with one of the sons of Sir William Wyndham, then Lord Egremont. But
let us not anticipate events.

I thus passed about eighteen months in London, working almost without
intermission at my trade, avoiding all expence on my own account,
except going now and then to the play, and purchasing a few books.
But my friend Ralph kept me poor. He owed me about twenty-seven
pounds, which was so much money lost; and when considered as taken
from my little savings, was a very great sum. I had, notwithstanding
this, a regard for him, as he possessed many amiable qualities. But
though I had done nothing for myself in point of fortune, I had
increased my stock of knowledge, either by the many excellent books
I had read, or the conversation of learned and literary persons with
whom I was acquainted.

We sailed from Gravesend the 23d of July, 1726. For the incidents
of my voyage I refer you to my Journal, where you will find all its
circumstances minutely related. We landed at Philadelphia on the 11th
of the following October.

Keith had been deprived of his office of governor, and was succeeded
by Major Gordon. I met him walking in the streets as a private
individual. He appeared a little ashamed at seeing me, but passed on
without saying any thing.

I should have been equally ashamed myself at meeting Miss Read, had
not her family, justly despairing of my return after reading my
letter, advised her to give me up, and marry a potter, of the name
of Rogers; to which she consented: but he never made her happy,
and she soon separated from him, refusing to cohabit with him, or
even bear his name, on account of a report which prevailed, of his
having another wife. His skill in his profession had seduced Miss
Read's parents; but he was as bad a subject as he was excellent as a
workman. He involved himself in debt, and fled, in the year 1727 or
1728, to the West Indies, where he died.

During my absence Keimer had taken a more considerable house, in
which he kept a shop, that was well supplied with paper, and various
other articles. He had procured some new types, and a number of
workmen; among whom, however, there was not one who was good for any
thing; and he appeared not to want business.

Mr. Denham took a warehouse in Water-street, where we exhibited our
commodities. I applied myself closely, studied accounts, and became
in a short time very expert in trade. We lodged and ate together. He
was sincerely attached to me, and acted towards me as if he had been
my father. On my side, I respected and loved him. My situation was
happy; but it was a happiness of no long duration.

Early in February, 1727, when I entered into my twenty-second year,
we were both taken ill. I was attacked with a pleurisy, which had
nearly carried me off; I suffered terribly, and considered it as
all over with me. I felt indeed a sort of disappointment when I
found myself likely to recover, and regretted that I had still to
experience, sooner or later, the same disagreeable scene again.

I have forgotten what was Mr. Denham's disorder; but it was a tedious
one, and he at last sunk under it. He left me a small legacy in his
will, as a testimony of his friendship; and I was once more abandoned
to myself in the wide world, the warehouse being confided to the care
of testamentary executor, who dismissed me.

My brother-in-law, Holmes, who happened to be at Philadelphia,
advised me to return to my former profession; and Keimer offered me
a very considerable salary if I would undertake the management of
his printing-office, that he might devote himself entirely to the
superintendence of his shop. His wife and relations in London had
given me a bad character of him; and I was loth, for the present, to
have any concern with him. I endeavoured to get employment as a clerk
to a merchant; but not readily finding a situation, I was induced to
accept Keimer's proposal.

The following were the persons I found in his printing-house:

Hugh Meredith, a Pennsylvanian, about thirty-five years of age.
He had been brought up to husbandry, was honest, sensible, had
some experience, and was fond of reading; but too much addicted to
drinking.

Stephen Potts, a young rustic, just broke from school, and of
rustic education, with endowments rather above the common order,
and a competent portion of understanding and gaiety; but a little
idle. Keimer had engaged these two at very low wages, which he had
promised to raise every three months a shilling a week, provided
their improvement in the typographic art should merit it. This future
increase of wages was the bait he had made use of to ensnare them.
Meredith was to work at the press, and Potts to bind books, which he
had engaged to teach them, though he understood neither himself.

John Savage, an Irishman, who had been brought up to no trade, and
whose service, for a period of four years, Keimer had purchased of
the captain of a ship. He was also to be a pressman.

George Webb, an Oxford scholar, whose time he had in like manner
bought for four years, intending him for a compositor. I shall speak
more of him presently.

Lastly, David Harry, a country lad, who was apprenticed to him.

I soon perceived that Keimer's intention, in engaging me at a price
so much above what he was accustomed to give, was, that I might form
all these raw journeymen and apprentices, who scarcely cost him any
thing, and who, being indentured, would, as soon as they should be
sufficiently instructed, enable him to do without me. I nevertheless
adhered to my agreement. I put the office in order, which was in the
utmost confusion, and brought his people by degrees, to pay attention
to their work, and to execute it in a more masterly style.

It was singular to see an Oxford scholar in the condition of a
purchased servant. He was not more than eighteen years of age,
and the following are the particulars he gave me of himself. Born
at Gloucester, he had been educated at a grammar-school, and had
distinguished himself among the scholars by his superior style of
acting, when they represented dramatic performances. He was a member
of a literary club in the town; and some pieces of his composition,
in prose as well as in verse, had been inserted in the Gloucester
papers. From hence he was sent to Oxford, where he remained about
a year: but he was not contented, and wished above all things to
see London, and become an actor. At length, having received fifteen
guineas to pay his quarter's board, he decamped with the money, from
Oxford, hid his gown in a hedge, and travelled to London. There,
having no friend to direct him, he fell into bad company, soon
squandered his fifteen guineas, could find no way of being introduced
to the actors, became contemptible, pawned his cloaths, and was in
want of bread. As he was walking along the streets, almost famished
with hunger, and not knowing what to do, a recruiting-bill was put
into his hand, which offered an immediate treat and bounty-money to
whoever was disposed to serve in America. He instantly repaired to
the house of rendezvous, inlisted himself, was put on board a ship
and conveyed to America, without ever writing a line to inform his
parents what was become of him. His mental vivacity, and good natural
disposition, made him an excellent companion; but he was indolent,
thoughtless, and to the last degree imprudent.

John, the Irishman, soon ran away. I began to live very agreeably
with the rest. They respected me, and the more so as they found
Keimer incapable of instructing them, and as they learned something
from me every day. We never worked on a Saturday, it being Keimer's
Sabbath, so that I had two days a week for reading.

I increased my acquaintance with persons of information and knowledge
in the town. Keimer himself treated me with great civility, and
apparent esteem; and I had nothing to give me uneasiness but my debt
to Vernon, which I was unable to pay, my savings as yet being very
little. He had the goodness, however, not to ask me for the money.

Our press was frequently in want of the necessary quantity of letter,
and there was no such trade as that of letter-founder in America. I
had seen the practice of this art at the house of James, in London,
but had at the time paid it very little attention; I however,
contrived to fabricate a mould. I made use of such letters as we had
for punches, founded new letters of lead in mattrices of clay, and
thus supplied in a tolerable manner the wants that were most pressing.

I also, upon occasion, engraved various ornaments, made ink, gave an
eye to the shop--in short, I was in every respect the _factotum_. But
useful as I made myself, I perceived that my services became every
day of less importance, in proportion as the other men improved;
and when Keimer paid me my second quarter's wages, he gave me to
understand they were too heavy, and that he thought I ought to make
an abatement. He became by degrees less civil, and assumed more the
tone of master. He frequently found fault, was difficult to please,
and seemed always on the point of coming to an open quarrel with me.

I continued, however, to bear it patiently, conceiving that his ill
humour was partly occasioned by the derangement and embarrassment of
his affairs. At last a slight incident broke our connection. Hearing
a noise in the neighbourhood, I put my head out at the window, to see
what was the matter. Keimer being in the street, observed me, and in
a loud and angry tone bid me to mind my work; adding some reproachful
words, which piqued me the more, as they were uttered in the street;
and the neighbours, whom the same noise attracted to the windows,
were witnesses of the manner in which I was treated. He immediately
came up to the printing-room, where he continued to exclaim against
me. The quarrel became warm on both sides, and he gave me notice to
quit him at the expiration of three months, as had been agreed upon
between us; regretting that he was obliged to give me so long a term.
I told him that his regret was superfluous, as I was ready to quit
him instantly; and I took my hat and came out of the house, begging
Meredith to take care of some things which I left, and bring them to
my lodgings.

Meredith came to me in the evening. We talked for some time upon the
quarrel that had taken place. He had conceived a great veneration
for me, and was sorry I should quit the house, while he remained in
it. He dissuaded me from returning to my native country, as I began
to think of doing. He reminded me that Keimer owed more than he
possessed; that his creditors began to be alarmed; that he kept his
shop in a wretched state, often selling things at prime cost for the
sake of ready money, and continually giving credit without keeping
any accounts; that of consequence he must very soon fail, which would
occasion a vacancy from which I might derive advantage. I objected my
want of money. Upon which he informed me that his father had a very
high opinion of me, and, from a conversation that had passed between
them, he was sure he would advance whatever might be necessary to
establish us, if I was willing to enter into partnership with him.
"My time with Keimer," added he, "will be at an end next spring. In
the mean time we may send to London for our press and types. I know
that I am no workman; but if you agree to the proposal, your skill in
the business will be balanced by the capital I shall furnish, and we
will share the profits equally." His proposal was reasonable, and I
fell in with it. His father, who was then in town, approved of it. He
knew that I had some ascendancy over his son, as I had been able to
prevail on him to abstain for a long time from drinking brandy; and
he hoped that, when more closely connected with him, I should cure
him entirely of this unfortunate habit.

I gave the father a list of what it would be necessary to import
from London. He took it to a merchant, and the order was given. We
agreed to keep the secret till the arrival of the materials, and
I was in the mean time to procure work, if possible, in another
printing-house; but there was no place vacant, and I remained idle.
After some days, Keimer having the expectation of being employed
to print some New Jersey money-bills, that would require types and
engravings which I only could furnish, and fearful that Bradford, by
engaging me, might deprive him of this undertaking, sent me a very
civil message, telling me that old friends ought not to be disunited
on account of a few words, which were the effect only of a momentary
passion, and inviting me to return to him. Meredith persuaded me to
comply with the invitation, particularly as it would afford him more
opportunities of improving himself in the business, by means of my
instructions. I did so; and we lived upon better terms than before
our separation.

He obtained the New Jersey business; and, in order to execute it, I
constructed a copper-plate printing-press! the first that had been
seen in the country. I engraved various ornaments and vignettes for
the bills; and we repaired to Burlington together, where I executed
the whole to the general satisfaction; and he received a sum of money
for this work, which enabled him to keep his head above water for a
considerable time longer.

At Burlington I formed an acquaintance with the principal personages
of the province; many of whom were commissioned by the assembly to
superintend the press, and to see that no more bills were printed
than the law had prescribed. Accordingly they were constantly with
us, each in his turn; and he that came, commonly brought with him
a friend or two to bear him company. My mind was more cultivated
by reading than Keimer's; and it was for this reason, probably,
that they set more value on my conversation. They took me to their
houses, introduced me to their friends, and treated me with the
greatest civility; while Keimer, though master, saw himself a little
neglected. He was, in fact, a strange animal, ignorant of the common
modes of life, apt to oppose with rudeness generally received
opinions, an enthusiast in certain points of religion, disgustingly
unclean in his person, and a little knavish withal.

We remained there nearly three months, and at the expiration of
this period I could include in the list of my friends, Judge Allen,
Samuel Bustil, secretary of the province, Isaac Pearson, Joseph
Cooper, several of the Smiths, all members of the assembly, and Isaac
Decon, inspector-general. The last was a shrewd and subtle old man.
He told me, that, when a boy, his first employment had been that of
carrying clay to the brick-makers; that he did not learn to write
till he was somewhat advanced in life; and that he was afterwards
employed as an underling to a surveyor, who taught him his trade,
and that by industry he had at last acquired a competent fortune.
"I foresee," said he one day to me, "that you will soon supplant
this man," speaking of Keimer, "and get a fortune in the business at
Philadelphia." He was wholly ignorant at the time, of my intention of
establishing myself there, or any where else. These friends were very
serviceable to me in the end, as was I also, upon occasion, to some
of them; and they have continued ever since their esteem for me.

Before I relate the particulars of my entrance into business, it may
be proper to inform you what was at that time the state of my mind
as to moral principles, that you may see the degree of influence they
had upon the subsequent events of my life.

My parents had given me betimes religious impressions; and I received
from my infancy a pious education in the principles of Calvinism.
But scarcely was I arrived at fifteen years of age, when, after
having doubted in turn of different tenets, according as I found
them combated in the different books that I read, I began to doubt
of revelation itself. Some volumes against deism fell into my hands.
They were said to be the substance of sermons preached at Boyle's
lecture. It happened that they produced on me an effect precisely
the reverse of what was intended by the writers; for the arguments
of the deists, which were cited in order to be refuted, appeared
to me much more forcible than the refutation itself. In a word, I
soon became a perfect deist. My arguments perverted some other young
persons, particularly Collins and Ralph. But in the sequel, when I
recollected that they had both used me extremely ill, without the
smallest remorse; when I considered the behaviour of Keith, another
free-thinker, and my own conduct towards Vernon and Miss Read, which
at times gave me great uneasiness, I was led to suspect that this
doctrine, though it might be true, was not very useful. I began to
entertain a less favourable opinion of my London pamphlet to which I
had prefixed as a motto, the following lines of Dryden:

    Whatever is--is right; though purblind man
    Sees but a part of the chain, the nearest link,
    His eyes not carrying to the equal beam
    That poises all above.

And of which the object was to prove, from the attributes of God,
his goodness, wisdom, and power, that there could be no such thing
as evil in the world; that vice and virtue did not in reality exist,
and were nothing more than vain distinctions. I no longer regarded it
as so blameless a work as I had formerly imagined; and I suspected
that some error must have imperceptibly glided into my argument, by
which all the inferences I had drawn from it had been affected, as
frequently happens in metaphysical reasonings. In a word, I was at
last convinced that truth, probity, and sincerity in transactions
between man and man, were of the utmost importance to the happiness
of life; and I resolved from that moment, and wrote the resolution in
my journal, to practise them as long as I lived.

Revelation, indeed, as such, had no influence on my mind; but I was
of opinion that, though certain actions could not be bad merely
because revelation had prohibited them, or good because it enjoined
them, yet it was probable that those actions were prohibited because
they were bad for us, or enjoined because advantageous in their
nature, all things considered. This persuasion, divine providence,
or some guardian angel, and perhaps a concurrence of favourable
circumstances co-operating, preserved me from all immorality, or
gross and _voluntary_, injustice, to which my want of religion was
calculated to expose me, in the dangerous period of youth, and in
the hazardous situations in which I sometimes found myself, among
strangers, and at a distance from the eye and admonitions of my
father. I may say _voluntary_, because the errors into which I had
fallen, had been in a manner the forced result either of my own
inexperience, or the dishonesty of others. Thus, before I entered
on my new career, I had imbibed solid principles, and a character
of probity. I knew their value; and I made a solemn engagement with
myself never to depart from them.

I had not long returned from Burlington before our printing materials
arrived from London. I settled my accounts with Keimer, and quitted
him, with his own consent, before he had any knowledge of our plan.
We found a house to let near the market. We took it; and to render
the rent less burdensome, (it was then twenty-four pounds a year, but
I have since known it let for seventy,) we admitted Thomas Godfrey, a
glazier, with his family, who eased us of a considerable part of it;
and with him we agreed to board.

We had no sooner unpacked our letters, and put our press in order,
than a person of my acquaintance, George House, brought us a
countryman, whom he had met in the streets enquiring for a printer.
Our money was almost exhausted by the number of things we had
been obliged to procure. The five shillings we received from this
countryman, the first fruits of our earnings, coming so seasonably,
gave me more pleasure than any sum I have since gained; and the
recollection of the gratitude I felt on this occasion to George
House, has rendered me often more disposed, than perhaps I should
otherwise have been, to encourage young beginners in trade.

There are in every country morose beings, who are always
prognosticating ruin. There was one of this stamp at Philadelphia.
He was a man of fortune, declining in years, had an air of wisdom,
and a very grave manner of speaking. His name was Samuel Mickle. I
knew him not; but he stopped one day at my door, and asked me if I
was the young man who had lately opened a new printing-house. Upon
my answering in the affirmative, he said he was very sorry for me,
as it was an expensive undertaking, and the money that had been
laid out upon it would be lost, Philadelphia being a place falling
into decay; its inhabitants having all, or nearly all of them,
been obliged to call together their creditors. That he knew, from
undoubted fact, the circumstances which might lead us to suppose the
contrary, such as new buildings, and the advanced price of rent, to
be deceitful appearances, which, in reality, contributed to hasten
the general ruin; and he gave me so long a detail of misfortunes,
actually existing, or which were soon to take place, that he left me
almost in a state of despair. Had I known this man before I entered
into trade, I should doubtless never have ventured. He continued,
however, to live in this place of decay, and to declaim in the same
style, refusing for many years to buy a house because all was going
to wreck; and in the end I had the satisfaction to see him pay five
times as much for one as it would have cost him had he purchased it
when he first began his lamentations.

I ought to have related, that, during the autumn of the preceding
year, I had united the majority of well-informed persons of my
acquaintance into a club, which we called by the name of the _Junto_,
and the object of which was to improve our understandings. We met
every Friday evening. The regulations I drew up, obliged every member
to propose, in his turn, one or more questions upon some point of
morality, politics, or philosophy, which were to be discussed by
the society; and to read, once in three months, an essay of his
own composition, on whatever subject he pleased. Our debates were
under the direction of a president, and were to be dictated only by
a sincere desire of truth; the pleasure of disputing, and the vanity
of triumph having no share in the business; and in order to prevent
undue warmth, every expression which implied obstinate adherence to
an opinion, and all direct contradiction, were prohibited, under
small pecuniary penalties.

The first members of our club were Joseph Breintnal, whose occupation
was that of a scrivener. He was a middle-aged man, of a good natural
disposition, strongly attached to his friends, a great lover of
poetry, reading every thing that came in his way, and writing
tolerably well, ingenious in many little trifles, and of an agreeable
conversation.

Thomas Godfrey, a skilful, though self-taught mathematician, and
who was afterwards the inventor of what now goes by the name of
Hadley's quadrant; but he had little knowledge out of his own line,
and was insupportable in company, always requiring, like the majority
of mathematicians that had fallen in my way, an unusual precision
in every thing that is said, continually contradicting, or making
trifling distinctions; a sure way of defeating all the ends of
conversation. He very soon left us.

Nicholas Scull, a surveyor, and who became afterwards,
surveyor-general. He was fond of books, and wrote verses.

William Parsons, brought up to the trade of a shoe-maker, but who,
having a taste for reading, had acquired a profound knowledge of
mathematics. He first studied them with a view to astrology, and
was, afterwards, the first to laugh at his folly. He also became
surveyor-general.

William Mawgridge, a joiner, and very excellent mechanic; and in
other respects a man of solid understanding.

Hugh Meredith, Stephen Potts, and George Webb, of whom I have already
spoken.

Robert Grace, a young man of fortune; generous, animated, and witty;
fond of epigrams, but more fond of his friends.

And lastly, William Coleman, at that time a merchant's clerk, and
nearly of my own age. He had a cooler and clearer head, a better
heart, and more scrupulous morals, than almost any other person
I have ever met with. He became a very respectable merchant, and
one of our provincial judges. Our friendship subsisted, without
interruption, for more than forty years, till the period of his
death; and the club continued to exist almost as long.

This was the best school of politics and philosophy that then existed
in the province; for our questions, which were read a week previous
to their discussion, induced us to peruse attentively such books
as were written upon the subjects proposed, that we might be able
to speak upon them more pertinently. We thus acquired the habit of
conversing more agreeably; every object being discussed conformably
to our regulations, and in a manner to prevent mutual disgust. To
this circumstance may be attributed the long duration of the club;
which I shall have frequent occasion to mention as I proceed.

I have introduced it here, as being one of the means on which I had
to count for success in my business, every member exerting himself
to procure work for us. Breintnal, among others, obtained for us,
on the part of the Quakers, the printing of forty sheets of their
history; of which the rest was to be done by Keimer. Our execution
of this work was by no means masterly; as the price was very low.
It was in folio, upon _pro patria_ paper, and in the _pica_ letter,
with heavy notes in the smallest type. I composed a sheet a-day, and
Meredith put it to the press. It was frequently eleven o'clock at
night, sometimes later, before I had finished my distribution for the
next day's task; for the little things which our friends occasionally
sent us, kept us back in this work: but I was so determined to
compose a sheet a-day, that one evening, when my form was imposed,
and my day's work, as I thought, at an end, an accident having broken
this form, and deranged two complete folio pages, I immediately
distributed, and composed them anew before I went to bed.

This unwearied industry, which was perceived by our neighbours,
began to acquire us reputation and credit. I learned, among other
things, that our new printing-house being the subject of conversation
at a club of merchants, who met every evening, it was the general
opinion that it would fail; there being already two printing-houses
in the town, Keimer's and Bradford's. But Dr. Bard, whom you and I
had occasion to see, many years after, at his native town of St.
Andrew's, in Scotland, was of a different opinion. "The industry of
this Franklin, (said he,) is superior to any thing of the kind I
ever witnessed. I see him still at work when I return from the club
at night, and he is at it again in the morning before his neighbours
are out of bed." This account struck the rest of the assembly, and
shortly after, one of its members came to our house, and offered to
supply us with articles of stationary; but we wished not as yet to
embarrass ourselves with keeping a shop. It is not for the sake of
applause that I enter so freely into the particulars of my industry,
but that such of my descendants as shall read these memoirs may know
the use of this virtue, by seeing in the recital of my life the
effects it operated in my favour.

George Webb, having found a friend who lent him the necessary sum to
buy out his time of Keimer, came one day to offer himself to us as
a journeyman. We could not employ him immediately; but I foolishly
told him, under the rose, that I intended shortly to publish a
new periodical paper, and that we should then have work for him.
My hopes of success, which I imparted to him, were founded on the
circumstance, that the only paper we had in Philadelphia at that
time, and which Bradford printed, was a paltry thing, miserably
conducted, in no respect amusing, and which yet was profitable. I
consequently supposed that a good work of this kind could not fail
of success. Webb betrayed my secret to Keimer, who, to prevent me,
immediately published the _prospectus_ of a paper that he intended to
institute himself, and in which Webb was to be engaged.

I was exasperated at this proceeding, and, with a view to counteract
them, not being able at present to institute my own paper, I wrote
some humourous pieces in Bradford's, under the title of the Busy
Body[5]; and which was continued for several months by Breintnal.
I hereby fixed the attention of the public upon Bradford's paper;
and the _prospectus_ of Keimer, which we turned into ridicule, was
treated with contempt. He began, notwithstanding, his paper; and
after continuing it for nine months, having at most not more than
ninety subscribers, he offered it me for a mere trifle. I had for
some time been ready for such an engagement; I therefore instantly
took it upon myself, and, in a few years, it proved extremely
profitable to me.

I perceive that I am apt to speak in the first person, though our
partnership still continued. It is, perhaps, because, in fact, the
whole business devolved upon me. Meredith was no compositor, and
but an indifferent pressman; and it was rarely that he abstained
from hard drinking. My friends were sorry to see me connected with
him; but I contrived to derive from it the utmost advantage the case
admitted.

Our first number produced no other effect than any other paper
which had appeared in the province, as to type and printing; but
some remarks, in my peculiar style of writing, upon the dispute
which then prevailed between governor Burnet and the Massachusetts
assembly, struck some persons as above mediocrity, caused the paper
and its editors to be talked of, and in a few weeks, induced them to
become our subscribers. Many others followed their example; and our
subscription continued to increase. This was one of the first good
effects of the pains I had taken to learn to put my ideas on paper. I
derived this farther advantage from it, that the leading men of the
place, seeing in the author of this publication a man so well able
to use his pen, thought it right to patronize and encourage me.

The votes, laws, and other public pieces, were printed by Bradford.
An address of the house of assembly to the governor had been executed
by him in a very coarse and incorrect manner. We reprinted it
with accuracy and neatness, and sent a copy to every member. They
perceived the difference; and it so strengthened the influence of our
friends in the assembly, that we were nominated its printer for the
following year.

Among these friends I ought not to forget one member in particular,
Mr. Hamilton, whom I have mentioned in a former part of my narrative,
and who was now returned from England. He warmly interested
himself for me on this occasion, as he did likewise on many others
afterwards; having continued his kindness to me till his death.

About this period Mr. Vernon reminded me of the debt I owed him, but
without pressing me for payment. I wrote a handsome letter on the
occasion, begging him to wait a little longer, to which he consented;
and as soon as I was able I paid him, principal and interest, with
many expressions of gratitude; so that this error of my life was in a
manner atoned for.

But another trouble now happened to me, which I had not the smallest
reason to expect. Meredith's father, who, according to our agreement,
was to defray the whole expence of our printing materials, had
only paid a hundred pounds. Another hundred was still due, and the
merchant being tired of waiting, commenced a suit against us. We
bailed the action, but with the melancholy prospect, that, if the
money was not forthcoming at the time fixed, the affair would come
to issue, judgment be put in execution, our delightful hopes be
annihilated, and ourselves entirely ruined; as the type and press
must be sold, perhaps, at half their value, to pay the debt.

In this distress, two real friends, whose generous conduct I
have never forgotten, and never shall forget while I retain the
remembrance of any thing, came to me separately, without the
knowledge of each other, and without my having applied to either of
them. Each offered me whatever money might be necessary to take the
business into my own hands, if the thing was practicable, as they
did not like I should continue in partnership with Meredith, who,
they said, was frequently seen drunk in the streets, and gambling
at ale-houses, which very much injured our credit. These friends
were William Coleman and Robert Grace. I told them, that while there
remained any probability that the Merediths would fulfil their part
of the compact, I could not propose a separation, as I conceived
myself to be under obligations to them for what they had done
already, and were still disposed to do, if they had the power; but,
in the end, should they fail in their engagement, and our partnership
be dissolved, I should then think myself at liberty to accept the
kindness of my friends.

Things remained for some time in this state. At last, I said one
day to my partner, "Your father is, perhaps, dissatisfied with your
having a share only in the business, and is unwilling to do for two,
what he would do for you alone. Tell me frankly if that be the case,
and I will resign the whole to you, and do for myself as well as I
can."--"No, (said he,) my father has really been disappointed in his
hopes; he is not able to pay, and I wish to put him to no farther
inconvenience. I see that I am not at all calculated for a printer;
I was educated as a farmer, and it was absurd in me to come here,
at thirty years of age, and bind myself apprentice to a new trade.
Many of my countrymen are going to settle in North Carolina, where
the soil is exceedingly favourable. I am tempted to go with them,
and to resume my former occupation. You will doubtless find friends
who will assist you. If you will take upon yourself the debts of the
partnership, return my father the hundred pounds he has advanced, pay
my little personal debts, and give me thirty pounds and a new saddle,
I will renounce the partnership, and consign over the whole stock to
you."

I accepted this proposal without hesitation. It was committed to
paper, and signed and sealed without delay. I gave him what he
demanded, and he departed soon after for Carolina, from whence he
sent me, in the following year, two long letters, containing the best
accounts that had yet been given of that country, as to climate,
soil, agriculture, &c. for he was well versed in these matters. I
published them in my newspaper, and they were received with great
satisfaction.

As soon as he was gone, I applied to my two friends, and not wishing
to give a disobliging preference to either of them, I accepted
from each, half what he had offered me, and which it was necessary
I should have. I paid the partnership debts, and continued the
business on my own account; taking care to inform the public, by
advertisement, of the partnership being dissolved. This was, I
think, in the year 1729, or thereabout.

Nearly at the same period, the people demanded a new emission of
paper money; the existing and only one that had taken place in the
province, and which amounted to fifteen thousand pounds, being soon
to expire. The wealthy inhabitants, prejudiced against every sort of
paper currency, from the fear of its depreciation, of which there
had been an instance in the province of New England, to the injury
of its holders, strongly opposed the measure. We had discussed this
affair in our Junto, in which I was on the side of the new emission;
convinced that the first small sum, fabricated in 1723, had done
much good in the province, by favouring commerce, industry, and
population, since all the houses were now inhabited, and many others
building; whereas I remembered to have seen, when I first paraded
the streets of Philadelphia eating my roll, the majority of those
in Walnut-street, Second-street, Fourth-street, as well as a great
number in Chesnut and other streets, with papers on them signifying
that they were to be let; which made me think at the time that the
inhabitants of the town were deserting it one after another.

Our debates made me so fully master of the subject, that I wrote
and published an anonymous pamphlet, entitled, "An Enquiry into the
Nature and Necessity of a Paper currency." It was very well received
by the lower and middling class of people; but it displeased the
opulent, as it increased the clamour in favour of the new emission.
Having, however, no writer among them capable of answering it,
their opposition became less violent; and there being in the house
of assembly a majority for the measure, it passed. The friends I
had acquired in the house, persuaded that I had done the country
essential service on this occasion, rewarded me by giving me the
printing of the bills. It was a lucrative employment, and proved a
very seasonable help to me; another advantage which I derived from
having habituated myself to write.

Time and experience so fully demonstrated the utility of paper
currency, that it never after experienced any considerable
opposition; so that it soon amounted to 55,000_l._ and in the year
1739, to 80,000_l._ It has since risen, during the last war, to
350,000_l._, trade, buildings and population, having in the interval
continually increased: but I am now convinced that there are limits
beyond which paper money would be prejudicial.

I soon after obtained, by the influence of my friend Hamilton, the
printing of the Newcastle paper money, another profitable work,
as I then thought it, little things appearing great to persons of
moderate fortune; and they were really great to me, as proving great
encouragements. He also procured me the printing of the laws and
votes of that government, which I retained as long as I continued in
the business.

I now opened a small stationer's shop. I kept bonds and agreements of
all kinds, drawn up in a more accurate form than had yet been seen in
that part of the world; a work in which I was assisted by my friend
Breintnal. I had also paper, parchment, pasteboard, books, &c. One
Whitemash, an excellent compositor, whom I had known in London, came
to offer himself, I engaged him: and he continued constantly and
diligently to work with me. I also took an apprentice, the son of
Aquila Rose.

I began to pay, by degrees, the debt I had contracted; and, in order
to insure my credit and character as a tradesman, I took care not
only to be _really_ industrious and frugal, but also to avoid every
appearance of the contrary. I was plainly dressed, and never seen in
any place of public amusement. I never went a fishing or hunting. A
book, indeed, enticed me sometimes from my work, but it was seldom,
by stealth, and occasioned no scandal; and to show that I did not
think myself above my profession, I conveyed home, sometimes in a
wheelbarrow, the paper I purchased at the warehouses.

I thus obtained the reputation of being an industrious young man, and
very punctual in his payments. The merchants who imported articles
of stationary solicited my custom; others offered to furnish me with
books, and my little trade went on prosperously.

Meanwhile the credit and business of Keimer diminishing every day,
he was at last forced to sell his stock to satisfy his creditors;
and he betook himself to Barbadoes, where he lived for sometime in
a very impoverished state. His apprentice, David Harry, whom I had
instructed while I worked for Keimer, having bought his materials,
succeeded him in the business. I was apprehensive, at first, of
finding in Harry a powerful competitor, as he was allied to an
opulent and respectable family; I therefore proposed a partnership,
which, happily for me, he rejected with disdain. He was extremely
proud, thought himself a fine gentleman, lived extravagantly, and
pursued amusements which suffered him to be scarcely ever at home; of
consequence he became in debt, neglected his business, and business
neglected him. Finding in a short time nothing to do in the country,
he followed Keimer to Barbadoes, carrying his printing materials with
him. There the apprentice employed his old master as a journeyman.
They were continually quarrelling; and Harry still getting in debt,
was obliged at last to sell his press and types, and return to his
old occupation of husbandry in Pennsylvania. The person who purchased
them employed Keimer to manage the business; but he died a few years
after.

I had now at Philadelphia no competitor but Bradford, who, being in
easy circumstances, did not engage in the printing of books, except
now and then as workmen chanced to offer themselves; and was not
anxious to extend his trade. He had, however, one advantage over me,
as he had the direction of the post-office, and was of consequence
supposed to have better opportunities of obtaining news. His paper
was also supposed to be more advantageous to advertising customers;
and in consequence of that supposition, his advertisements were
much more numerous than mine: this was a source of great profit to
him, and disadvantageous to me. It was to no purpose that I really
procured other papers, and distributed my own, by means of the post;
the public took for granted my inability in this respect; and I was
indeed unable to conquer it in any other mode than by bribing the
post-boys, who served me only by stealth, Bradford being so illiberal
as to forbid them. This treatment of his excited my resentment; and
my disgust was so rooted, that, when I afterwards succeeded him in
the post-office, I took care to avoid copying his example.

I had hitherto continued to board with Godfrey, who, with his wife
and children, occupied part of my house, and half of the shop for
his business; at which indeed he worked very little, being always
absorbed by mathematics. Mrs. Godfrey formed a wish of marrying
me to the daughter of one of her relations. She contrived various
opportunities of bringing us together, till she saw that I was
captivated; which was not difficult, the lady in question possessing
great personal merit. The parents encouraged my addresses, by
inviting me continually to supper, and leaving us together, till at
last it was time to come to an explanation. Mrs. Godfrey undertook
to negociate our little treaty. I gave her to understand, that I
expected to receive with the young lady a sum of money that would
enable me at least to discharge the remainder of the debt for my
printing materials. It was then, I believe, not more than a hundred
pounds. She brought me for answer, that they had no such sum at their
disposal. I observed that it might easily be obtained, by a mortgage
on their house. The reply to this was, after a few days interval,
that they did not approve of the match; that they had consulted
Bradford, and found that the business of a printer was not lucrative;
that my letters would soon be worn out, and must be supplied with new
ones; that Keimer and Harry had failed, and that, probably, I should
do so too. Accordingly they forbade me the house, and the young lady
was confined. I know not if they had really changed their minds, or
if it was merely an artifice, supposing our affections to be too
far engaged for us to desist, and that we should contrive to marry
secretly, which would leave them at liberty to give or not as they
pleased. But, suspecting this motive, I never went again to their
house.

Some time after, Mrs. Godfrey informed me that they were very
favourably disposed towards me, and wished me to renew the
acquaintance; but I declared a firm resolution never to have any
thing more to do with the family. The Godfreys expressed some
resentment at this: and as we could no longer agree, they changed
their residence, leaving me in possession of the whole house. I
then resolved to take no more lodgers. This affair having turned
my thoughts to marriage, I looked around me, and made overtures of
alliance in other quarters: but I soon found that the profession of a
printer being generally looked upon as a poor trade, I could expect
no money with a wife, at least, if I wished her to possess any other
charm. Meanwhile, that passion of youth, so difficult to govern, had
often drawn me into intrigues with despicable women who fell in my
way; which were not unaccompanied with expence and inconvenience,
besides the perpetual risk of injuring my health, and catching a
disease which I dreaded above all things. But I was fortunate enough
to escape this danger.

As a neighbour and old acquaintance, I had kept up a friendly
intimacy with the family of Miss Read. Her parents had retained
an affection for me from the time of my lodging in their house. I
was often invited thither; they consulted me about their affairs,
and I had been sometimes serviceable to them. I was touched with
the unhappy situation of their daughter, who was almost always
melancholy, and continually seeking solitude. I regarded my
forgetfulness and inconstancy, during my abode in London, as the
principal cause of her misfortune, though her mother had the candour
to attribute the fault to herself, rather than to me, because after
having prevented our marriage previously to my departure, she had
induced her to marry another in my absence.

Our mutual affection revived; but there existed great obstacles
to our union. Her marriage was considered, indeed, as not being
valid, the man having, it was said, a former wife still living in
England; but of this it was difficult to obtain a proof at so great
a distance; and though a report prevailed of his being dead, yet we
had no certainty of it; and supposing it to be true, he had left
many debts, for the payment of which his successor might be sued. We
ventured, nevertheless, in spite of all these difficulties; and I
married her on the 1st of September, 1730. None of the inconveniences
we had feared happened to us. She proved to me a good and faithful
companion, and contributed essentially to the success of my shop. We
prospered together, and it was our mutual study to render each other
happy. Thus I corrected, as well as I could, this great error of my
youth.

Our club was not at that time established at a tavern. We held our
meetings at the house of Mr. Grace, who appropriated a room to
the purpose. Some member observed one day, that as our books were
frequently quoted in the course of our discussions, it would be
convenient to have them collected in the room in which we assembled,
in order to be consulted upon occasion; and that, by thus forming a
common library of our individual collections, each would have the
advantage of using the books of all the other members, which would
nearly be the same as if he possessed them all himself. The idea
was approved, and we accordingly brought such books as we thought
we could spare, which were placed at the end of the club-room.
They amounted not to so many as we expected; and through we made
considerable use of them, yet some inconveniences resulting, from
want of care, it was agreed, after about a year, to discontinue the
collection; and each took away such books as belonged to him.

It was now that I first started the idea of establishing, by
subscription, a public library, I drew up the proposals, had them
ingrossed in form by Brockden the attorney, and my project succeeded,
as will be seen in the sequel.


  [The life of Dr. Franklin, as written by himself, so far as it
  has yet been communicated to the world, breaks off in this place.
  We understand that it was continued by him somewhat farther,
  and we hope that the remainder will, at some future period, be
  communicated to the public. We have no hesitation in supposing that
  every reader will find himself greatly interested by the frank
  simplicity and the philosophical discernment by which these pages
  are so eminently characterized. We have therefore thought proper,
  in order as much as possible to relieve his regret, to subjoin the
  following continuation, by one of the Doctor's intimate friends.
  It is extracted from an American periodical publication, and was
  written by the late Dr. Stuber,[6] of Philadelphia.]


The promotion of literature had been little attended to in
Pennsylvania. Most of the inhabitants were too much immersed in
business to think of scientific pursuits; and those few, whose
inclinations led them to study, found it difficult to gratify them,
from the want of libraries sufficiently large. In such circumstances,
the establishment of a public library was an important event. This
was first set on foot by Franklin, about the year 1731. Fifty persons
subscribed forty shillings each, and agreed to pay ten shillings
annually. The number increased; and in 1742, the company was
incorporated by the name of "The Library Company of Philadelphia."
Several other companies were formed in this city in imitation of
it. These were all at length united with the Library Company of
Philadelphia, which thus received a considerable accession of books
and property. It now contains about eight thousand volumes on all
subjects, a philosophical apparatus, and a well-chosen collection of
natural and artificial curiosities. For its support the company now
possesses landed property of considerable value. They have lately
built an elegant house in Fifth-street, in the front of which will be
erected a marble statue of their founder, Benjamin Franklin.

This institution was greatly encouraged by the friends of literature
in America and in Great Britain. The Penn family distinguished
themselves by their donations. Amongst the earliest friends of
this institution must be mentioned the late Peter Collinson,
the friend and correspondent of Dr. Franklin. He not only made
considerable presents himself, and obtained others from his friends,
but voluntarily undertook to manage the business of the Company
in London, recommending books, purchasing and shipping them. His
extensive knowledge, and zeal for the promotion of science, enabled
him to execute this important trust with the greatest advantage.
He continued to perform these services for more than thirty years,
and uniformly refused to accept of any compensation. During this
time, he communicated to the directors every information relative to
improvements and discoveries in the arts, agriculture, and philosophy.

The beneficial influence of this institution was soon evident. The
terms of subscription to it were so moderate that it was accessible
to every one. Its advantages were not confined to the opulent. The
citizens in the middle and lower walks of life were equally partakers
of them. Hence a degree of information was extended amongst all
classes of people. The example was soon followed. Libraries were
established in various places, and they are now become very numerous
in the United States, and particularly in Pennsylvania. It is to
be hoped that they will be still more widely extended, and that
information will be every where increased. This will be the best
security for maintaining our liberties. A nation of well informed
men, who have been taught to know and prize the rights which God has
given them, cannot be enslaved. It is in the regions of ignorance
that tyranny reigns. It flies before the light of science. Let the
citizens of America, then, encourage institutions calculated to
diffuse knowledge amongst the people; and amongst these, public
libraries are not the least important.

In 1732, Franklin began to publish Poor Richard's Almanack. This
was remarkable for the numerous and valuable concise maxims which
it contained, all tending to exhort to industry and frugality. It
was continued for many years. In the almanack for the last year, all
the maxims were collected in an address to the reader, entitled, The
Way to Wealth. This has been translated into various languages, and
inserted in different publications. It has also been printed on a
large sheet, and may be seen framed in many houses in this city. This
address contains, perhaps, the best practical system of economy that
ever has appeared. It is written in a manner intelligible to every
one, and which cannot fail of convincing every reader of the justice
and propriety of the remarks and advice which it contains. The demand
for this almanack was so great, that ten thousand have been sold in
one year; which must be considered as a very large number, especially
when we reflect, that this country was, at that time, but thinly
peopled. It cannot be doubted that the salutary maxims contained in
these almanacks must have made a favourable impression upon many of
the readers of them.

It was not long before Franklin entered upon his political career.
In the year 1736, he was appointed clerk to the general assembly
of Pennsylvania, and was re-elected by succeeding assemblies for
several years, until he was chosen a representative for the city of
Philadelphia.

Bradford, the printer, mentioned above, was possessed of some
advantages over Franklin, by being post-master, thereby having an
opportunity of circulating his paper more extensively, and thus
rendering it a better vehicle for advertisements, &c. Franklin, in
his turn, enjoyed these advantages, by being appointed post-master
of Philadelphia in 1737. Bradford, while in office, had acted
ungenerously towards Franklin, preventing as much as possible the
circulation of his paper. He had now an opportunity of retaliating;
but his nobleness of soul prevented him from making use of it.

The police of Philadelphia had early appointed watchmen, whose duty
it was to guard the citizens against the midnight robber, and to
give an immediate alarm in case of fire. This duty is, perhaps, one
of the most important that can be committed to any set of men. The
regulations, however, were not sufficiently strict. Franklin saw the
dangers arising from this cause, and suggested an alteration, so as
to oblige the guardians of the night to be more watchful over the
lives and property of the citizens. The propriety of this was
immediately perceived, and a reform was effected.

There is nothing more dangerous to growing cities than fires. Other
causes operate slowly, and almost imperceptibly; but these in a
moment render abortive the labours of ages. On this account there
should be, in all cities, ample provisions to prevent fires from
spreading. Franklin early saw the necessity of these; and, about
the year 1728, formed the first fire company in this city. The
example was soon followed by others; and there are now numerous fire
companies in the city and liberties. To these may be attributed in
a great degree the activity in extinguishing fires, for which the
citizens of Philadelphia are distinguished, and the inconsiderable
damage this city has sustained from this cause. Some time after,
Franklin suggested the plan for an association for insuring houses
from losses by fire, which was adopted; and the association continues
to this day. The advantages experienced from it have been great.

From the first settlement of Pennsylvania, a spirit of dispute
appears to have prevailed among its inhabitants. During the life-time
of William Penn, the constitution had been three times altered. After
this period the history of Pennsylvania is little else than a recital
of the quarrels between the proprietaries, or their governors,
and the assembly. The proprietaries contended for the right of
exempting their land from taxes; to which the assembly would by no
means consent. This subject of dispute interfered in almost every
question, and prevented the most salutary laws from being enacted.
This at times subjected the people to great inconveniences. In the
year 1774, during a war between France and Great Britain, some
French and Indians had made inroads upon the frontier inhabitants
of the province, who were unprovided for such an attack. It became
necessary that the citizens should arm for their defence. Governor
Thomas recommended to the assembly, who were then sitting, to pass
a militia law. To this they would agree only upon condition, that
he should give his assent to certain laws, which appeared to them
calculated to promote the interests of the people. As he thought
these laws would be injurious to the proprietaries, he refused his
assent to them; and the assembly broke up without passing a militia
bill. The situation of the province was at this time truly alarming:
exposed to the continual inroad of an enemy, and destitute of every
means of defence. At this crisis Franklin stepped forth, and proposed
to a meeting of the citizens of Philadelphia, a plan of a voluntary
association for the defence of the province. This was approved
of, and signed by twelve hundred persons immediately. Copies were
circulated without delay through the province; and in a short time
the number of signatures amounted to ten thousand. Franklin was
chosen colonel of the Philadelphia regiment; but he did not think
proper to accept of the honour.

Pursuits of a different nature now occupied the greatest part of
his attention for some years. He engaged in a course of electrical
experiments, with all the ardor and thirst for discovery which
characterized the philosophers of that day. Of all the branches of
experimental philosophy, electricity had been least explored. The
attractive power of amber is mentioned by Theophrastus and Pliny,
and from them, by later naturalists. In the year 1600, Gilbert, an
English physician, enlarged considerably the catalogue of substances
which have the property of attracting light bodies. Boyle, Otto
Guericke, a burgomaster of Magdeburg, celebrated as the inventor
of the air-pump, Dr. Wall, and Sir Isaac Newton added some facts.
Guericke first observed the repulsive power of electricity, and the
light and noise produced by it. In 1709, Hawkesbec communicated
some important observations and experiments to the world. For
several years electricity was entirely neglected, until Mr. Grey
applied himself to it, in 1728, with great assiduity. He and his
friend Mr. Wheeler, made a great variety of experiments, in which
they demonstrated, that electricity may be communicated from one
body to another, even without being in contact, and in this way may
be conducted to a great distance. Mr. Grey afterwards found, that,
by suspending rods of iron by silk or hair lines, and bringing
an excited tube under them, sparks might be drawn, and a light
perceived at the extremities in the dark. M. du Faye, intendant
of the French king's gardens, made a number of experiments, which
added not a little to the science. He made the discovery of two
kinds of electricity, which he called _vitreous_ and _resinous_; the
former produced by rubbing glass, the latter from excited sulphur,
sealing-wax, &c. But this he afterwards gave up as erroneous. Between
the years 1739 and 1742, Desaguliers made a number of experiments,
but added little of importance. He first used the terms _conductors_
and _electrics per se_. In 1742, several ingenious Germans engaged
in this subject, of these the principal were, professor Boze
of Wittemberg, professor Winkler of Leipsic, Gordon, a Scotch
Benedictine monk, professor of philosophy at Erfurt, and Dr. Ludolf,
of Berlin. The result of their researches astonished the philosophers
of Europe. Their apparatus was large, and by means of it they were
enabled to collect large quantities of the electric fluid, and thus
to produce phenomena which had been hitherto unobserved. They killed
small birds, and set spirits on fire. Their experiments excited the
curiosity of other philosophers. Collinson, about the year 1745,
sent to the Library Company of Philadelphia, an account of these
experiments, together with a tube, and directions how to use it.
Franklin, with some of his friends, immediately engaged in a course
of experiments, the result of which is well known. He was enabled
to make a number of important discoveries, and to propose theories
to account for various phenomena, which have been universally
adopted, and which bid fair to endure for ages. His observations
he communicated in a series of letters, to his friend Collinson,
the first of which is dated March 28, 1747. In these he shews the
power of points in drawing and throwing off the electrical matter,
which had hitherto escaped the notice of electricians. He also made
the grand discovery of a _plus_ and _minus_, or of a _positive_ and
_negative_ state of electricity. We give him the honour of this,
without hesitation; although the English have claimed it for their
countryman, Dr. Watson. Watson's paper is dated January 21, 1748;
Franklin's July 11, 1747: several months prior. Shortly after,
Franklin, from his principles of the plus and minus state, explained,
in a satisfactory manner, the phenomena of the Leyden phial, first
observed by Mr. Cuneus, or by professor Muschenbroeck, of Leyden,
which had much perplexed philosophers. He shewed clearly, that when
charged, the bottle contained no more electricity than before, but
that as much was taken from one side as was thrown on the other;
and that, to discharge it, nothing was necessary but to produce a
communication between the two sides, by which the equilibrium might
be restored, and that then no signs of electricity would remain.
He afterwards demonstrated, by experiments, that the electricity
did not reside in the coating, as had been supposed, but in the
pores of the glass itself. After a phial was charged, he removed
the coating, and found that upon applying a new coating, the shock
might still be received. In the year 1749, he first suggested his
idea of explaining the phenomena of thunder-gusts, and of the aurora
borealis, upon electrical principles. He points out many particulars
in which lightning and electricity agree; and he adduces many
facts, and reasonings from facts, in support of his positions. In
the same year he conceived the astonishingly bold and grand idea of
ascertaining the truth of his doctrine, by actually drawing down
the lightning, by means of sharp-pointed iron rods, raised into the
region of the clouds. Even in this uncertain state, his passion
to be useful to mankind, displayed itself in a powerful manner.
Admitting the identity of electricity and lightning, and knowing the
power of points in repelling bodies charged with electricity, and in
conducting their fire silently and imperceptibly, he suggested the
idea of securing houses, ships, &c. from being damaged by lightning,
by erecting pointed rods, that should rise some feet above the most
elevated part, and descend some feet into the ground or the water.
The effect of these, he concluded, would be either to present a
stroke by repelling the cloud beyond the striking distance, or by
drawing off the electrical fire which it contained; or, if they could
not effect this, they would at least conduct the electric matter to
the earth, without any injury to the building.

It was not until the summer of 1752, that he was enabled to complete
his grand and unparalleled discovery by experiment. The plan, which
he had originally proposed, was, to erect on some high tower, or
other elevated place, a centry-box, from which should rise a pointed
iron rod, insulated by being fixed in a cake of resin. Electrified
clouds passing over this, would, he conceived, impart to it a
portion of their electricity, which would be rendered evident to the
senses by sparks being emitted, when a key, the knuckle, or other
conductor was presented to it. Philadelphia at this time afforded
no opportunity of trying an experiment of this kind. While Franklin
was waiting for the erection of a spire, it occurred to him that he
might have more ready access to the region of clouds by means of a
common kite. He prepared one by fastening two cross sticks to a silk
handkerchief, which would not suffer so much from the rain as paper.
To the upright stick was affixed an iron point. The string was, as
usual, of hemp, except the lower end, which was silk. Where the
hempen string terminated, a key was fastened. With this apparatus, on
the appearance of a thunder-gust approaching, he went out into the
commons, accompanied by his son, to whom alone he communicated his
intentions, well knowing the ridicule which, too generally for the
interest of science, awaits unsuccessful experiments in philosophy.
He placed himself under a shade, to avoid the rain--his kite was
raised--a thunder-cloud passed over it--no sign of electricity
appeared. He almost despaired of success, when, suddenly, he observed
the loose fibres of his string to move towards an erect position. He
now presented his knuckle to the key, and received a strong spark.
How exquisite must his sensations have been at this moment! On this
experiment depended the fate of his theory. If he succeeded, his
name would rank high among those who had improved science; if he
failed, he must inevitably be subjected to the derision of mankind,
or, what is worse, their pity, as a well-meaning man, but a weak,
silly projector. The anxiety with which he looked for the result
of his experiment, may be easily conceived. Doubts and despair
had begun to prevail, when the fact was ascertained in so clear a
manner, that even the most incredulous could no longer withhold
their assent.--Repeated sparks were drawn from the key, a phial
was charged, a shock given, and all the experiments made which are
usually performed with electricity.

About a month before this period, some ingenious Frenchman had
completed the discovery in the manner originally proposed by Dr.
Franklin. The letters which he sent to Mr. Collinson, it is said,
were refused a place in the Transactions of the Royal Society of
London. However this may be, Collinson published them in a separate
volume, under the title of "New Experiments and Observations on
Electricity, made at Philadelphia, in America." They were read
with avidity, and soon translated into different languages. A very
incorrect French translation fell into the hands of the celebrated
Buffon, who, notwithstanding the disadvantages under which the work
laboured, was much pleased with it, and repeated the experiments
with success. He prevailed on his friend, M. D'Alibard, to give his
countrymen a more correct translation of the works of the American
electrician. This contributed much towards spreading a knowledge
of Franklin's principles in France. The king, Louis XV., hearing
of these experiments, expressed a wish to be a spectator of them.
A course of experiments was given at the seat of the D'Ayen, at
St. Germain, by M. de Lor. The applauses which the king bestowed
upon Franklin, excited in Buffon, D'Alibard, and De Lor, an earnest
desire of ascertaining the truth of his theory of thunder-gusts.
Buffon erected his apparatus on the tower of Montbar, M. D'Alibard
at Marly-la-ville, and De Lor at his house in the _Estrapade_ at
Paris, some of the highest ground in that capital. D'Alibard's
machine first shewed signs of electricity. On the 10th of May, 1752,
a thunder cloud passed over it, in the absence of M. D'Alibard, and
a number of sparks were drawn from it by Coiffier, joiner, with whom
D'Alibard had left directions how to proceed, and by M. Raulet, the
prior of Marly-la-ville. An account of this experiment was given to
the Royal Academy of Sciences, by M. D'Alibard, in a Memoir dated May
13th, 1752. On the 18th of May, M. de Lor proved equally successful
with the apparatus erected at his own house. These philosophers soon
excited those of other parts of Europe to repeat the experiment;
amongst whom, none signalised themselves more than Father Beccaria,
of Turin, to whose observations science is much indebted. Even the
cold regions of Russia were penetrated by the ardor for discovery.
Professor Richman bade fair to add much to the stock of knowledge on
this subject, when an unfortunate flash from his conductor, put a
period to his existence. The friends of science will long remember
with regret, the amiable martyr to electricity.

By these experiments Franklin's theory was established in the
most convincing manner. When the truth of it could no longer
be doubted, envy and vanity endeavoured to detract from its
merit. That an American, an inhabitant of the obscure city of
Philadelphia, the name of which was hardly known, should be able
to make discoveries, and to frame theories, which had escaped
the notice of the enlightened philosophers of Europe, was too
mortifying to be admitted. He must certainly have taken the idea
from some one else. An American, a being of an inferior order, make
discoveries!--Impossible. It was said, that the Abbé Nollet, 1748,
had suggested the idea of the similarity of lightning and electricity
in his _Leçons de Physique_. It is true that the Abbé mentions the
idea, but he throws it out as a bare conjecture, and proposes no
mode of ascertaining the truth of it. He himself acknowledges, that
Franklin first entertained the bold thought of bringing lightning
from the heavens, by means of pointed rods fixed in the air. The
similarity of lightning and electricity is so strong, that we need
not be surprised at notice being taken of it, as soon as electrical
phenomena became familiar. We find it mentioned by Dr. Wall and
Mr. Grey, while the science was in its infancy. But the honour of
forming a regular theory of thunder-gusts, of suggesting a mode of
determining the truth of it by experiments, and of putting these
experiments in practice, and thus establishing the theory upon a firm
and solid basis, is incontestibly due to Franklin. D'Alibard, who
made the first experiments in France, says, that he only followed the
tract which Franklin had pointed out.

It has been of late asserted, that the honour of completing the
experiment with the electrical kite, does not belong to Franklin.
Some late English paragraphs have attributed it to some Frenchman,
whose name they do not mention; and the Abbé Bertholon gives it to M.
de Romas, assessor to the presideal of Nerac; the English paragraphs
probably refer to the same person. But a very slight attention will
convince us of the injustice of this procedure: Dr. Franklin's
experiment was made in June 1752; and his letter, giving an account
of it, is dated October 19, 1752. M. de Romas made his first attempt
on the 14th of May, 1753, but was not successful until the 7th of
June; a year after Franklin had completed the discovery, and when it
was known to all the philosophers in Europe.

Besides these great principles, Franklin's letters on electricity
contain a number of facts and hints, which have contributed greatly
towards reducing this branch of knowledge to a science. His friend
Mr. Kinnersley communicated to him a discovery of the different
kinds of electricity, excited by rubbing glass and sulphur. This,
we have said, was first observed by M. Du Faye; but it was for many
years neglected. The philosophers were disposed to account for the
phenomena, rather from a difference in the quantity of electricity
collected, and even Du Faye himself seems at last to have adopted
this doctrine. Franklin at first entertained the same idea; but upon
repeating the experiments, he perceived that Mr. Kinnersley was
right; and that the _vitreous_ and _resinous_ electricity of du Faye
were nothing more than the _positive_, and _negative_ states which he
had before observed; and that the glass globe charged _positively_ or
increased the quantity of electricity on the prime conductor, while
the globe of sulphur diminished its natural quantity, or charged
_negatively_. These experiments and observations opened a new field
for investigation, upon which electricians entered with avidity; and
their labours have added much to the stock of our knowledge.

In September, 1752, Franklin entered upon a course of experiments,
to determine the state of electricity in the clouds. From a number
of experiments he formed this conclusion:--"That the clouds of a
thunder-gust are most commonly in a negative state of electricity,
but sometimes in a positive state;" and from this it follows, as a
necessary consequence, "that, for the most part, in thunder-strokes,
it is the earth that strikes into the clouds, and not the clouds that
strike into the earth." The letter containing these observations is
dated in September, 1753; and yet the discovery of ascending thunder
has been said to be of a modern date, and has been attributed to the
Abbé Bertholon, who published his memoir on the subject in 1776.

Franklin's letters have been translated into most of the European
languages, and into Latin. In proportion as they have become known,
his principles have been adopted. Some opposition was made to his
theories, particularly by the Abbé Nollet, who was, however, but
feebly supported, while the first philosophers in Europe stepped
forth in defence of Franklin's principles, amongst whom D'Alibard and
Beccaria were the most distinguished. The opposition has gradually
ceased, and the Franklinian system is now universally adopted, where
science flourishes.

The important practical use which Franklin made of his discoveries,
the securing of houses from injury by lightning, has been already
mentioned. Pointed conductors are now very common in America; but
prejudice has hitherto prevented their general introduction into
Europe, notwithstanding the most undoubted proofs of their utility
have been given. But mankind can with difficulty be brought to lay
aside practices, or to adopt new ones. And perhaps we have more
reason, to be surprised, that a practice however rational, which was
proposed about forty years ago, should in that time have been adopted
in so many places, than that it has not universally prevailed. It is
only by degrees that the great body of mankind can be led into new
practices, however salutary their tendency. It is now nearly eighty
years since inoculation was introduced into Europe and America; and
it is so far from being general at present, that it will, require one
or two centuries to render it so.

In the year 1745, Franklin published an account of his new-invented
Pennsylvania fire-places, in which he minutely and accurately states
the advantages of different kinds of fire-places; and endeavours to
show that the one which he describes is to be preferred to any other.
This contrivance has given rise to the open stoves now in general
use, which, however, differ from it in construction, particularly in
not having an air-box at the back, through which a constant supply of
air, warmed in its passage, is thrown into the room. The advantages
of this are, that as a stream of warm air is continually flowing into
the room, less fuel is necessary to preserve a proper temperature,
and the room may be so tightened as that no air may enter through
cracks--the consequence of which are colds, tooth-aches, &c.

Although philosophy was a principal object of Franklin's pursuit for
several years, he confined himself not to this. In the year 1747, he
became a member of the general assembly of Pennsylvania, as a burgess
for the city of Philadelphia. Warm disputes subsisted at this time
between the assembly and the proprietaries; each contending for
what they conceived to be their just rights. Franklin, a friend to
the rights of man from his infancy, soon distinguished himself as a
steady opponent of the unjust schemes of the proprietaries. He was
soon looked up to as the head of the opposition; and to him have
been attributed many of the spirited replies of the assembly, to the
messages of the governors. His influence in the body was very great.
This arose not from any superior powers of eloquence; he spoke but
seldom, and he never was known to make any thing like an elaborate
harangue. His speeches often consisted of a single sentence, or
of a well-told story, the moral of which was always obviously to
the point. He never attempted the flowery fields of oratory. His
manner was plain and mild. His style in speaking was, like that of
his writings, simple, unadorned, and remarkably concise. With this
plain manner, and his penetrating and solid judgment, he was able to
confound the most eloquent and subtle of his adversaries, to confirm
the opinions of his friends, and to make converts of the unprejudiced
who had opposed him. With a single observation, he has rendered of no
avail an elegant and lengthy discourse, and determined the fate of a
question of importance.

But he was not contented with thus supporting the rights of the
people. He wished to render them permanently secure, which can
only be done by making their value properly known; and this must
depend upon increasing and extending information to every class of
men. We have already seen that he was the founder of the public
library, which contributed greatly towards improving the minds
of the citizens. But this was not sufficient. The schools then
subsisting were in general of little utility. The teachers were men
ill qualified for the important duty which they had undertaken; and,
after all, nothing more could be obtained than the rudiments of a
common English education. Franklin drew up a plan of an academy, to
be erected in the city of Philadelphia, suited to "the state of an
infant country;" but in this, as in all his plans, he confined not
his views to the present time only. He looked forward to the period
when an institution on an enlarged plan would become necessary. With
this view, he considered his academy as "a foundation for posterity
to erect a seminary of learning more extensive, and suitable to
future circumstances." In pursuance of this plan, the constitutions
were drawn up and signed on the 13th of November, 1749. In these,
twenty-four of the most respectable citizens of Philadelphia were
named as trustees. In the choice of these, and in the formation of
his plan, Franklin is said to have consulted chiefly with Thomas
Hopkinson, Esq; the Rev. Richard Peters, then secretary of the
province, Tench Francis, Esq. attorney-general, and Dr. Phineas Bond.

The following article shews a spirit of benevolence worthy of
imitation; and, for the honour of our city, we hope that it continues
to be in force.

"In case of the disability of the _rector_, or any master
(established on the foundation by receiving a certain salary) through
sickness, or any other natural infirmity, whereby he may be reduced
to poverty, the trustees shall have power to contribute to his
support, in proportion to his distress and merit, and the stock in
their hands."

The last clause of the fundamental rules is expressed in language so
tender and benevolent, so truly parental, that it will do everlasting
honour to the hearts and heads of the founders.

"It is hoped and expected that the trustees will make it their
pleasure, and in some degree their business, to visit the academy
often; to encourage and countenance the youth, to countenance and
assist the masters, and, by all means in their power, advance the
usefulness and reputation of the design; that they will look on
the students as, in some measure, their own children, treat them
with familiarity and affection; and when they have behaved well,
gone through their studies, and are to enter the world, they shall
zealously unite, and make all the interest that can be made to
promote and establish them, whether in business, offices, marriages,
or any other thing for their advantage, in preference to all other
persons whatsoever, even of equal merit."

The constitutions being signed and made public, with the names of
the gentlemen proposing themselves as trustees and founders, the
design was so well approved of by the public-spirited citizens of
Philadelphia, that the sum of eight hundred pounds per annum, for
five years, was in the course of a few weeks subscribed for carrying
it into execution; and in the beginning of January following (viz.
1750) three of the schools were opened, namely, the Latin and
Greek schools, the Mathematical school, and the English school.
In pursuance of an article in the original plan, a school for
educating sixty boys and thirty girls (in the charter since called
the Charitable School) was opened; and amidst all the difficulties
with which the trustees have struggled in respect to their funds,
has still been continued full for the space of forty years; so that
allowing three years education for each boy and girl admitted into
it, which is the general rule, at least twelve hundred children
have received in it the chief part of their education, who might
otherwise, in a great measure, have been left without the means of
instruction. And many of those who have been thus educated, are now
to be found among the most useful and reputable citizens of this
state.

The institution, thus successfully begun, continued daily to
flourish, to the great satisfaction of Dr. Franklin; who,
notwithstanding the multiplicity of his other engagements and
pursuits, at that busy stage of his life, was a constant attendant
at the monthly visitations and examinations of the schools, and made
it his particular study, by means of his extensive correspondence
abroad, to advance the reputation of the seminary, and to draw
students and scholars to it from different parts of America and
the West Indies. Through the interposition of his benevolent and
learned friend, Peter Collinson, of London, upon the application
of the trustees, a charter of incorporation, dated July 13, 1753,
was obtained from the honourable proprietors of Pennsylvania,
Thomas Penn and Richard Penn, Esqrs. accompanied with a liberal
benefaction of five hundred pounds sterling; and Dr. Franklin now
began in good earnest to please himself with the hopes of a speedy
accomplishment of his original design, viz. the establishment of
a perfect institution, upon the plan of the European colleges and
universities; for which his academy was intended as a nursery or
foundation. To elucidate this fact, is a matter of considerable
importance in respect to the memory and character of Dr. Franklin
as a philosopher, and as the friend and patron of learning and
science; for, notwithstanding what is expressly declared by him in
the preamble to the constitutions, viz. that the academy was begun
for "teaching the Latin and Greek languages, with all useful branches
of the arts and sciences, suitable to the state of an infant country,
and laying a foundation for posterity to erect a seminary of learning
more extensive, and suitable to their future circumstances;" yet it
has been suggested of late, as upon Dr. Franklin's authority, that
the Latin and Greek, or the dead languages, are an incumbrance upon
a scheme of liberal education, and that the engrafting or founding a
college, or more extensive seminary, upon his academy, was without
his approbation or agency, and gave him discontent. If the reverse
of this does not already appear from what has been quoted above,
the following letters will put the matter beyond dispute. They were
written by him to a gentleman, who had at that time published the
idea of a college, suited to the circumstances of a young country
(meaning New-York) a copy of which having been sent to Dr. Franklin
for his opinion, gave rise to that correspondence which terminated
about a year afterwards, in erecting the college upon the foundation
of the academy, and establishing that gentleman at the head of both,
where he still continues, after a period of thirty-six years, to
preside with distinguished reputation.

From these letters also, the state of the academy, at that time, will
be, seen.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] As a proof that Franklin was anciently the common name of an
order or rank in England, see Judge Fortesque, _De laudibus legum
Angliæ_, written about the year 1412, in which is the following
passage, to shew that good juries might easily be formed in any part
of England:

"Regio etiam ilia, ita respersa refertaque est _posessoribus
terrarum_ et agrorum, quod in ea, villula tam parva reperiri non
poterit, in qua non est _miles_, _armiger_, vel pater-familias,
qualis ibidem _franklin_ vulgariter nuncupatur, magnis ditatus
possessionibus, nec non libere tenentes et alii _valecti_ plurimi,
suis patrimoniis sufficientes, ad faciendum juratam, in forma
prænotata."

"Moreover, the same country is so filled and replenished with landed
menne, that therein so small a thorpe cannot be found wherein
dwelleth not a knight, an esquire, or such a householder as is there
commonly called a _franklin_, enriched with great possessions; and
also other freeholders and many yeomen, able for their livelihoods to
make a jury in form aforementioned."

        OLD TRANSLATION.

Chaucer too, calls his country gentleman a _franklin_; and, after
describing his good housekeeping, thus characterizes him:

    This worthy franklin bore a purse of silk
    Fix'd to his girdle, white as morning milk;
    Knight of the shire, first justice at th' assize,
    To help the poor, the doubtful to advise.
    In all employments, generous, just he prov'd,
    Renown'd for courtesy, by all belov'd.


[2] Town in the island of Nantucket.

[3] Probably the Dunciad, where we find him thus immortalized by the
author:

    Silence, ye wolves, while Ralph to Cynthia howls,
    And makes night hideous--answer him, ye owls!

[4] Printing houses in general are thus denominated by the workmen:
the _spirit_ they call by the name of _Ralph_.

[5] A manuscript note in the file of the American Mercury, preserved
in the Philadelphia library, says, that Franklin wrote the five first
numbers, and part of the eighth.

[6] Dr. Stuber was born in Philadelphia, of German parents. He was
sent, at an early age, to the university, where his genius, diligence
and amiable temper, soon acquired him the particular notice and
favour of those under whose immediate direction he was placed. After
passing through the common course of study, in a much shorter time
than usual, he left the university, at the age of sixteen, with great
reputation. Not long after, he entered on the study of physic; and
the zeal with which he pursued it, and the advances he made, gave
his friends reason to form the most flattering prospects of his
future eminence and usefulness in the profession. As Dr. Stuber's
circumstances were very moderate, he did not think this pursuit well
calculated to improve them. He therefore relinquished it, after he
had obtained a degree in the profession, and qualified himself to
practise with credit and success; and immediately entered on the
study of the law. While in pursuit of the last mentioned object, he
was prevented by a premature death from reaping the fruit of those
talents with which he was endowed, and of a youth spent in the ardent
and successful pursuit of useful and elegant literature.




  "_Philad. April 19th, 1753._

  "SIR,

"I received your favour of the 11th instant, with your new[7] piece
on _Education_, which I shall carefully peruse, and give you my
sentiments of it, as you desire, by next post.

"I believe the young gentlemen, your pupils, may be entertained and
instructed here, in mathematics and philosophy, to satisfaction. Mr.
Alison[8] (who was educated at Glasgow) has been long accustomed
to teach the latter, and Mr. Grew[9] the former; and I think their
pupils make great progress. Mr. Alison has the care of the Latin and
Greek school, but as he has now three good assistants,[10] he can
very well afford some hours every day for the instruction of those
who are engaged in higher studies. The mathematical school is pretty
well furnished with instruments. The English library is a good one;
and we have belonging to it a middling apparatus for experimental
philosophy, and propose speedily to complete it. The Loganian
library, one of the best collections in America, will shortly be
opened; so that neither books nor instruments will be wanting; and
as we are determined always to give good salaries, we have reason to
believe we may have always an opportunity of choosing good masters;
upon which indeed, the success of the whole depends. We are obliged
to you for your kind offers in this respect, and when you are settled
in England, we may occasionally make use of your friendship and
judgment.--

"If it suits your conveniency to visit Philadelphia before you return
to Europe, I shall be extremely glad to see and converse with you
here, as well as to correspond with you after your settlement in
England; for an acquaintance and communication with men of learning,
virtue, and public spirit, is one of my greatest enjoyments.

"I do not know whether you ever happened to see the first proposals
I made for erecting this academy. I send them inclosed. They had
(however imperfect) the desired success, being followed by a
subscription of four thousand pounds, towards carrying them into
execution. And as we are fond of receiving advice, and are daily
improving by experience, I am in hopes we shall, in a few years, see
a _perfect institution_.

    "I am, very respectfully, &c.

        "B. FRANKLIN.

  "_Mr. W. Smith, Long-Island._"

FOOTNOTES:

[7] A general idea of the college of Mirania.

[8] The Rev. and learned Mr. Francis Alison, afterwards D. D. and
vice-provost of the college.

[9] Mr. Theophilus Grew, afterwards professor of mathematics in the
college.

[10] Those assistants were at that time Mr. Charles Thomson, late
secretary to congress, Mr. Paul Jackson, and Mr. Jacob Duche.




  "_Philad. May 3d, 1753._

  "SIR,

"Mr. Peters has just now been with me, and we have compared notes on
your new piece. We find nothing in the scheme of education, however
excellent, but what is, in our opinion, very practicable. The
great difficulty will be to find the Aratus[11], and other suitable
persons, to carry it into execution; but such may be had if proper
encouragement be given. We have both received great pleasure in the
perusal of it. For my part, I know not when I have read a piece that
has more affected me--so noble and just are the sentiments, so warm
and animated the language; yet as censure from your friends may be
of more use, as well as more agreeable to you than praise, I ought
to mention, that I wish you had omitted not only the quotation from
the Review[12], which you are now justly dissatisfied with, but those
expressions of resentment against your adversaries, in pages 65 and
79. In such cases, the noblest victory is obtained by neglect, and by
shining on.

"Mr. Allen has been out of town these ten days; but before he went he
directed me to procure him six copies of your piece. Mr. Peters has
taken ten. He proposed to have written to you; but omits it, as he
expects so soon to have the pleasure of seeing you here. He desires
me to present his affectionate compliments to you, and to assure
you that you will be very welcome to him. I shall only say, that
you may depend on my doing all in my power to make your visit to
Philadelphia agreeable to you.

    "I am, &c.

        "B. FRANKLIN.

  "_Mr. Smith._"

FOOTNOTES:

[11] The name given to the principal or head of the ideal college,
the system of education in which hath nevertheless been nearly
realized, or followed as a model, in the college and academy of
Philadelphia, and some other American seminaries, for many years past.

[12] The quotation alluded to (from the London Monthly Review for
1749,) was judged to reflect too severely on the discipline and
government of the English universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and
was expunged from the following editions of this work.




  "_Philad. Nov. 27th, 1753._

  "DEAR SIR,

"Having written you fully, _via_ Bristol, I have now little to
add. Matters relating to the academy remain in _statu quo_. The
trustees would be glad to see a rector established there, but they
dread entering into new engagements till they are got out of debt;
and I have not yet got them wholly over to my opinion, that a good
professor, or teacher of the higher branches of learning, would
draw so many scholars as to pay great part, if not the whole of his
salary. Thus, unless the proprietors (of the province) shall think
fit to put the finishing hand to our institution, it must, I fear,
wait some few years longer before it can arrive at that state of
perfection, which to me it seems now capable of; and all the pleasure
I promised myself in seeing you settled among us, vanishes into smoke.

"But good Mr. Collinson writes me word, that no endeavours of his
shall be wanting; and he hopes, with the archbishop's assistance, to
be able to prevail with our proprietors[13]. I pray God grant them
success.

"My son presents his affectionate regards, with, dear Sir,

    "Your's, &c.

        "B. FRANKLIN.

"P. S. I have not been favoured with a line from you since your
arrival in England."

FOOTNOTE:

[13] Upon the application of archbishop Herring and P. Collinson,
Esq. at Dr. Franklin's request, (aided by the letters of Mr. Allen
and Mr. Peters,) the Hon. Thomas Penn, Esq. subscribed an annual sum,
and afterwards gave at least 5000_l._ to the founding or engrafting the
college upon the academy.




  "_Philad. April 18th, 1754._

  "DEAR SIR,

"I have had but one letter from you since your arrival in
England, which was but a short one, _via_ Boston, dated October
18th, acquainting me that you had written largely by Captain
Davis.--Davis was lost, and with him your letters, to my great
disappointment.--Mesnard and Gibbon have since arrived here, and I
hear nothing from you. My comfort is, an imagination that you only
omit writing because you are coming, and propose to tell me every
thing _viva voce_. So not knowing whether this letter will reach you,
and hoping either to see or hear from you by the Myrtilla, Captain
Budden's ship, which is daily expected, I only add, that I am, with
great esteem and affection

    "Your's, &c.

      "B. FRANKLIN.

  "_Mr. Smith._"


About a month after the date of this last letter, the gentleman to
whom it was addressed arrived in Philadelphia, and was immediately
placed at the head of the seminary; whereby Dr. Franklin and the
other trustees were enabled to prosecute their plan, for perfecting
the institution, and opening the college upon the large and liberal
foundation on which it now stands; for which purpose they obtained
their additional charter, dated May 27th, 1755.

Thus far we thought it proper to exhibit in one view Dr. Franklin's
services in the foundation and establishment of this seminary. He
soon afterwards embarked for England, in the public service of his
country; and having been generally employed abroad, in the like
service, for the greatest part of the remainder of his life, (as
will appear in our subsequent account of the same) he had but few
opportunities of taking any further active part in the affairs of
the seminary, until his final return in the year 1785, when he found
its charters violated, and his ancient colleagues, the original
founders, deprived of their trust, by an act of the legislature; and
although his own name had been inserted amongst the new trustees,
yet he declined to take his seat among them, or any concern in the
management of their affairs, till the institution was restored by
law to its original owners. He then assembled his old colleagues at
his own house, and being chosen their president, all their future
meetings were, at his request, held there, till within a few months
of his death, when with reluctance, and at their desire, lest he
might be too much injured by his attention to their business, he
suffered them to meet at the college.

Franklin not only gave birth to many useful institutions himself,
but he was also instrumental in promoting those which had originated
with other men. About the year 1752, an eminent physician of this
city, Dr. Bond, considering the deplorable state of the poor when
visited with disease, conceived the idea of establishing an hospital.
Notwithstanding very great exertions on his part, he was able to
interest few people so far in his benevolent plan, as to obtain
subscriptions from them. Unwilling that his scheme should prove
abortive, he sought the aid of Franklin, who readily engaged in
the business, both by using his influence with his friends, and by
stating the advantageous influence of the proposed institution in his
paper. These efforts were attended with success. Considerable sums
were subscribed; but they were still short of what was necessary.
Franklin now made another exertion. He applied to the assembly; and,
after some opposition, obtained leave to bring in a bill, specifying,
that as soon as two thousand pounds were subscribed, the same sum
should be drawn from the treasury by the speaker's warrant, to be
applied to the purposes of the institution. The opposition, as the
sum was granted upon a contingency which they supposed would never
take place, were silent, and the bill passed. The friends of the plan
now redoubled their efforts, to obtain subscriptions to the amount
stated in the bill, and were soon successful. This was the foundation
of the Pennsylvanian Hospital, which, with the Bettering-house, and
Dispensary, bears ample testimony of the humanity of the citizens of
Philadelphia.

Dr. Franklin had conducted himself so well in the office of
post-master, and had shown himself to be so well acquainted with
the business of that department, that it was thought expedient to
raise him to a more dignified station. In 1753 he was appointed
deputy post-master general for the British colonies. The profits
arising from the postage of letters formed no inconsiderable part
of the revenue, which the crown of Great Britain derived from these
colonies. In the hands of Franklin, it is said, that the post-office
in America, yielded annually thrice as much as that of Ireland.

The American colonies were much exposed to depredations on their
frontiers, by the Indians; and more particularly whenever a war took
place between France and England. The colonies, individually, were
either too weak to take efficient measures for their own defence,
or they were unwilling to take upon themselves the whole burden of
erecting forts and maintaining garrisons, whilst their neighbours,
who partook equally with themselves of the advantages, contributed
nothing to the expence. Sometimes also the disputes, which subsisted
between the governors and assemblies, prevented the adoption of means
of defence; as we have seen was the case in Pennsylvania in 1745.
To devise a plan of union between the colonies, to regulate this
and other matters, appeared a desirable object. To accomplish this,
in the year 1754, commissioners from New Hampshire, Massachussets,
Rhode Island, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland, met at Albany.
Dr. Franklin attended here, as a commissioner from Pennsylvania,
and produced a plan, which, from the place of meeting, has been
usually termed, "The Albany plan of Union." This proposed, that
application should be made for an act of parliament, to establish
in the colonies a general government, to be administered by a
president-general, appointed by the crown, and by a grand council,
consisting of members, chosen by the representatives of the different
colonies; their number to be in direct proportion to the sums paid
by each colony into the general treasury, with this restriction,
that no colony should have more than seven, nor less than two
representatives. The whole executive authority was committed to
the president-general. The power of legislation was lodged in the
grand council and president-general jointly; his consent being made
necessary to passing a bill into a law. The power vested in the
president and council was, to declare war and peace, and to conclude
treaties with the Indian nations; to regulate trade with, and to make
purchases of vacant lands from them, either in the name of the crown,
or of the union; to settle new colonies, to make laws for governing
these until they should be erected into separate governments; and
to raise troops, build forts, and fit out armed vessels, and to use
other means for the general defence; and, to effect these things, a
power was given to make laws, laying such duties, imposts, or taxes,
as they should find necessary, and as would be least burdensome
to the people. All laws were to be sent to England for the king's
approbation; and unless disapproved of within three years, were to
remain in force. All officers in the land or sea service were to be
nominated by the president-general, and approved of by the general
council; civil officers were to be nominated by the council, and
approved of by the president. Such are the outlines of the plan
proposed, for the consideration of the congress, by Dr. Franklin.
After several days' discussion, it was unanimously agreed to by the
commissioners, a copy transmitted to each assembly, and one to the
king's council. The fate of it was singular. It was disapproved of by
the ministry of Great Britain, because it gave too much power to the
representatives of the people; and it was rejected by every assembly,
as giving to the president-general, the representative of the crown,
an influence greater than appeared to them proper, in a plan of
government intended for freemen. Perhaps this rejection, on both
sides, is the strongest proof that could be adduced of the excellence
of it, as suited to the situation of America and Great Britain at
that time. It appears to have steered exactly in the middle between
the opposite interests of both.

Whether the adoption of this plan would have prevented the separation
of America from Great Britain, is a question which might afford much
room for speculation. It may be said, that, by enabling the colonies
to defend themselves, it would have removed the pretext upon which
the stamp-act, tea-act, and other acts of the British parliament,
were passed; which excited a spirit of opposition, and laid the
foundation for the separation of the two countries. But, on the other
hand, it must be admitted, that the restriction laid by Great Britain
upon our commerce, obliging us to sell our produce to her citizens
only, and to take from them various articles, of which, as our
manufactures were discouraged, we stood in need, at a price greater
than that for which they could have been obtained from other nations,
must inevitably produce dissatisfaction, even though no duties were
imposed by the parliament; a circumstance which might still have
taken place. Besides, as the president-general was to be appointed
by the crown, he must, of necessity, be devoted to its views, and
would, therefore, refuse his assent to any laws, however salutary
to the community, which had the most remote tendency to injure the
interests of his sovereign. Even should they receive his assent, the
approbation of the king was to be necessary; who would indubitably,
in every instance, prefer the advantage of his home dominions to
that of his colonies. Hence would ensue perpetual disagreements
between the council and the president-general, and thus, between
the people of America and the crown of Great Britain:--While the
colonies continued weak, they would be obliged to submit, and as soon
as they acquired strength they would become more urgent in their
demands, until, at length, they would shake off the yoke, and declare
themselves independent.

Whilst the French were in possession of Canada, their trade with
the natives extended very far; even to the back of the British
settlements. They were disposed, from time to time, to establish
posts within the territory, which the English claimed as their own.
Independent of the injury to the fur trade, which was considerable,
the colonies suffered this further inconvenience, that the Indians
were frequently instigated to commit depredations on their frontiers.
In the year 1753, encroachments were made upon the boundaries of
Virginia. Remonstrances had no effect. In the ensuing year, a body
of men were sent out under the command of Mr. Washington, who,
though a very young man, had, by his conduct in the preceding year,
shewn himself worthy of such an important trust. Whilst marching
to take possession of the post at the junction of the Allegany and
Monongahela, he was informed that the French had already erected
a fort there. A detachment of their men marched against him. He
fortified himself as strongly as time and circumstances would
admit. A superiority of numbers soon obliged him to surrender _Fort
Necessity_. He obtained honourable terms for himself and men, and
returned to Virginia. The government of Great Britain now thought
it necessary to interfere. In the year 1755, General Braddock, with
some regiments of regular troops, and provincial levies, was sent
to dispossess the French of the posts upon which they had seized.
After the men were all ready, a difficulty occurred, which had nearly
prevented the expedition. This was the want of waggons. Franklin now
stepped forward, and with the assistance of his son, in a little time
procured a hundred and fifty. Braddock unfortunately fell into an
ambuscade, and perished, with a number of his men. Washington, who
had accompanied him as an aid-de-camp, and had warned him, in vain,
of his danger, now displayed great military talents in effecting a
retreat of the remains of the army, and in forming a junction with
the rear, under colonel Dunbar, upon whom the chief command now
devolved. With some difficulty they brought their little body to a
place of safety; but they found it necessary to destroy their waggons
and baggage, to prevent them falling into the hands of the enemy. For
the waggons which he had furnished, Franklin had given bonds to a
large amount. The owners declared their intention of obliging him to
make a restitution of their property. Had they put their threats in
execution, ruin must inevitably have been the consequence. Governor
Shirley, finding that he had incurred these debts for the service of
government, made arrangements to have them discharged, and released
Franklin from his disagreeable situation.

The alarm spread through the colonies, after the defeat of Braddock,
was very great. Preparations to arm were every where made. In
Pennsylvania, the prevalence of the Quaker interest prevented the
adoption of any system of defence, which would compel the citizens
to bear arms. Franklin introduced into the assembly a bill for
organizing a militia, by which every man was allowed to take arms or
not, as to him should appear fit. The Quakers, being thus left at
liberty, suffered the bill to pass; for although their principles
would not suffer them to fight, they had no objection to their
neighbours fighting for them. In consequence of this act a very
respectable militia was formed. The sense of impending danger infused
a military spirit in all, whose religious tenets were not opposed to
war. Franklin was appointed colonel of a regiment in Philadelphia,
which consisted of 1200 men.

The north-western frontier being invaded by the enemy, it became
necessary to adopt measures for its defence. Franklin was directed
by the governor to take charge of this. A power of raising men,
and of appointing officers to command them, was vested in him. He
soon levied a body of troops, with which he repaired to the place
at which their presence was necessary. Here he built a fort, and
placed a garrison in such a posture of defence, as would enable them
to withstand the inroads, to which the inhabitants had previously
been exposed. He remained here for some time, in order the more
completely to discharge the trust committed to him. Some business of
importance at length rendered his presence necessary in the assembly,
and he returned to Philadelphia.

The defence of her colonies was a great expence to Great Britain.
The most effectual mode of lessening this was, to put arms into the
hands of the inhabitants, and to teach them their use. But England
wished not that the Americans should become acquainted with their
own strength. She was apprehensive, that, as soon as this period
arrived, they would no longer submit to that monopoly of their trade,
which to them was highly injurious, but extremely advantageous to the
mother-country. In comparison with the profits of this, the expence
of maintaining armies and fleets to defend them was trifling. She
fought to keep them dependent upon her for protection; the best plan
which could be devised for retaining them in peaceable subjection.
The least appearance of a military spirit was therefore to be guarded
against, and, although a war then raged, the act for organizing a
militia was disapproved of by the ministry. The regiments which had
been formed under it were disbanded, and the defence of the province
entrusted to regular troops.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the people continued in
full force, although a war was raging on the frontiers. Not even
the sense of danger was sufficient to reconcile, for ever so short
a time, their jarring interests. The assembly still insisted upon
the justice of taxing the proprietary estates, but the governors
constantly refused their assent to this measure, without which no
bill could pass into a law. Enraged at the obstinacy, and what
they conceived to be unjust proceedings of their opponents, the
assembly at length determined to apply to the mother-country for
relief. A petition was addressed to the king, in council, stating
the inconveniencies under which the inhabitants laboured, from the
attention of the proprietaries to their private interests, to the
neglect of the general welfare of the community, and praying for
redress. Franklin was appointed to present this address, as agent
for the province of Pennsylvania, and departed from America in June,
1757. In conformity to the instructions which he had received from
the legislature, he held a conference with the proprietaries who
then resided in England, and endeavoured to prevail upon them to
give up the long contested point. Finding that they would harken to
no terms of accommodation, he laid his petition before the Council.
During this time governor Denny assented to a law imposing a tax,
in which no discrimination was made in favour of the estates of the
Penn family. They, alarmed at this intelligence, and Franklin's
exertions, used their utmost endeavours to prevent the royal sanction
being given to this law, which they represented as highly iniquitous,
designed to throw the burden of supporting government upon them, and
calculated to produce the most ruinous consequences to them and their
posterity. The cause was amply discussed before the privy Council.
The Penns found here some strenuous advocates; nor were there wanting
some who warmly espoused the side of the people. After some time
spent in debate, a proposal was made, that Franklin should solemnly
engage, that the assessment of the tax should be so made, as that the
proprietary estates should pay no more than a due proportion. This
he agreed to perform; the Penn family withdrew their opposition, and
tranquillity was thus once more restored to the province.

The mode in which this dispute was terminated is a striking proof
of the high opinion entertained of Franklin's integrity and honour,
even by those who considered him as inimical to their views. Nor
was their confidence ill-founded. The assessment was made upon the
strictest principles of equity; and the proprietary estates bore only
a proportionable share of the expences of supporting government.

After the completion of this important business, Franklin remained
at the court of Great Britain, as agent for the province of
Pennsylvania. The extensive knowledge which he possessed of the
situation of the colonies, and the regard which he always manifested
for their interests, occasioned his appointment to the same office by
the colonies of Massachussets, Maryland, and Georgia. His conduct,
in this situation, was such as rendered him still more dear to his
countrymen.

He had now an opportunity of indulging in the society of those
friends, whom his merits had procured him while at a distance. The
regard which they had entertained for him was rather increased by
a personal acquaintance. The opposition which had been made to his
discoveries in philosophy gradually ceased, and the rewards of
literary merit were abundantly conferred upon him. The Royal Society
of London, which had at first refused his performances admission into
its transactions, now thought it an honour to rank him amongst its
fellows. Other societies of Europe were equally ambitious of calling
him a member. The university of St. Andrew's, in Scotland, conferred
upon him the degree of Doctor of Laws. Its example was followed by
the universities of Edinburgh and Oxford. His correspondence was
sought for by the most eminent philosophers of Europe. His letters
to these abound with true science, delivered in the most simple
unadorned manner.

The province of Canada was at this time in the possession of the
French, who had originally settled it. The trade with the Indians,
for which its situation was very convenient, was exceedingly
lucrative. The French traders here found a market for their
commodities, and received in return large quantities of rich
furs, which they disposed of at a high price in Europe. Whilst
the possession of this country was highly advantageous to France,
it was a grievous inconvenience to the inhabitants of the British
colonies. The Indians were almost generally desirous to cultivate the
friendship of the French, by whom they were abundantly supplied with
arms and ammunition. Whenever a war happened, the Indians were ready
to fall upon the frontiers: and this they frequently did, even when
Great Britain and France were at peace. From these considerations, it
appeared to be the interest of Great Britain to gain the possession
of Canada. But the importance of such an acquisition was not well
understood in England. Franklin about this time published his
Canada pamphlet, in which he, in a forcible manner, pointed out the
advantages which would result from the conquest of this province.

An expedition against it was planned, and the command given to
General Wolfe. His success is well known. At the treaty in 1762,
France ceded Canada to Great Britain, and by her cession of
Louisiana, at the same time, relinquished all her possessions on the
continent of America.

Although Dr. Franklin was now principally occupied with political
pursuits, he found time for philosophical studies. He extended
his researches in electricity, and made a variety of experiments,
particularly on the tourmalin. The singular properties which this
stone possesses of being electrified on one side positively and on
the other negatively, by heat alone, without friction, had been but
lately observed.

Some experiments on the cold produced by evaporation, made by Dr.
Cullen, had been communicated to Dr. Franklin, by Professor Simpson,
of Glasgow. These he repeated, and found, that, by the evaporation
of æther in the exhausted receiver of an air-pump, so great a degree
of cold was produced in a summer's day, that water was converted
into ice. This discovery he applied to the solution of a number of
phenomena, particularly a singular fact, which philosophers had
endeavoured in vain to account for, viz. that the temperature of the
human body, when in health, never exceeds 96 degrees of Fahrenheit's
thermometer, though the atmosphere which surrounds it may be heated
to a much greater degree. This he attributed to the increased
perspiration, and consequent evaporation, produced by the heat.

In a letter to Mr. Small, of London, dated in May, 1760, Dr. Franklin
makes a number of observations, tending to show that, in North
America, north-east storms begin in the south-west parts. It appears,
from actual observations, that a north-east storm, which extended a
considerable distance, commenced at Philadelphia near four hours
before it was felt at Boston. He endeavoured to account for this,
by supposing that, from heat, some rarefaction takes place about
the gulph of Mexico, that the air further north rushes in, and is
succeeded by the cooler and denser air still farther north, and that
thus a continual current is at length produced.

The tone produced by rubbing the brim of a drinking-glass with a wet
finger, had been generally known. A Mr. Puckeridge, an Irishman,
by placing on a table a number of glasses of different sizes, and
tuning them by partly filling them with water, endeavoured to form an
instrument capable of playing tunes. He was prevented by an untimely
end, from bringing his invention to any degree of perfection. After
his death some improvements were made upon his plan. The sweetness of
the tones induced Dr. Franklin to make a variety of experiments; and
he at length formed that elegant instrument which he has called the
_Armonica_.

In the summer of 1762, he returned to America. On his passage he
observed the singular effect produced by the agitation of a vessel,
containing oil, floating on water. The surface of the oil remains
smooth and undisturbed, whilst the water is agitated with the utmost
commotion. No satisfactory explanation of this appearance has, we
believe, ever been given.

Dr. Franklin received the thanks of the assembly of Pennsylvania,
"as well for the faithful discharge of his duty to that province in
particular, as for the many and important services done to America in
general, during his residence in Great Britain." A compensation of
5000_l._, Pennsylvania currency, was also decreed him for his services
during six years.

During his absence he had been annually elected member of the
assembly. On his return to Pennsylvania he again took his seat in
this body, and continued a steady defender of the liberties of the
people.

In December 1762, a circumstance which caused great alarm in the
province took place. A number of Indians had resided in the county of
Lancaster, and conducted themselves uniformly as friends to the white
inhabitants. Repeated depredations on the frontiers had exasperated
the inhabitants to such a degree, that they determined on revenge
upon every Indian. A number of persons, to the number of about 120,
principally inhabitants of Donegal and Peckstang or Paxton township,
in the county of York, assembled; and, mounted on horseback,
proceeded to the settlement of these harmless and defenceless
Indians, whose number had now been reduced to about twenty. The
Indians had received intelligence of the attack which was intended
against them, but disbelieved it. Considering the white people as
their friends, they apprehended no danger from them. When the party
arrived at the Indian settlement, they found only some women and
children, and a few old men, the rest being absent at work. They
murdered all whom they found, and amongst others the chief Shaheas,
who had been always distinguished for his friendship to the whites.
This bloody deed excited much indignation in the well-disposed part
of the community.

The remainder of these unfortunate Indians, who by absence, had
escaped the massacre, were conducted to Lancaster, and lodged in
the gaol as a place of security. The governor issued a proclamation
expressing the strongest disapprobation of the action, offering
a reward for the discovery of the perpetrators of the deed, and
prohibiting all injuries to the peaceable Indians in future. But,
notwithstanding this, a party of the same men shortly after marched
to Lancaster, broke open the gaol, and inhumanly butchered the
innocent Indians, who had been placed there for security. Another
proclamation was issued, but it had no effect. A detachment marched
down to Philadelphia, for the express purpose of murdering some
friendly Indians, who had been removed to the city for safety. A
number of the citizens armed in their defence. The quakers, whose
principles are opposed to fighting, even in their own defence, were
most active upon this occasion. The rioters came to Germantown. The
governor fled for safety to the house of Dr. Franklin, who, with
some others, advanced to meet the Paxton boys, as they were called,
and had influence enough to prevail upon them to relinquish their
undertaking, and return to their homes.

The disputes between the proprietaries and the assembly, which, for
a time, had subsided, were again revived. The proprietaries were
dissatisfied with the concessions made in favour of the people, and
made great struggles to recover the privilege of exempting their
estates from taxation, which they had been induced to give up.

In 1763, the assembly passed a militia-bill, to which the governor
refused to give his assent, unless the assembly would agree to
certain amendments which he proposed. These consisted in increasing
the fines, and in some cases, substituting death for fines. He wished
too, that the officers should be appointed altogether by himself,
and not be nominated by the people, as the bill had proposed. These
amendments the assembly considered as inconsistent with the spirit of
liberty. They would not adopt them--the governor was obstinate, and
the bill was lost.

These, and various other circumstances, encreased the uneasiness
which subsisted between the proprietaries and the assembly, to such
a degree, that, in 1764, a petition to the king was agreed to by
the house, praying an alteration from a _proprietary_ to a _regal_
government. Great opposition was made to this measure, not only in
the house, but in the public prints. A speech of Mr. Dickenson on
the subject was published, with a preface by Dr. Smith, in which
great pains were taken to show the impropriety and impolicy of this
proceeding. A speech of Mr. Galloway, in reply to Mr. Dickenson,
was published, accompanied with a preface by Dr. Franklin, in
which he ably opposed the principles laid down in the preface to
Mr. Dickenson's speech. This application to the throne produced no
effect. The proprietary government was still continued.

At the election of a new assembly, in the fall of 1764, the friends
of the proprietaries made great exertions to exclude those of the
adverse party; and they obtained a small majority in the city of
Philadelphia. Franklin now lost his seat in the house, which he had
held for fourteen years. On the meeting of the assembly, it appeared
there was still a decided majority of Franklin's friends. He was
immediately appointed provincial agent, to the great chagrin of his
enemies, who made a solemn protest against his appointment, which was
refused admission upon the minutes, as being unprecedented. It was,
however, published in the papers, and produced a spirited reply from
him, just before his departure for England.

The disturbances produced in America by Mr. Grenville's stamp-act,
and the opposition made to it, are well known. Under the marquis
of Rockingham's administration, it appeared expedient to endeavour
to calm the minds of the colonists; and the repeal of the odious
tax was contemplated. Amongst other means of collecting information
on the disposition of the people to submit to it, Dr. Franklin was
called to the bar of the house of commons. The examination which
he underwent was published, and contains a striking account of the
extent and accuracy of his information, and the facility with which
he communicated his sentiments. He represented facts in so strong a
point of view, that the inexpediency of the act must have appeared
clear to every unprejudiced mind. The act, after some opposition, was
repealed, about a year after it was enacted, and before it had ever
been carried into execution.

In the year 1766, he made a visit to Holland and Germany, and
received the greatest marks of attention from men of science. In
his passage through Holland he learned from the watermen the effect
which a diminution of the quantity of water in canals has, in
impeding the progress of boats. Upon his return to England, he was
led to make a number of experiments, all of which tended to confirm
the observation. These, with an explanation of the phenomenon, he
communicated in a letter to his friend, Sir John Pringle, which will
be found among his philosophical pieces.

In the following year he travelled into France, where he met a no
less favorable reception than he had experienced in Germany. He was
introduced to a number of literary characters, and to the king, Louis
XV.

Several letters written by Hutchinson, Oliver, and others, to persons
in eminent stations in Great Britain, came into the hands of Dr.
Franklin. These contained the most violent invectives against the
leading characters of the state of Massachussets, and strenuously
advised the prosecution of vigorous measures, to compel the people
to obedience to the measures of the ministry. These he transmitted
to the legislature, by whom they were published. Attested copies of
them were sent to Great Britain, with an address, praying the king
to discharge from office persons who had rendered themselves so
obnoxious to the people, and who had shown themselves so unfriendly
to their interests. The publication of these letters produced a
duel between Mr. Whately and Mr. Temple, each of whom was suspected
of having been instrumental in procuring them. To prevent any
farther disputes on this subject, Dr. Franklin, in one of the public
papers, declared that he had sent them to America, but would give no
information concerning the manner in which he had obtained them--nor
was this ever discovered.

Shortly after, the petition of the Massachussets assembly was taken
up for examination, before the privy council. Dr. Franklin attended,
as agent for the assembly; and here a torrent of the most violent
and unwarranted abuse was poured upon him by the solicitor-general,
Wedderburne, who was engaged as council for Oliver and Hutchinson.
The petition was declared to be scandalous and vexatious, and the
prayer of it refused.

Although the parliament of Great Britain had repealed the stamp-act,
it was only upon the principle of expediency. They still insisted
upon their right to tax the colonies; and, at the same time that
the stamp-act was repealed, an act was passed, declaring the
right of parliament to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever.
This language was used even by the most strenuous opposers of the
stamp-act: and, amongst others, by Mr. Pitt. This right was never
recognized by the colonists; but, as they flattered themselves that
it would not be exercised, they were not very active in remonstrating
against it. Had this pretended right been suffered to remain
dormant, the colonists would cheerfully have furnished their quota
of supplies, in the mode to which they had been accustomed; that
is, by acts of their own assemblies, in consequence of requisitions
from the secretary of state. If this practice had been pursued, such
was the disposition of the colonies towards their mother-country,
that, notwithstanding the disadvantages under which they laboured,
from restraints upon their trade, calculated solely for the benefit
of the commercial and manufacturing interests of Great Britain,
a separation of the two countries might have been a far distant
event. The Americans, from their earliest infancy, were taught to
venerate a people from whom they were descended; whose language,
laws, and manners, were the same as their own. They looked up to them
as models of perfection; and, in their prejudiced minds, the most
enlightened nations of Europe were considered as almost barbarians,
in comparison with Englishmen. The name of an Englishman conveyed to
an American the idea of every thing good and great. Such sentiments
instilled into them in early life, what but a repetition of unjust
treatment could have induced them to entertain the most distant
thought of separation! The duties on glass, paper, leather, painters'
colours, tea, &c. the disfranchisement of some of the colonies;
the obstruction to the measures of the legislature in others, by
the king's governors; the contemptuous treatment of their humble
remonstrances, stating their grievances, and praying a redress of
them, and other violent and oppressive measures, at length excited an
ardent spirit of opposition. Instead of endeavouring to allay this
by a more lenient conduct, the ministry seemed resolutely bent upon
reducing the colonies to the most slavish obedience to their decrees.
But this only tended to aggravate. Vain were all the efforts made
use of to prevail upon them to lay aside their designs, to convince
them of the impossibility of carrying them into effect, and of the
mischievous consequences which must ensue from a continuance of the
attempts. They persevered, with a degree of inflexibility scarcely
paralleled.

The advantages which Great Britain derived from her colonies were
so great, that nothing but a degree of infatuation, little short of
madness, could have produced a continuance of measures calculated to
keep up a spirit of uneasiness, which might occasion the slightest
wish for a separation. When we consider the great improvements in the
science of government, the general diffusion of the principles of
liberty amongst the people of Europe, the effects which these have
already produced in France, and the probable consequences which will
result from them elsewhere, all of which are the offspring of the
American revolution, it cannot but appear strange, that events of so
great moment to the happiness of mankind, should have been ultimately
occasioned by the wickedness or ignorance of a British ministry.

Dr. Franklin left nothing untried to prevail upon the ministry to
consent to a change of measures. In private conversations, and in
letters to persons in government, he continually expatiated upon
the impolicy and injustice of their conduct towards America; and
stated, that, notwithstanding the attachment of the colonists to
the mother-country, a repetition of ill treatment must ultimately
alienate their affections. They listened not to his advice. They
blindly persevered in their own schemes, and left to the colonists
no alternative, but opposition, or unconditional submission. The
latter accorded not with the principles of freedom, which they had
been taught to revere. To the former they were compelled, though
reluctantly, to have recourse.

Dr. Franklin, finding all efforts to restore harmony between Great
Britain and her colonies useless, returned to America in the year
1775; just after the commencement of hostilities. The day after his
return he was elected by the legislature of Pennsylvania a delegate
to congress. Not long after his election a committee was appointed,
consisting of Mr. Lynch, Mr. Harrison, and himself, to visit the camp
at Cambridge, and, in conjunction with the commander in chief, to
endeavour to convince the troops, whose term of enlistment was about
to expire, of the necessity of their continuing in the field, and
persevering in the cause of their country.

In the fall of the same year he visited Canada, to endeavour to unite
them in the common cause of liberty; but they could not be prevailed
upon to oppose the measures of the British government. M. Le Roy,
in a letter annexed to Abbé Fauchet's eulogium of Dr. Franklin,
states, that the ill success of this negociation was occasioned, in a
great degree, by religious animosities, which subsisted between the
Canadians and their neighbours, some of whom had at different times
burnt their chapels.

When Lord Howe came to America, in 1776, vested with power to treat
with the colonists, a correspondence took place between him and
Dr. Franklin, on the subject of a reconciliation. Dr. Franklin was
afterwards appointed, together with John Adams, and Edward Rutledge,
to wait upon the commissioners, in order to learn the extent of their
powers. These were found to be only to grant pardons upon submission.
Such terms which could not be accepted; and the object of the
commissioners was not obtained.

The momentous question of independence was shortly after brought
into view, at a time when the fleets and armies, which were sent to
enforce obedience, were truly formidable. With an army, numerous
indeed, but ignorant of discipline, and entirely unskilled in
the art of war, without money, without a fleet, without allies,
and with nothing but the love of liberty to support them, the
colonists determined to separate from a country, from which they had
experienced a repetition of injury and insult. In this question, Dr.
Franklin was decidedly in favour of the measure proposed, and had
great influence in bringing others to his sentiments.

The public mind had been prepared for this event, by Mr. Paine's
celebrated pamphlet, _Common Sense_. There is good reason to
believe that Dr. Franklin had no inconsiderable share, at least, in
furnishing materials for this work.

In the convention which assembled at Philadelphia in 1776, for
the purpose of establishing a new form of government for the
state of Pennsylvania, Dr. Franklin was chosen president. The
late constitution of this state, which was the result of their
deliberations, may be considered as a digest of his principles of
government. The single legislature, and the plural executive, seem to
have been his favourite tenets.

In the latter end of 1776, Dr. Franklin was appointed to assist in
the negociation which had been set on foot by Silas Deane at the
court of France. A conviction of the advantages of a commercial
intercourse with America, and a desire of weakening the British
empire by dismembering it, first induced the French court to listen
to proposals of an alliance. But they shewed rather a reluctance
to the measure, which, by Dr. Franklin's address, and particularly
by the success of the American arms against general Burgoyne, was
at length overcome; and in February, 1778, a treaty of alliance,
offensive and defensive, was concluded; in consequence of which
France became involved in the war with Great Britain.

Perhaps no person could have been found more capable of rendering
essential services to the United States at the court of France, than
Dr. Franklin. He was well known as a philosopher, and his character
was held in the highest estimation. He was received with the greatest
marks of respect by all the literary characters; and this respect was
extended amongst all classes of men. His personal influence was hence
very considerable. To the effects of this were added those of various
performances which he published, tending to establish the credit and
character of the United States. To his exertions in this way, may, in
no small degree, be ascribed the success of the loans negociated in
Holland and France, which greatly contributed to bring the war to a
conclusion.

The repeated ill success of their arms, and more particularly the
capture of Cornwallis and his army, at length convinced the British
nation of the impossibility of reducing the Americans to subjection.
The trading interest particularly became clamorous for peace. The
ministry were unable longer to oppose their wishes. Provisional
articles of peace were agreed to, and signed at Paris on the 30th of
November, 1782, by Dr. Franklin, Mr. Adams, Mr. Jay, and Mr. Laurens,
on the part of the United States; and by Mr. Oswald on the part of
Great Britain. These formed the basis of the definitive treaty, which
was concluded the 3d of September, 1783, and signed by Dr. Franklin,
Mr. Adams, and Mr. Jay, on the one part, and by Mr. David Hartly on
the other.

On the third of April, 1783, a treaty of amity and commerce, between
the United States and Sweden, was concluded at Paris, by Dr. Franklin
and the Count Von Krutz.

A similar treaty with Prussia was concluded in 1785, not long before
Dr. Franklin's departure from Europe.

Dr. Franklin did not suffer his political pursuits to engross his
whole attention. Some of his performances made their appearance in
Paris. The object of these was generally the promotion of industry
and economy.

In the year 1784, when animal magnetism made great noise in the
world, particularly at Paris, it was thought a matter of such
importance, that the king appointed commissioners to examine into
the foundation of this pretended science. Dr. Franklin was one of
the number. After a fair and diligent examination, in the course of
which Mesmer repeated a number of experiments, in the presence of
the commissioners, some of which were tried upon themselves, they
determined that it was a mere trick, intended to impose upon the
ignorant and credulous--Mesmer was thus interrupted in his career to
wealth and fame, and a most insolent attempt to impose upon the human
understanding baffled.

The important ends of Dr. Franklin's mission being completed by the
establishment of American independence, and the infirmities of age
and disease coming upon him, he became desirous of returning to
his native country. Upon application to congress to be recalled,
Mr. Jefferson was appointed to succeed him in 1785. Some time in
September of the same year Dr. Franklin arrived in Philadelphia. He
was shortly after chosen member of the supreme executive council for
the city; and soon after was elected president of the same.

When a convention was called to meet in Philadelphia, in 1787, for
the purpose of giving more energy to the government of the union, by
revising and amending the articles of confederation, Dr. Franklin was
appointed a delegate from the State of Pennsylvania. He signed the
constitution which they proposed for the union, and gave it the most
unequivocal marks of his approbation.

A society for political enquiries, of which Dr. Franklin was
president, was established about this period. The meetings were
held at his house. Two or three essays read in this society were
published. It did not long continue.

In the year 1787, two societies were established in Philadelphia,
founded on the principles of the most liberal and refined
humanity--_The Philadelphia Society for alleviating the miseries
of public prisons; and the Pennsylvania Society for promoting the
abolition of slavery, the relief of free negroes unlawfully held in
bondage, and the improvement of the condition of the African race._
Of each of these Dr. Franklin was president. The labours of these
bodies have been crowned with great success; and they continue to
prosecute, with unwearied diligence, the laudable designs for which
they were established.

Dr. Franklin's increasing infirmities prevented his regular
attendance at the council-chamber; and, in 1788, he retired wholly
from public life.

His constitution had been a remarkably good one. He had been little
subject to disease, except an attack of the gout occasionally, until
about the year 1781, when he was first attacked with symptoms of the
calculous complaint, which continued during his life. During the
intervals of pain from this grievous disease, he spent many cheerful
hours, conversing in the most agreeable and instructive manner. His
faculties were entirely unimpaired, even to the hour of his death.

His name, as president of the abolition society, was signed to the
memorial presented to the house of representatives of the United
States, on the 12th of February, 1789, praying them to exert the full
extent of power vested in them by the constitution, in discouraging
the traffic of the human species. This was his last public act. In
the debates to which this memorial gave rise, several attempts were
made to justify the trade. In the Federal Gazette of March 25th,
there appeared an essay, signed Historicus, written by Dr. Franklin,
in which he communicated a speech, said to have been delivered in
the Divan of Algiers, in 1687, in opposition to the prayer of the
petition of a sect called _Erika_, or purists, for the abolition of
piracy and slavery. This pretended African speech was an excellent
parody of one delivered by Mr. Jackson, of Georgia. All the arguments
urged in favour of negro slavery, are applied with equal force to
justify the plundering and enslaving of Europeans. It affords, at
the same time, a demonstration of the futility of the arguments in
defence of the slave trade, and of the strength of mind and ingenuity
of the author, at his advanced period of life. It furnished too, a no
less convincing proof of his power of imitating the style of other
times and nations, than his celebrated parable against persecution.
And as the latter led many persons to search the scriptures with a
view to find, it, so the former caused many persons to search the
book-stores and libraries, for the work from which it was said to be
extracted.

In the beginning of April following, he was attacked with a fever
and complaint of his breast, which terminated his existence. The
following account of his last illness was written by his friend and
physician, Dr. Jones.

"The stone, with which he had been afflicted for several years, had
for the last twelve months confined him chiefly to his bed; and
during the extremely painful paroxysms, he was obliged to take large
doses of laudanum to mitigate his tortures--still, in the intervals
of pain, he not only amused himself with reading and conversing
cheerfully with his family, and a few friends who visited him, but
was often employed in doing business of a public as well as private
nature, with various persons who waited on him for that purpose; and
in every instance displayed, not only that readiness and disposition
of doing good, which was the distinguishing characteristic of his
life, but the fullest and clearest possession of his uncommon mental
abilities; and not unfrequently indulged himself in those _jeux
d'esprit_ and entertaining anecdotes, which were the delight of all
who heard him.

"About sixteen days before his death, he was seized with a feverish
indisposition, without any particular symptoms attending it, till
the third or fourth day, when he complained of a pain in the left
breast, which increased till it became extremely acute, attended
with a cough and laborious breathing. During this state, when the
severity of his pains sometimes drew forth a groan of complaint,
he would observe--that he was afraid he did not hear it as he
ought--acknowledged his grateful sense of the many blessings he had
received from the Supreme Being, who had raised him from small and
low beginnings to such high rank and consideration among men--and
made no doubt but his present afflictions were kindly intended to
wean him from a world, in which he was no longer fit to act the part
assigned him. In this frame of body and mind he continued till five
days before his death, when his pain and difficulty of breathing
entirely left him, and his family were flattering themselves with
the hopes of his recovery, when an imposthumation, which had formed
itself in his lungs, suddenly burst and discharged a great quantity
of matter, which he continued to throw up while he had sufficient
strength to do it, but, as that failed, the organs of respiration
became gradually oppressed--a calm lethargic state succeeded--and, on
the 17th of April, 1790, about eleven o'clock at night, he quietly
expired, closing a long and useful life of eighty-four years and
three months."

It may not be amiss to add to the above account, that Dr. Franklin,
in the year 1735, had a severe pleurisy, which terminated in an
abscess of the left lobe of his lungs, and he was then almost
suffocated with the quantity and suddenness of the discharge. A
second attack of a similar nature happened some years after this,
from which he soon recovered, and did not appear to suffer any
inconvenience in his respiration from these diseases.

The following epitaph on himself, was written by him many years
previous to his death:--


  THE BODY

  OF

  _BENJAMIN FRANKLIN_,

  PRINTER.

  (LIKE THE COVER OF AN OLD BOOK,

  ITS CONTENTS TORN OUT,

  AND STRIPT OF ITS LETTERING AND GILDING)

  LIES HERE FOOD FOR WORMS;

  YET THE WORK ITSELF SHALL NOT BE LOST,

  FOR IT WILL (AS HE BELIEVED) APPEAR ONCE MORE

  IN A NEW

  AND MORE BEAUTIFUL EDITION

  CORRECTED AND AMENDED

  BY

  THE AUTHOR.[14]




_EXTRACTS_

FROM THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF

DR. FRANKLIN.

With regard to my books, those I had in France, and those I left in
Philadelphia, being now assembled together here, and a catalogue made
of them, it is my intention to dispose of the same as follows:

My "History of the Academy of Sciences," in sixty or seventy volumes
quarto, I give to the philosophical society of Philadelphia, of which
I have the honour to be president. My collection in folio of "_Les
Arts et les Metiers_," I give to the American philosophical society,
established in New England, of which I am a member. My quarto edition
of the same, "_Arts et Metiers_," I give to the library company
of Philadelphia. Such and so many of my books as I shall mark, in
the said catalogue, with the name of my grandson Benjamin Franklin
Bache, I do hereby give to him: and such and so many of my books,
as I shall mark in the said catalogue with the name of my grandson
William Bache, I do hereby give to him: and such as shall be marked
with the name of Jonathan Williams, I hereby give to my cousin of
that name. The residue and remainder of all my books, manuscripts,
and papers, I do give to my grandson William Temple Franklin. My
share in the library company of Philadelphia I give to my grandson
Benjamin Franklin Bache, confiding that he will permit his brothers
and sisters to share in the use of it.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in
literature to the free grammar-schools established there. I therefore
give one hundred pounds sterling to my executors, to be by them,
the survivors or survivor of them, paid over to the managers or
directors of the free-schools in my native town of Boston, to be by
them, or the person or persons who shall have the superintendance
and management of the said schools, put out to interest, and so
continued at interest for ever; which interest annually shall be
laid out in silver medals, and given as honorary rewards annually
by the directors of the said free-schools, for the encouragement of
scholarship in the said schools, belonging to the said town, in such
manner as to the discretion of the select men of the said town shall
seem meet.

Out of the salary that may remain due to me, as president of the
state, I give the sum of two thousand pounds to my executors, to be
by them, the survivors or survivor of them, paid over to such person
or persons as the legislature of this state, by an act of assembly,
shall appoint to receive the same, in trust, to be employed for
making the Schuylkil navigable.

During the number of years I was in business as a stationer, printer,
and post-master, a great many small sums became due to me for books,
advertisements, postage of letters, and other matters, which were not
collected, when, in 1757, I was sent by the assembly to England as
their agent--and, by subsequent appointments, continued there till
1775--when, on my return, I was immediately engaged in the affairs of
congress, and sent to France in 1776, where I remained nine years,
not returning till 1785; and the said debts not being demanded in
such a length of time, are become in a manner obsolete, yet are
nevertheless justly due.--These as they are stated in my great
folio ledger, E, I bequeath to the contributors of the Pennsylvania
hospital; hoping that those debtors, and the descendants of such as
are deceased, who now, as I find, make some difficulty of satisfying
such antiquated demands as just debts, may, however, be induced to
pay or give them as charity to that excellent institution. I am
sensible that much must inevitably be lost; but I hope something
considerable may be recovered. It is possible too, that some of the
parties charged may have existing old unsettled accounts against me:
in which case the managers of the said hospital will allow and deduct
the amount, or pay the balance, if they find it against me.

I request my friends, Henry Hill, Esq. John Jay, Esq. Francis
Hopkinson, Esq. and Mr. Edward Duffield, of Bonfield, in Philadelphia
county, to be the executors of this my last will and testament, and I
hereby nominate and appoint them for that purpose.

I would have my body buried with as little expence or ceremony as may
be.

  PHILADELPHIA,

  July 17, 1778.


CODICIL.

I BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, in the foregoing or annexed last will and
testament, having further considered the same, do think proper to
make and publish the following codicil, in addition thereto.

It having long been a fixed and political opinion of mine, that in a
democratical state, there ought to be no offices of profit, for the
reasons I had given in an article of my drawing in our constitution,
it was my intention, when I accepted the office of president, to
devote the appointed salary to some public use; accordingly I had
already, before I made my last will in July last, given large sums of
it to colleges, schools, building of churches, &c.; and in that will
I bequeathed two thousand pounds more to the state, for the purpose
of making the Schuylkil navigable; but understanding since, that such
a sum will do but little, towards accomplishing such a work, and that
project is not likely to be undertaken for many years to come--and
having entertained another idea, which I hope may be more extensively
useful, I do hereby revoke and annul the bequest, and direct that
the certificates I have of what remains due to me of that salary, be
sold towards raising the sum of two thousand pounds sterling, to be
disposed of as I am now about to order.

It has been an opinion, that he who receives an estate from his
ancestors, is under some obligation to transmit the same to
posterity. This obligation lies not on me, who never inherited a
shilling from any ancestor or relation. I shall, however, if it is
not diminished by some accident before my death, leave a considerable
estate among my descendants and relations. The above observation is
made merely as some apology to my family, for my making bequests that
do not appear to have any immediate relation to their advantage.

I was born in Boston, New England, and owe my first instructions in
literature to the free grammar schools established there. I have,
therefore, considered those schools in my will.

But I am also under obligations to the state of Massachussets, for
having, unasked, appointed me formerly their agent, with a handsome
salary, which continued some years; and although I accidentally lost
in their service, by transmitting governor Hutchinson's letters, much
more than the amount of what they gave me, I do not think that ought
in the least to diminish my gratitude. I have considered that, among
artisans, good apprentices are most likely to make good citizens, and
having myself been bred to a manual art, printing, in my native town,
and afterwards assisted to set up my business in Philadelphia by kind
loans of money from two friends there, which was the foundation of
my fortune, and of all the utility in life that may be ascribed to
me--I wish to be useful even after my death, if possible, in forming
and advancing other young men, that may be serviceable to their
country in both these towns.

To this end I devote two thousand pounds sterling, which I give,
one thousand thereof to the inhabitants of the town of Boston, in
Massachussets, and the other thousand to the inhabitants of the
city of Philadelphia, in trust, to and for the uses, intents, and
purposes, herein after mentioned and declared.

The said sum of one thousand pounds sterling, if accepted by the
inhabitants of the town of Boston, shall be managed under the
direction of the select men, united with the ministers of the oldest
episcopalian, congregational, and presbyterian churches in that town,
who are to let out the same at five per cent. per annum, to such
young married artificers, under the age of twenty-five years, as have
served an apprenticeship in the said town, and faithfully fulfilled
the duties required in their indentures, so as to obtain a good moral
character from at least two respectable citizens, who are willing to
become sureties in a bond, with the applicants, for the re-payment of
the money so lent, with interest, according to the terms hereinafter
prescribed; all which bonds are to be taken for Spanish milled
dollars, or the value thereof in current gold coin: and the manager
shall keep a bound book, or books, wherein shall be entered the
names of those who shall apply for, and receive the benefit of this
institution, and of their sureties, together with the sums lent,
the dates, and other necessary and proper records, respecting the
business and concerns of this institution: and as these loans are
intended to assist young married artificers, in setting up their
business, they are to be proportioned by the discretion of the
managers, so as not to exceed sixty pounds sterling to one person,
nor to be less than fifteen pounds.

And if the number of appliers so entitled should be so large as that
the sum will not suffice to afford to each as much as might otherwise
not be improper, the proportion to each shall be diminished, so as
to afford to every one some assistance. These aids may, therefore,
be small at first, but as the capital increases by the accumulated
interest, they will be more ample. And in order to serve as many as
possible in their turn, as well as to make the re-payment of the
principal borrowed more easy, each borrower shall be obliged to pay
with the yearly interest, one tenth part of the principal; which sums
of principal and interest so paid in, shall be again let out to fresh
borrowers. And it is presumed, that there will be always found in
Boston virtuous and benevolent citizens, willing to bestow a part of
their time in doing good to the rising generation, by superintending
and managing this institution gratis; it is hoped that no part of the
money will at any time lie dead, or be diverted to other purposes,
but be continually augmenting by the interest, in which case, there
may in time be more than the occasion in Boston may require; and
then some may be spared to the neighbouring or other towns, in the
said state of Massachusetts, which may desire to have it, such towns
engaging to pay punctually the interest, and the proportion of the
principal annually to the inhabitants of the town of Boston. If
this plan is executed, and succeeds, as projected, for one hundred
years, the sum will then be one hundred and thirty thousand pounds,
of which I would have the managers of the donation to the town of
Boston then lay out, at their discretion, one hundred thousand pounds
in public works, which may be judged of most general utility to the
inhabitants; such as fortifications, bridges, aqueducts, public
buildings, baths, pavements, or whatever may make living in the
town more convenient to its people, and render it more agreeable to
strangers resorting thither for health, or a temporary residence. The
remaining thirty-one thousand pounds I would have continued to be let
out to interest, in the manner above directed, for one hundred years;
as I hope it will have been found that the institution has had a good
effect on the conduct of youth, and been of service to many worthy
characters and useful citizens. At the end of this second term, if
no unfortunate accident has prevented the operation, the sum will
be four millions and sixty-one thousand pounds sterling, of which I
leave one million and sixty-one thousand pounds to the disposition
and management of the inhabitants of the town of Boston, and the
three millions to the disposition of the government of the state--not
presuming to carry my views farther.

All the directions herein given respecting the disposition and
management of the donation to the inhabitants of Boston, I would
have observed respecting that to the inhabitants of Philadelphia;
only, as Philadelphia is incorporated, I request the corporation
of that city to undertake the management, agreeable to the said
directions: and I do hereby vest them with full and ample powers
for that purpose. And having considered that the covering its
ground-plat with buildings and pavements, which carry off most of
the rain, and prevent its soaking into the earth, and renewing and
purifying the springs, whence the water of the wells must gradually
grow worse, and in time be unfit for use, as I find has happened in
all old cities; I recommend, that, at the end of the first hundred
years, if not done before, the corporation of the city employ a part
of the hundred thousand pounds in bringing by pipes the water of
Wissahickon-creek into the town, so as to supply the inhabitants,
which I apprehend may be done without great difficulty, the level
of that creek being much above that of the city, and may be made
higher by a dam. I also recommend making the Schuylkil completely
navigable. At the end of the second hundred years, I would have
the disposition of the four millions and sixty-one thousand pounds
divided between the inhabitants of the city of Philadelphia and the
government of Pennsylvania, in the same manner as herein directed
with respect to that of the inhabitants of Boston and the government
of Massachusetts. It is my desire that this institution should
take place, and begin to operate within one year after my decease,
for which purpose due notice should be publicly given, previous
to the expiration of that year, that those for whose benefit this
establishment is intended may make their respective applications:
and I hereby direct my executors, the survivor or survivors of them,
within six months after my decease, to pay over the said sum of two
thousand pounds sterling to such persons as shall be duly appointed
by the select men of Boston, and the corporation of Philadelphia,
to receive and take charge of their respective sums of one thousand
pounds each, for the purposes aforesaid. Considering the accidents
to which all human affairs and projects are subject in such a
length of time, I have, perhaps, too much flattered myself with a
vain fancy, that these dispositions, if carried into execution, will
be continued without interruption, and have the effects proposed:
I hope, however, that if the inhabitants of the two cities should
not think fit to undertake the execution, they will at least accept
the offer of these donations, as a mark of my good will, token of
my gratitude, and testimony of my desire to be useful to them even
after my departure. I wish, indeed, that they may both undertake to
endeavour the execution of my project, because I think, that, though
unforeseen difficulties may arise, expedients will be found to remove
them, and the scheme be found practicable. If one of them accepts the
money with the conditions, and the other refuses, my will then is,
that both sums be given to the inhabitants of the city accepting;
the whole to be applied to the same purposes, and under the same
regulations directed for the separate parts; and, if both refuse, the
money remains of course in the mass of my estate, and it is to be
disposed of therewith, according to my will made the seventeenth day
of July, 1788.

My fine crab-tree walking-stick, with a gold head curiously wrought
in the form of the cap of Liberty, I give to my friend, and the
friend of mankind, General Washington. If it was a sceptre, he has
merited it, and would become it.

FOOTNOTE:

[14] This epitaph first appeared in a Boston news-paper established
and printed by Dr. Franklin. E.




  LETTERS AND PAPERS

  ON

  _ELECTRICITY_.




_It may not be improper to present the reader with the following
extract from the preface to the first edition of Dr. Franklin's
papers on electricity, which, as we have stated in the advertisement,
formed a pamphlet only._

_"The following observations and experiments were not drawn up with a
view to their being made public, but were communicated at different
times, and most of them in letters, written on various topics, as
matters only of private amusement._

_"But some persons, to whom they were read, and who had themselves
been conversant in electrical disquisitions, were of opinion, they
contained so many curious and interesting particulars relative
to this affair, that it would be doing a kind of injustice to
the public, to confine them solely to the limits of a private
acquaintance._

_"The editor was therefore prevailed upon to commit such extracts of
letters and other detached pieces as were in his hands to the press,
without waiting for the ingenious author's permission so to do; and
this was done with the less hesitation, as it was apprehended the
author's engagements in other affairs would scarce afford him leisure
to give the public his reflections and experiments on the subject,
finished with that care and precision, of which the treatise before
us shows he is alike studious and capable."_

_With respect to the general merit and originality of the experiments
and hypothesis of Dr. Franklin, as described and explained in these
letters, the following is the testimony of one of the first natural
philosophers of his age--the late Dr. Priestly, in his History of
Electricity._

_"Nothing was ever written upon the subject of electricity which was
more generally read and admired in all parts of Europe than these
letters. There is hardly any European language into which they have
not been translated; and, as if this were not sufficient to make
them properly known, a translation of them has lately been made into
Latin. It is not easy to say, whether we are most pleased with the
simplicity and perspicuity with which these letters are written, the
modesty with which the author proposes every hypothesis of his own,
or the noble frankness with which he relates his mistakes, when they
were corrected by subsequent experiments._

_"Though the English have not been backward in acknowledging the
great merit of this philosopher, he has had the singular good fortune
to be, perhaps, even more celebrated abroad than at home; so that,
to form a just idea of the great and deserved reputation of Dr.
Franklin, we must read the foreign publications on the subject of
electricity; in many of which the terms_ Franklinism, Franklinist,
_and the_ Franklinian system, _occur in almost every page. In
consequence of this, Dr. Franklin's principles bid fair to be handed
down to posterity as equally expressive of the true principles of
electricity, as the Newtonian philosophy is of the true system of
nature in general."_




_LETTERS AND PAPERS_

ON

PHILOSOPHICAL SUBJECTS.


_ELECTRICITY._




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  INTRODUCTORY LETTER.


  _Philadelphia, March 28, 1747._

  SIR,

Your kind present of an electric tube, with directions for using it,
has put several of us[15] on making electrical experiments, in which
we have observed some particular phenomena that we look upon to be
new. I shall therefore communicate them to you in my next, though
possibly they may not be new to you, as among the numbers daily
employed in those experiments on your side the water, it is probable
some one or other has hit on the same observations. For my own part,
I never was before engaged in any study that so totally engrossed my
attention and my time as this has lately done; for what with making
experiments when I can be alone, and repeating them to my friends and
acquaintance, who, from the novelty of the thing, come continually
in crowds to see them, I have, during some months past, had little
leisure for any thing else.


  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[15] i. e. of the _Library-Company_, an institution of the author's,
founded 1730. To which company the present was made[16].

[16] Where notes occur without a signature, in the Philosophical, or
other Papers, they are generally notes of the author.--EDITOR.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Wonderful Effect of Points.--Positive and negative
  Electricity.--Electrical Kiss.--Counterfeit Spider.--Simple and
  commodious electrical Machine._


  _Philadelphia, July 11, 1747._

  SIR,

In my last I informed you that, in pursuing our electrical enquiries,
we had observed some particular phenomena, which we looked upon to
be new, and of which I promised to give you some account, though I
apprehended they might not possibly be new to you, as so many hands
are daily employed in electrical experiments on your side the water,
some or other of which would probably hit on the same observations.

The first is the wonderful effect of pointed bodies, both in _drawing
off_ and _throwing off_ the electrical fire. For example,

Place an iron shot of three or four inches diameter on the mouth of
a clean dry glass bottle. By a fine silken thread from the cieling,
right over the mouth of the bottle, suspend a small cork-ball, about
the bigness of a marble; the thread of such a length, as that the
cork-ball may rest against the side of the shot. Electrify the shot,
and the ball will be repelled to the distance of four or five inches,
more or less, according to the quantity of electricity.--When in this
state, if you present to the shot the point of a long, slender, sharp
bodkin, at six or eight inches distance, the repellency is instantly
destroyed, and the cork flies to the shot. A blunt body must be
brought within an inch, and draw a spark to produce the same effect.
To prove that the electrical fire is _drawn off_ by the point, if
you take the blade of the bodkin out of the wooden handle, and fix
it in a stick of sealing-wax, and then present it at the distance
aforesaid, or if you bring it very near, no such effect follows; but
sliding one finger along the wax till you touch the blade, and the
ball flies to the shot immediately.--If you present the point in the
dark, you will see, sometimes at a foot distance and more, a light
gather upon it, like that of a fire-fly, or glow-worm; the less sharp
the point, the nearer you must bring it to observe the light; and at
whatever distance you see the light, you may draw off the electrical
fire, and destroy the repellency.--If a cork-ball so suspended be
repelled by the tube, and a point be presented quick to it, though
at a considerable distance, it is surprising to see how suddenly it
flies back to the tube. Points of wood will do near as well as those
of iron, provided the wood is not dry; for perfectly dry wood will no
more conduct electricity than sealing-wax.

To shew that points will _throw off_[17] as well as _draw off_ the
electrical fire; lay a long sharp needle upon the shot, and you
cannot electrise the shot so as to make it repel the cork-ball.--Or
fix a needle to the end of a suspended gun-barrel, or iron-rod, so as
to point beyond it like a little bayonet[18]; and while it remains
there, the gun-barrel, or rod, cannot by applying the tube to the
other end be electrised so as to give a spark, the fire continually
running out silently at the point. In the dark you may see it make
the same appearance as it does in the case before-mentioned.

The repellency between the cork-ball and the shot is likewise
destroyed. 1. By sifting fine sand on it; this does it gradually.
2. By breathing on it. 3. By making a smoke about it from burning
wood[19]. 4. By candle-light, even though the candle is at a foot
distance: these do it suddenly.--The light of a bright coal from
a wood fire; and the light of a red-hot iron do it likewise; but
not at so great a distance. Smoke from dry rosin dropt on hot iron,
does not destroy the repellency; but is attracted by both shot and
cork-ball, forming proportionable atmospheres round them, making them
look beautifully, somewhat like some of the figures in Burnet's or
Whiston's Theory of the Earth.

_N.B._ This experiment should be made in a closet, where the air is
very still, or it will be apt to fail.

The light of the sun thrown strongly on both cork and shot by
a looking-glass for a long time together, does not impair the
repellency in the least. This difference between fire-light and
sun-light is another thing that seems new and extraordinary to us[20].

We had for some time been of opinion, that the electrical fire was
not created by friction, but collected, being really an element
diffused among, and attracted by other matter, particularly by water
and metals. We had even discovered and demonstrated its afflux to
the electrical sphere, as well as its efflux, by means of little
light windmill-wheels made of stiff paper vanes, fixed obliquely, and
turning freely on fine wire axes.

Also by little wheels of the same matter, but formed like
water-wheels. Of the disposition and application of which wheels,
and the various phenomena resulting, I could, if I had time, fill
you a sheet[21]. The impossibility of electrising one's self (though
standing on wax) by rubbing the tube, and drawing the fire from it;
and the manner of doing it, by passing the tube near a person or
thing standing on the floor, &c. had also occurred to us some months
before Mr. Watson's ingenious _Sequel_ came to hand, and these were
some of the new things I intended to have communicated to you.--But
now I need only mention some particulars not hinted in that piece,
with our reasonings thereupon: though perhaps the latter might well
enough be spared.

1. A person standing on wax, and rubbing the tube, and another person
on wax drawing the fire, they will both of them (provided they do
not stand so as to touch one another) appear to be electrised, to a
person standing on the floor; that is, he will perceive a spark on
approaching each of them with his knuckle.

2. But if the persons on wax touch one another during the exciting of
the tube, neither of them will appear to be electrised.

3. If they touch one another after exciting the tube, and drawing the
fire as aforesaid, there will be a stronger spark between them than
was between either of them and the person on the floor.

4. After such strong spark, neither of them discover any electricity.

These appearances we attempt to account for thus: We suppose, as
aforesaid, that electrical fire is a common element, of which every
one of the three persons abovementioned has his equal share, before
any operation is begun with the tube. _A_, who stands on wax and
rubs the tube, collects the electrical fire from himself into the
glass; and his communication with the common stock being cut off
by the wax, his body is not again immediately supplied. _B_,(who
stands on wax likewise) passing his knuckle along near the tube,
receives the fire which was collected by the glass from _A_; and
his communication with the common stock being likewise cut off, he
retains the additional quantity received.--To _C_, standing on the
floor, both appear to be electrised: for he having only the middle
quantity of electrical fire, receives a spark upon approaching _B_,
who has an over quantity; but gives one to _A_, who has an under
quantity. If _A_ and _B_ approach to touch each other, the spark is
stronger, because the difference between them is greater: After such
touch there is no spark between either of them and _C_, because the
electrical fire in all is reduced to the original equality. If they
touch while electrising, the equality is never destroyed, the fire
only circulating. Hence have arisen some new terms among us; we say
_B_, (and bodies like circumstanced) is electrised _positively_; _A_,
_negatively_. Or rather, _B_ is electrised _plus_; _A_, _minus_. And
we daily in our experiments electrise bodies _plus_ or _minus_, as
we think proper.--To electrise _plus_ or _minus_, no more needs to
be known than this, that the parts of the tube or sphere that are
rubbed, do, in the instant of the friction, attract the electrical
fire, and therefore take it from the thing rubbing: the same parts
immediately, as the friction upon them ceases, are disposed to give
the fire they have received, to any body that has less. Thus you may
circulate it, as Mr. Watson has shewn; you may also accumulate or
subtract it, upon, or from any body, as you connect that body with
the rubber or with the receiver, the communication with the common
stock being cut off. We think that ingenious gentleman was deceived
when he imagined (in his _Sequel_) that the electrical fire came down
the wire from the cieling to the gun-barrel, thence to the sphere,
and so electrised the machine and the man turning the wheel, &c. We
suppose it was _driven off_, and not brought on through that wire;
and that the machine and man, &c. were electrised _minus_; _i. e._
had less electrical fire in them than things in common.

As the vessel is just upon sailing, I cannot give you so large an
account of American electricity as I intended: I shall only mention
a few particulars more.--We find granulated lead better to fill the
phial with, than water, being easily warmed, and keeping warm and
dry in damp air.--We fire spirits with the wire of the phial.--We
light candles, just blown out, by drawing a spark among the smoke
between the wire and snuffers.--We represent lightning, by passing
the wire in the dark, over a china plate that has gilt flowers, or
applying it to gilt frames of looking-glasses, &c.--We electrise a
person twenty or more times running, with a touch of the finger on
the wire, thus: He stands on wax. Give him the electrised bottle in
his hand. Touch the wire with your finger, and then touch his hand
or face; there are sparks every time[22].--We encrease the force of
the electrical kiss vastly, thus: Let _A_ and _B_ stand on wax; or
_A_ on wax, and _B_ on the floor; give one of them the electrised
phial in hand; let the other take hold of the wire; there will be
a small spark; but when their lips approach, they will be struck
and shock'd. The same if another gentleman and lady, _C_ and _D_,
standing also on wax, and joining hands with _A_ and _B_, salute or
shake hands. We suspend by fine silk thread a counterfeit spider,
made of a small piece of burnt cork, with legs of linnen thread, and
a grain or two of lead stuck in him, to give him more weight. Upon
the table, over which he hangs, we stick a wire upright, as high as
the phial and wire, four or five inches from the spider: then we
animate him, by setting the electrified phial at the same distance
on the other side of him; he will immediately fly to the wire of
the phial, bend his legs in touching it, then spring off, and fly
to the wire in the table, thence again to the wire of the phial,
playing with his legs against both, in a very entertaining manner,
appearing perfectly alive to persons unacquainted. He will continue
this motion an hour or more in dry weather.--We electrify, upon wax
in the dark, a book that has a double line of gold round upon the
covers, and then apply a knuckle to the gilding; the fire appears
every where upon the gold like a flash of lightning: not upon the
leather, nor, if you touch the leather instead of the gold. We rub
our tubes with buckskin, and observe always to keep the same side to
the tube, and never to sully the tube by handling; thus they work
readily and easily, without the least fatigue, especially if kept in
tight pasteboard cases, lined with flannel, and sitting close to the
tube[23]. This I mention, because the European papers on electricity
frequently speak of rubbing the tube as a fatiguing exercise. Our
spheres are fixed on iron axes, which pass through them. At one end
of the axis there is a small handle, with which you turn the sphere
like a common grind-stone. This we find very commodious, as the
machine takes up but little room, is portable, and may be enclosed in
a tight box, when not in use. It is true, the sphere does not turn
so swift as when the great wheel is used: but swiftness we think
of little importance, since a few turns will charge the phial, &c.
sufficiently[24].

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[17] This power of points to _throw off_ the electrical fire, was
first communicated to me by my ingenious friend Mr. Thomas Hopkinson,
since deceased, whose virtue and integrity, in every station of life,
public and private, will ever make his memory dear to those who knew
him, and knew how to value him.

[18] This was Mr. Hopkinson's experiment, made with an expectation
of drawing a more sharp and powerful spark from the point, as from a
kind of focus, and he was surprised to find little or none.

[19] We suppose every particle of sand, moisture, or smoke, being
first attracted and then repelled, carries off with it a portion
of the electrical fire; but that the same still subsists in those
particles, till they communicate it to something else, and that it is
never really destroyed. So when water is thrown on common fire, we do
not imagine the element is thereby destroyed or annihilated, but only
dispersed, each particle of water carrying off in vapour its portion
of the fire, which it had attracted and attached to itself.

[20] This different effect probably did not arise from any difference
in the light, but rather from the particles separated from the
candle, being first attracted and then repelled, carrying off the
electric matter with them; and from the rarefying the air, between
the glowing coal or red-hot iron, and the electrised shot, through
which rarefied air the electric fluid could more readily pass.

[21] These experiments with the wheels, were made and communicated
to me by my worthy and ingenious friend Mr. Philip Syng; but we
afterwards discovered that the motion of those wheels was not owing
to any afflux or efflux of the electric fluid, but to various
circumstances of attraction and repulsion. 1750.

[22] By taking a spark from the wire, the electricity within the
bottle is diminished; the outside of the bottle then draws some from
the person holding it, and leaves him in the negative state. Then
when his hand or face is touched, an equal quantity is restored to
him from the person touching.

[23] Our tubes are made here of green glass, 27 or 30 inches long, as
big as can be grasped.

[24] This simple easily-made machine was a contrivance of Mr. Syng's.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Observations on the Leyden Bottle, with Experiments proving the
  different electrical State of its different Surfaces._


  _Philadelphia, Sept. 1, 1747._

  SIR,

The necessary trouble of copying long letters, which, perhaps, when
they come to your hands, may contain nothing new, or worth your
reading, (so quick is the progress made with you in electricity) half
discourages me from writing any more on that subject. Yet I cannot
forbear adding a few observations on M. Muschenbroek's wonderful
bottle.

1. The non-electric contained in the bottle differs, when electrised,
from a non-electric electrised out of the bottle, in this: that the
electrical fire of the latter is accumulated _on its surface_, and
forms an electrical atmosphere round it of considerable extent; but
the electrical fire is crowded _into the substance_ of the former,
the glass confining it[25].

2. At the same time that the wire and the top of the bottle, &c.
is electrised _positively_ or _plus_, the bottom of the bottle is
electrised _negatively_ or _minus_, in exact proportion: _i. e._
whatever quantity of electrical fire is thrown in at the top, an
equal quantity goes out of the bottom[26]. To understand this,
suppose the common quantity of electricity in each part of the
bottle, before the operation begins, is equal to 20; and at every
stroke of the tube, suppose a quantity equal to 1 is thrown in; then,
after the first stroke, the quantity contained in the wire and upper
part of the bottle will be 21, in the bottom 19. After the second,
the upper part will have 22, the lower 18, and so on, till, after 20
strokes, the upper part will have a quantity of electrical fire equal
to 40, the lower part none: and then the operation ends: for no more
can be thrown into the upper part, when no more can be driven out of
the lower part. If you attempt to throw more in, it is spewed back
through the wire, or flies out in loud cracks through the sides of
the bottle.

3. The equilibrium cannot be restored in the bottle by _inward_
communication or contact of the parts; but it must be done by a
communication formed _without_ the bottle, between the top and
bottom, by some non-electric, touching or approaching both at the
same time; in which case it is restored with a violence and quickness
inexpressible; or, touching each alternately, in which case the
equilibrium is restored by degrees.

4. As no more electrical fire can be thrown into the top of the
bottle, when all is driven out of the bottom, so in a bottle not
yet electrised, none can be thrown into the top, when none _can_
get out at the bottom; which happens either when the bottom is too
thick, or when the bottle is placed on an electric _per se_. Again,
when the bottle is electrised, but little of the electrical fire can
be _drawn out_ from the top, by touching the wire, unless an equal
quantity can at the same time _get in_ at the bottom[27]. Thus, place
an electrised bottle on clean glass or dry wax, and you will not,
by touching the wire, get out the fire from the top. Place it on a
non-electric, and touch the wire, you will get it out in a short
time; but soonest when you form a direct communication as above.

So wonderfully are these two states of electricity, the _plus_ and
_minus_, combined and balanced in this miraculous bottle! situated
and related to each other in a manner that I can by no means
comprehend! If it were possible that a bottle should in one part
contain a quantity of air strongly comprest, and in another part a
perfect vacuum, we know the equilibrium would be instantly restored
_within_. But here we have a bottle containing at the same time
a _plenum_ of electrical fire, and a _vacuum_ of the same fire;
and yet the equilibrium cannot be restored between them but by a
communication _without!_ though the _plenum_ presses violently to
expand, and the hungry vacuum seems to attract as violently in order
to be filled.

5. The shock to the nerves (or convulsion rather) is occasioned by
the sudden passing of the fire through the body in its way from the
top to the bottom of the bottle. The fire takes the shortest[28]
course, as Mr. Watson justly observes: But it does not appear from
experiment that in order for a person to be shocked, a communication
with the floor is necessary: for he that holds the bottle with one
hand, and touches the wire with the other, will be shocked as much,
though his shoes be dry, or even standing on wax, as otherwise. And
on the touch of the wire, (or of the gun-barrel, which is the same
thing) the fire does not proceed from the touching finger to the
wire, as is supposed, but from the wire to the finger, and passes
through the body to the other hand, and so into the bottom of the
bottle.


_Experiments confirming the above._


EXPERIMENT I.

Place an electrised phial on wax; a small cork-ball suspended by a
dry silk thread held in your hand, and brought near to the wire,
will first be attracted, and then repelled: when in this state of
repellency, sink your hand, that the ball may be brought towards
the bottom of the bottle; it will be there instantly and strongly
attracted, till it has parted with its fire.

If the bottle had a _positive_ electrical atmosphere, as well as the
wire, an electrified cork would be repelled from one as well as from
the other.

[Illustration: (of the experiments below)

  _Plate I._        _Vol. I. page 182._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]


EXPERIMENT II.

FIG. 1. From a bent wire (_a_) sticking in the table, let a small
linen thread (_b_) hang down within half an inch of the electrised
phial (_c_). Touch the wire or the phial repeatedly with your finger,
and at every touch you will see the thread instantly attracted by
the bottle. (This is best done by a vinegar cruet, or some such
bellied-bottle). As soon as you draw any fire out from the upper
part, by touching the wire, the lower part of the bottle draws an
equal quantity in by the thread.


EXPERIMENT III.

FIG. 2. Fix a wire in the lead, with which the bottom of the bottle
is armed (_d_) so as that bending upwards, its ring-end may be level
with the top or ring-end of the wire in the cork (_e_) and at three
or four inches distance. Then electrise the bottle, and place it on
wax. If a cork suspended by a silk thread (_f_) hang between these
two wires, it will play incessantly from one to the other, till the
bottle is no longer electrised; that is, it fetches and carries fire
from the top to the bottom[29] of the bottle, till the equilibrium is
restored.


EXPERIMENT IV.

FIG. 3. Place an electrised phial on wax; take a wire (_g_) in
form of a _C_, the ends at such a distance when bent, as that the
upper may touch the wire of the bottle, when the lower touches the
bottom: stick the outer part on a stick of sealing-wax (_h_), which
will serve as a handle; then apply the lower end to the bottom of
the bottle, and gradually bring the upper end near the wire in the
cork. The consequence is, spark follows spark till the equilibrium
is restored. Touch the top first, and on approaching the bottom,
with the other end, you have a constant stream of fire from the wire
entering the bottle. Touch the top and bottom together, and the
equilibrium will instantly be restored, the crooked wire forming the
communication.


EXPERIMENT V.

FIG. 4. Let a ring of thin lead, or paper, surround a bottle (_i_)
even at some distance from or above the bottom. From that ring let a
wire proceed up, till it touch the wire of the cork (_k_). A bottle
so fixt cannot by any means be electrised: the equilibrium is never
destroyed: for while the communication between the upper and lower
parts of the bottle is continued by the outside wire, the fire only
circulates: what is driven out at bottom, is constantly supplied
from the top[30]. Hence a bottle cannot be electrised that is foul
or moist on the outside, if such moisture continue up to the cork or
wire.


EXPERIMENT VI.

Place a man on a cake of wax, and present him the wire of the
electrified phial to touch, you standing on the floor, and holding
it in your hand. As often as he touches it, he will be electrified
_plus_; and any one standing on the floor may draw a spark from him.
The fire in this experiment passes out of the wire into him; and at
the same time out of your hand into the bottom of the bottle.


EXPERIMENT VII.

Give him the electrical phial to hold; and do you touch the wire; as
often as you touch it he will be electrified _minus_, and may draw a
spark from any one standing on the floor. The fire now passes from
the wire to you, and from him into the bottom of the bottle.


EXPERIMENT VIII.

Lay two books on two glasses, back towards back, two or three inches
distant. Set the electrified phial on one, and then touch the wire;
that book will be electrified _minus_; the electrical fire being
drawn out of it by the bottom of the bottle. Take off the bottle, and
holding it in your hand, touch the other with the wire; that book
will be electrified _plus_; the fire passing into it from the wire,
and the bottle at the same time supplied from your hand. A suspended
small cork-ball will play between these books till the equilibrium is
restored.


EXPERIMENT IX.

When a body is electrised _plus_, it will repel a positively
electrified feather or small cork-ball. When _minus_ (or when in the
common state) it will attract them, but stronger when _minus_ than
when in the common state, the difference being greater.


EXPERIMENT X.

Though, as in _Experiment_ VI, a man standing on wax may be
electrised a number of times by repeatedly touching the wire of an
electrised bottle (held in the hand of one standing on the floor)
he receiving the fire from the wire each time: yet holding it in his
own hand, and touching the wire, though he draws a strong spark, and
is violently shocked, no electricity remains in him; the fire only
passing through him, from the upper to the lower part of the bottle.
Observe, before the shock, to let some one on the floor touch him to
restore the equilibrium in his body; for in taking hold of the bottom
of the bottle, he sometimes becomes a little electrised _minus_,
which will continue after the shock, as would also any _plus_
electricity, which he might have given him before the shock. For
restoring the equilibrium in the bottle, does not at all affect the
electricity in the man through whom the fire passes; that electricity
is neither increased nor diminished.


EXPERIMENT XI.

The passing of the electrical fire from the upper to the lower
part[31] of the bottle, to restore the equilibrium, is rendered
strongly visible by the following pretty experiment. Take a book
whose covering is filletted with gold; bend a wire of eight or ten
inches long, in the form of (_m_) Fig. 5; slip it on the end of
the cover of the book, over the gold line, so as that the shoulder
of it may press upon one end of the gold line, the ring up, but
leaning towards the other end of the book. Lay the book on a glass
or wax[32], and on the other end of the gold lines set the bottle
electrised; then bend the springing wire, by pressing it with a
stick of wax till its ring approaches the ring of the bottle wire,
instantly there is a strong spark and stroke, and the whole line
of gold, which completes the communication, between the top and
bottom of the bottle, will appear a vivid flame, like the sharpest
lightning. The closer the contact between the shoulder of the wire,
and the gold at one end of the line, and between the bottom of the
bottle and the gold at the other end, the better the experiment
succeeds. The room should be darkened. If you would have the whole
filletting round the cover appear in fire at once, let the bottle and
wire touch the gold in the diagonally opposite corners.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[25] See this opinion rectified in § 16 and 17 of the next letter.
The fire in the bottle was found by subsequent experiments not to be
contained in the non-electric, but _in the glass_. 1748.

[26] What is said here, and after, of the _top_ and _bottom_ of the
bottle, is true of the _inside_ and _outside_ surfaces, and should
have been so expressed.

[27] See the preceding note, relating to _top_ and _bottom_.

[28] Other circumstances being equal.

[29] _i. e._ from the inside to the outside.

[30] See the preceding note, relating to _top_ and _bottom_.

[31] _i. e._ From the _inside_ to the _outside_.

[32] Placing the book on glass or wax is not necessary to produce the
appearance; it is only to show that the visible electricity is not
brought up from the common stock in the earth.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Farther Experiments confirming the preceding Observations.--Leyden
  Bottle analysed.--Electrical Battery.--Magical Picture.--Electrical
  Wheel or Jack.--Electrical Feast._


  _Philadelphia, 1748._

  SIR,

§ 1. There will be the same explosion and shock if the electrified
phial is held in one hand by the hook, and the coating touched with
the other, as when held by the coating, and touched at the hook.

2. To take the charged phial safely by the hook, and not at the same
time diminish its force, it must first be set down on an electric
_per se_.

3. The phial will be electrified as strongly, if held by the hook,
and the coating applied to the globe or tube; as when held by the
coating, and the hook applied[33].

4. But the _direction_ of the electrical fire being different in the
charging, will also be different in the explosion. The bottle charged
through the hook, will be discharged through the hook; the bottle
charged through the coating, will be discharged through the coating,
and not otherways; for the fire must come out the same way it went in.

5. To prove this, take two bottles that were equally charged through
the hooks, one in each hand: bring their hooks near each other, and
no spark or shock will follow; because each hook is disposed to
give fire, and neither to receive it. Set one of the bottles down
on glass, take it up by the hook, and apply its coating to the hook
of the other; then there will be an explosion and shock, and both
bottles will be discharged.

6. Vary the experiment, by charging two phials equally, one through
the hook, the other through the coating: hold that by the coating
which was charged through the hook; and that by the hook which was
charged through the coating: apply the hook of the first to the
coating of the other, and there will be no shock or spark. Set that
down on glass which you held by the hook, take it up by the coating,
and bring the two hooks together: a spark and shock will follow, and
both phials be discharged.

In this experiment the bottles are totally discharged, or the
equilibrium within them restored. The _abounding_ of fire in one of
the hooks (or rather in the internal surface of one bottle) being
exactly equal to the _wanting_ of the other: and therefore, as each
bottle has in itself the _abounding_ as well as the _wanting_,
the wanting and abounding must be equal in each bottle. See § 8,
9, 10, 11. But if a man holds in his hands two bottles, one fully
electrified, the other not at all, and brings their hooks together,
he has but half a shock, and the bottles will both remain half
electrified, the one being half discharged, and the other half
charged.

7. Place two phials equally charged on a table at five or six inches
distance. Let a cork-ball, suspended by a silk thread, hang between
them. If the phials were both charged through their hooks, the
cork, when it has been attracted and repelled by the one, will not
be attracted, but equally repelled by the other. But if the phials
were charged, the one through the hook, and the other[34] through
the coating, the ball, when it is repelled from one hook, will be as
strongly attracted by the other, and play vigorously between them,
fetching the electric fluid from the one, and delivering it to the
other, till both phials are nearly discharged.

8. When we use the terms of _charging_ and _discharging_ the phial,
it is in compliance with custom, and for want of others more
suitable. Since we are of opinion that there is really no more
electrical fire in the phial after what is called its _charging_,
than before, nor less after its _discharging_; excepting only the
small spark that might be given to, and taken from the non-electric
matter, if separated from the bottle, which spark may not be equal to
a five hundredth part of what is called the explosion.

For if, on the explosion, the electrical fire came out of the bottle
by one part, and did not enter in again by another, then, if a man,
standing on wax, and holding the bottle in one hand, takes the spark
by touching the wire hook with the other, the bottle being thereby
_discharged_, the man would be _charged_; or whatever fire was lost
by one, would be found in the other, since there was no way for its
escape: but the contrary is true.

9. Besides, the phial will not suffer what is called a _charging_,
unless as much fire can go out of it one way, as is thrown in by
another. A phial cannot be charged standing on wax or glass, or
hanging on the prime conductor, unless a communication be formed
between its coating and the floor.

10. But suspend two or more phials on the prime conductor, one
hanging on the tail of the other; and a wire from the last to the
floor, an equal number of turns of the wheel shall charge them all
equally, and every one as much as one alone would have been. What is
driven out at the tail of the first, serving to charge the second;
what is driven out of the second charging the third; and so on. By
this means a great number of bottles might be charged with the same
labour, and equally high, with one alone; were it not that every
bottle receives new fire, and loses its old with some reluctance, or
rather gives some small resistance to the charging, which in a number
of bottles becomes more equal to the charging power, and so repels
the fire back again on the globe, sooner in proportion than a single
bottle would do.

11. When a bottle is charged in the common way, its _inside_ and
_outside_ surfaces stand ready, the one to give fire by the hook,
the other to receive it by the coating; the one is full, and ready
to throw out, the other empty and extremely hungry; yet as the
first will not _give out_, unless the other can at the same instant
_receive in_; so neither will the latter receive in, unless the first
can at the same instant give out. When both can be done at once, it
is done with inconceivable quickness and violence.

12. So a straight spring (though the comparison does not agree in
every particular) when forcibly bent, must, to restore itself,
contract that side which in the bending was extended, and extend that
which was contracted; if either of these two operations be hindered,
the other cannot be done. But the spring is not said to be _charged_
with elasticity when bent, and discharged when unbent; its quantity
of elasticity is always the same.

13. Glass, in like manner, has, within its substance, always the
same quantity of electrical fire, and that a very great quantity in
proportion to the mass of glass, as shall be shewn hereafter.

14. This quantity, proportioned to the glass, it strongly and
obstinately retains, and will have neither more nor less, though it
will suffer a change to be made in its parts and situation; _i. e._
we may take away part of it from one of the sides, provided we throw
an equal quantity into the other.

15. Yet when the situation of the electrical fire is thus altered in
the glass; when some has been taken from one side, and some added to
the other, it will not be at rest or in its natural state, till it
is restored to its original equality. And this restitution cannot
be made through the substance of the glass, but must be done by a
non-electric communication formed without, from surface to surface.

16. Thus, the whole force of the bottle, and power of giving a
shock, is in the GLASS ITSELF; the non-electrics in contact with the
two surfaces, serving only to _give_ and _receive_ to and from the
several parts of the glass; that is, to give on one side, and take
away from the other.

17. This was discovered here in the following manner: Purposing to
analyse the electrified bottle, in order to find wherein its strength
lay, we placed it on glass, and drew out the cork and wire which
for that purpose had been loosely put in. Then taking the bottle
in one hand, and bringing a finger of the other near its mouth, a
strong spark came from the water, and the shock was as violent as
if the wire had remained in it, which shewed that the force did not
lie in the wire. Then to find if it resided in the water, being
crowded into and condensed in it, as confined by the glass, which
had been our former opinion, we electrified the bottle again, and
placing it on glass, drew out the wire and cork as before; then
taking up the bottle, we decanted all its water into an empty bottle,
which likewise stood on glass; and taking up that other bottle, we
expected, if the force resided in the water, to find a shock from
it; but there was none. We judged then that it must either be lost
in decanting, or remain in the first bottle. The latter we found to
be true; for that bottle on trial gave the shock, though filled up
as it stood with fresh unelectrified water from a tea-pot.--To find,
then, whether glass had this property merely as glass, or whether
the form contributed any thing to it; we took a pane of sash-glass,
and laying it on the hand, placed a plate of lead on its upper
surface; then electrified that plate, and bringing a finger to it,
there was a spark and shock. We then took two plates of lead of equal
dimensions, but less than the glass by two inches every way, and
electrified the glass between them, by electrifying the uppermost
lead; then separated the glass from the lead, in doing which, what
little fire might be in the lead was taken out, and the glass being
touched in the electrified parts with a finger, afforded only very
small pricking sparks, but a great number of them might be taken from
different places. Then dextrously placing it again between the leaden
plates, and compleating a circle between the two surfaces, a violent
shock ensued.--Which demonstrated the power to reside in glass as
glass, and that the non-electrics in contact served only, like the
armature of a loadstone, to unite the force of the several parts, and
bring them at once to any point desired: it being the property of a
non-electric, that the whole body instantly receives or gives what
electrical fire is given to or taken from any one of its parts.

18. Upon this we made what we called an _electrical-battery_,
consisting of eleven panes of large sash-glass, armed with thin
leaden plates, pasted on each side, placed vertically, and supported
at two inches distance on silk cords, with thick hooks of leaden
wire, one from each side, standing upright, distant from each other,
and convenient communications of wire and chain, from the giving
side of one pane, to the receiving side of the other; that so the
whole might be charged together, and with the same labour as one
single pane; and another contrivance to bring the giving sides,
after charging, in contact with one long wire, and the receivers
with another, which two long wires would give the force of all the
plates of glass at once through the body of any animal forming the
circle with them. The plates may also be discharged separately, or
any number together that is required. But this machine is not much
used, as not perfectly answering our intention with regard to the
ease of charging, for the reason given, _Sec. 10._ We made also of
large glass panes, magical pictures, and self-moving animated wheels,
presently to be described.

19. I perceive by the ingenious Mr. Watson's last book, lately
received, that Dr. Bevis had used, before we had, panes of glass to
give a shock[35]; though, till that book came to hand, I thought to
have communicated it to you as a novelty. The excuse for mentioning
it here is, that we tried the experiment differently, drew different
consequences from it (for Mr. Watson still seems to think the fire
_accumulated on the non-electric_ that is in contact with the glass,
p. 72) and, as far as we hitherto know, have carried it farther.

20. The magical picture[36] is made thus. Having a large metzotinto
with a frame and glass, suppose of the KING (God preserve him) take
out the print, and cut a pannel out of it near two inches distant
from the frame all round. If the cut is through the picture it is not
the worse. With thin paste, or gum-water, fix the border that is cut
off on the inside the glass, pressing it smooth and close; then fill
up the vacancy by gilding the glass well with leaf-gold, or brass.
Gild likewise the inner edge of the back of the frame all round,
except the top part, and form a communication between that gilding
and the gilding behind the glass: then put in the board, and that
side is finished. Turn up the glass, and gild the fore side exactly
over the back gilding, and when it is dry, cover it, by pasting on
the pannel of the picture that hath been cut out, observing to bring
the correspondent parts of the border and picture together, by which
the picture will appear of a piece, as at first, only part is behind
the glass, and part before. Hold the picture horizontally by the
top, and place a little moveable gilt crown on the king's head. If
now the picture be moderately electrified, and another person take
hold of the frame with one hand, so that his fingers touch its inside
gilding, and with the other hand endeavour to take off the crown, he
will receive a terrible blow, and fail in the attempt. If the picture
were highly charged, the consequence might perhaps be as fatal[37] as
that of high treason, for when the spark is taken through a quire of
paper laid on the picture by means of a wire communication, it makes
a fair hole through every sheet, that is, through forty-eight leaves,
though a quire of paper is thought good armour against the push of
a sword, or even against a pistol bullet, and the crack is exceeding
loud. The operator, who holds the picture by the upper end, where
the inside of the frame is not gilt, to prevent its falling, feels
nothing of the shock, and may touch the face of the picture without
danger, which he pretends is a test of his loyalty.--If a ring of
persons take the shock among them, the experiment is called, _The
Conspirators_.

21. On the principle, in _Sec. 7_, that hooks of bottles, differently
charged, will attract and repel differently, is made an electrical
wheel, that turns with considerable strength. A small upright shaft
of wood passes at right angles through a thin round board, of about
twelve inches diameter, and turns on a sharp point of iron, fixed
in the lower end, while a strong wire in the upper end, passing
through a small hole in a thin brass plate, keeps the shaft truly
vertical. About thirty _radii_ of equal length, made of sash-glass,
cut in narrow strips, issue horizontally from the circumference of
the board, the ends most distant from the centre, being about four
inches apart. On the end of every one, a brass thimble is fixed. If
now the wire of a bottle electrified in the common way, be brought
near the circumference of this wheel, it will attract the nearest
thimble, and so put the wheel in motion; that thimble, in passing
by, receives a spark and thereby being electrified is repelled, and
so driven forwards; while a second being attracted, approaches the
wire, receives a spark, and is driven after the first, and so on till
the wheel has gone once round, when the thimbles before electrified
approaching the wire, instead of being attracted as they were at
first, are repelled, and the motion presently ceases.--But if
another bottle, which had been charged through the coating, be placed
near the same wheel, its wire will attract the thimble repelled by
the first, and thereby double the force that carries the wheel round;
and not only taking out the fire that had been communicated to the
thimbles by the first bottle, but even robbing them of their natural
quantity, instead of being repelled when they come again towards the
first bottle, they are more strongly attracted, so that the wheel
mends its pace, till it goes with great rapidity twelve or fifteen
rounds in a minute, and with such strength, as that the weight of one
hundred Spanish dollars with which we once loaded it, did not seem in
the least to retard its motion.--This is called an electrical jack;
and if a large fowl were spitted on the upright shaft, it would be
carried round before a fire with a motion fit for roasting.

22. But this wheel, like those driven by wind, water, or weights,
moves by a foreign force, to wit, that of the bottles. The
self-moving wheel, though constructed on the same principles, appears
more surprising. It is made of a thin round plate of window-glass,
seventeen inches diameter, well gilt on both sides, all but two
inches next the edge. Two small hemispheres of wood are then fixed
with cement to the middle of the upper and under sides, centrally
opposite, and in each of them a thick strong wire eight or ten
inches long, which together make the axis of the wheel. It turns
horizontally on a point at the lower end of its axis, which rests on
a bit of brass cemented within a glass salt-cellar. The upper end
of its axis passes through a hole in a thin brass plate cemented to
a long strong piece of glass, which keeps it six or eight inches
distant from any non-electric, and has a small ball of wax or metal
on its top, to keep in the fire. In a circle on the table which
supports the wheel, are fixed twelve small pillars of glass, at
about four inches distance, with a thimble on the top of each. On
the edge of the wheel is a small leaden bullet, communicating by
a wire with the gilding of the _upper_ surface of the wheel; and
about six inches from it is another bullet, communicating in like
manner with the _under_ surface. When the wheel is to be charged
by the upper surface, a communication must be made from the under
surface to the table. When it is well charged it begins to move; the
bullet nearest to a pillar moves towards the thimble on that pillar,
and passing by electrifies it, and then pushes itself from it; the
succeeding bullet, which communicates with the other surface of the
glass, more strongly attracts that thimble, on account of its being
before electrified by the other bullet; and thus the wheel encreases
its motion till it comes to such a height as that the resistance of
the air regulates it. It will go half an hour, and make one minute
with another twenty turns in a minute, which is six hundred turns
in the whole; the bullet of the upper surface giving in each turn
twelve sparks to the thimbles, which makes seven thousand two hundred
sparks: and the bullet of the under surface receiving as many from
the thimbles; those bullets moving in the time near two thousand five
hundred feet.--The thimbles are well fixed, and in so exact a circle,
that the bullets may pass within a very small distance of each of
them.--If instead of two bullets you put eight, four communicating
with the upper surface, and four with the under surface, placed
alternately, which eight, at about six inches distance, completes the
circumference, the force and swiftness will be greatly increased, the
wheel making fifty turns in a minute; but then it will not continue
moving so long.--These wheels may be applied, perhaps, to the ringing
of chimes,[38] and moving of light-made orreries.

23. A small wire bent circularly, with a loop at each end; let one
end rest against the under surface of the wheel, and bring the other
end near the upper surface, it will give a terrible crack, and the
force will be discharged.

24. Every spark in that manner drawn from the surface of the wheel,
makes a round hole in the gilding, tearing off a part of it in coming
out; which shews that the fire is not accumulated on the gilding, but
is in the glass itself.

25. The gilding being varnished over with turpentine varnish, the
varnish, though dry and hard, is burnt by the spark drawn through
it, and gives a strong smell and visible smoke. And when the spark
is drawn thro' paper, all round the hole made by it, the paper will
be blacked by the smoke, which sometimes penetrates several of the
leaves. Part of the gilding torn off is also found forcibly driven
into the hole made in the paper by the stroke.

26. It is amazing to observe in how small a portion of glass a
great electrical force may lie. A thin glass bubble, about an inch
diameter, weighing only six grains, being half filled with water,
partly gilt on the outside, and furnished with a wire hook, gives,
when electrified, as great a shock as a man can well bear. As the
glass is thickest near the orifice, I suppose the lower half, which
being gilt was electrified and gave the shock, did not exceed two
grains; for it appeared, when broken, much thinner than the upper
half.--If one of these thin bottles be electrified by the coating,
and the spark taken out through the gilding, it will break the glass
inwards, at the same time that it breaks the gilding outwards.

27. And allowing (for the reasons before given, § 8, 9, 10,) that
there is no more electrical fire in a bottle after charging, than
before, how great must be the quantity in this small portion of
glass! It seems as if it were of its very substance and essence.
Perhaps if that due quantity of electrical fire so obstinately
retained by glass, could be separated from it, it would no longer
be glass; it might lose its transparency, or its brittleness, or
its elasticity.--Experiments may possibly be invented hereafter, to
discover this.

27. We were surprised at the account given in Mr. Watson's book, of a
shock communicated through a great space of dry ground, and suspect
there must be some metalline quality in the gravel of that ground;
having found that simple dry earth, rammed in a glass tube, open at
both ends, and a wire hook inserted in the earth at each end, the
earth and wires making part of a circuit, would not conduct the least
perceptible shock, and indeed when one wire was electrified the other
hardly shewed any signs of its being in connection with it[39]. Even
a thoroughly wet packthread sometimes fails of conducting a shock,
though it otherwise conducts electricity very well. A dry cake of
ice, or an icicle held between two in a circle, likewise prevents the
shock, which one would not expect, as water conducts it so perfectly
well.--Gilding on a new book, though at first it conducts the shock
extremely well, yet fails after ten or a dozen experiments, though it
appears otherwise in all respects the same, which we cannot account
for[40].

28. There is one experiment more which surprises us, and is not
hitherto satisfactorily accounted for; it is this: Place an iron
shot on a glass stand, and let a ball of damp cork, suspended by a
silk thread, hang in contact with the shot. Take a bottle in each
hand, one that is electrified through the hook, the other through
the coating: Apply the giving wire to the shot, which will electrify
it _positively_, and the cork shall be repelled: then apply the
requiring wire, which will take out the spark given by the other;
when the cork will return to the shot: Apply the same again, and take
out another spark, so will the shot be electrified _negatively_,
and the cork in that case shall be repelled equally as before. Then
apply the giving wire to the shot, and give the spark it wanted, so
will the cork return: Give it another, which will be an addition to
its natural quantity, so will the cork be repelled again: And so
may the experiment be repeated as long as there is any charge in
the bottles. Which shews that bodies, having less than the common
quantity of electricity, repel each other, as well as those that have
more.

Chagrined a little that we have been hitherto able to produce nothing
in this way of use to mankind; and the hot weather coming on, when
electrical experiments are not so agreeable, it is proposed to put
an end to them for this season, somewhat humorously, in a party of
pleasure, on the banks of _Skuylkil_[41]. Spirits, at the same time,
are to be fired by a spark sent from side to side through the river,
without any other conductor than the water; an experiment which we
some time since performed, to the amazement of many[42].

A turkey is to be killed for our dinner by the _electrical shock_,
and roasted by the _electrical jack_, before a fire kindled by
the _electrified bottle_: when the healths of all the famous
electricians in England, Holland, France, and Germany are to be drank
in _electrified bumpers_[43], under the discharge of guns from the
_electrical battery_.

FOOTNOTES:

[33] This was a discovery of the very ingenious Mr. Kinnersley, and
by him communicated to me.

[34] To charge a bottle commodiously through the coating, place it on
a glass stand; form a communication from the prime conductor to the
coating, and another from the hook to the wall or floor. When it is
charged, remove the latter communication before you take hold of the
bottle, otherwise great part of the fire will escape by it.

[35] I have since heard that Mr. Smeaton was the first who made use
of panes of glass for that purpose.

[36] Contrived by Mr. Kinnersley.

[37] We have since found it fatal to small animals, though not to
large ones. The biggest we have yet killed is a hen. 1750.

[38] This was afterwards done with success by Mr. Kinnersley.

[39] Probably the ground is never so dry.

[40] We afterwards found that it failed after one stroke with a large
bottle; and the continuity of the gold appearing broken, and many of
its parts dissipated, the electricity could not pass the remaining
parts without leaping from part to part through the air, which always
resists the motion of this fluid, and was probably the cause of the
gold's not conducting so well as before; the number of interruptions
in the line of gold, making, when added together, a space larger,
perhaps, than the striking distance.

[41] The river that washes one side of Philadelphia, as the Delaware
does the other; both are ornamented with the summer habitations of
the citizens, and the agreeable mansions of the principal people of
this colony.

[42] As the possibility of this experiment has not been easily
conceived, I shall here describe it.--Two iron rods, about three
feet long, were planted just within the margin of the river, on the
opposite sides. A thick piece of wire, with a small round knob at
its end, was fixed on the top of one of the rods, bending downwards,
so as to deliver commodiously the spark upon the surface of the
spirit. A small wire fastened by one end to the handle of the spoon,
containing the spirit, was carried a-cross the river, and supported
in the air by the rope commonly used to hold by, in drawing the
ferry-boats over. The other end of this wire was tied round the
coating of the bottle; which being charged, the spark was delivered
from the hook to the top of the rod standing in the water on that
side. At the same instant the rod on the other side delivered a spark
into the spoon, and fired the spirit; the electric fire returning to
the coating of the bottle, through the handle of the spoon and the
supported wire connected with them.

That the electric fire thus actually passes through the water, has
since been satisfactorily demonstrated to many by an experiment of
Mr. Kinnersley's, performed in a trough of water about ten feet long.
The hand being placed under water in the direction of the spark
(which always takes the strait or shortest course, if sufficient, and
other circumstances are equal) is struck and penetrated by it as it
passes.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Observations and Suppositions, towards forming a new Hypothesis,
  for explaining the several Phenomena of Thunder-Gusts._[44]


  SIR,


Non-electric bodies, that have electric fire thrown into them, will
retain it till other electrics, that have less, approach; and then it
is communicated by a snap, and becomes equally divided.

2. Electrical fire loves water, is strongly attracted by it, and they
can subsist together.

3. Air is an electric _per se_, and when dry will not conduct the
electrical fire; it will neither receive it, nor give it to other
bodies: otherwise no body surrounded by air, could be electrified
positively and negatively: for should it be attempted positively, the
air would immediately take away the overplus; or negatively, the air
would supply what was wanting.

4. Water being electrified, the vapours arising from it will be
equally electrified; and floating in the air, in the form of clouds,
or otherwise, will retain that quantity of electrical fire, till they
meet with other clouds or bodies not so much electrified, and then
will communicate as before-mentioned.

5. Every particle of matter electrified is repelled by every other
particle equally electrified. Thus the stream of a fountain,
naturally dense and continual, when electrified, will separate and
spread in the form of a brush, every drop endeavouring to recede from
every other drop. But on taking out the electrical fire they close
again.

6. Water being strongly electrified (as well as when heated by common
fire) rises in vapours more copiously; the attraction of cohesion
among its particles being greatly weakened, by the opposite power of
repulsion introduced with the electrical fire; and when any particle
is by any means disengaged, it is immediately repelled, and so flies
into the air.

7. Particles happening to be situated as _A_ and _B_, (FIG. VI.
_representing the profile of a vessel of water_) are more easily
disengaged than _C_ and _D_, as each is held by contact with three
only, whereas _C_ and _D_ are each in contact with nine. When the
surface of the water has the least motion, particles are continually
pushed into the situation represented by _A_ and _B_.

8. Friction between a non-electric and an electric _per se_ will
produce electrical fire; not by _creating_, but _collecting_ it:
for it is equally diffused in our walls, floors, earth, and the
whole mass of common matter. Thus the whirling glass globe, during
its friction against the cushion, draws fire from the cushion, the
cushion is supplied from the frame of the machine, that from the
floor on which it stands. Cut off the communication by thick glass or
wax, placed under the cushion, and no fire can be _produced_, because
it cannot be _collected_.

9. The ocean is a compound of water, a non-electric, and salt an
electric _per se_.

10. When there is a friction among the parts near its surface, the
electrical fire is collected from the parts below. It is then plainly
visible in the night; it appears in the stern and in the wake of
every sailing vessel; every dash of an oar shews it, and every surf
and spray: in storms the whole sea seems on fire.--The detached
particles of water then repelled from the electrified surface,
continually carry off the fire as it is collected; they rise and form
clouds, and those clouds are highly electrified, and retain the fire
till they have an opportunity of communicating it.

11. The particles of water, rising in vapours, attach themselves to
particles of air.

12. The particles of air are said to be hard, round, separate and
distant from each other; every particle strongly repelling every
other particle, whereby they recede from each other, as far as common
gravity will permit.

13. The space between any three particles, equally repelling each
other, will be an equilateral triangle.

14. In air compressed, these triangles are smaller; in rarified air
they are larger.

15. Common fire, joined with air, increases the repulsion, enlarges
the triangles, and thereby makes the air specifically lighter. Such
air, among denser air, will rise.

16. Common fire, as well as electrical fire, gives repulsion to the
particles of water, and destroys their attraction of cohesion; hence
common fire, as well as electrical fire, assists in raising vapours.

17. Particles of water, having no fire in them, mutually attract each
other. Three particles of water then, being attached to the three
particles of a triangle of air, would, by their mutual attraction
operating against the air's repulsion, shorten the sides and lessen
the triangle, whereby that portion of air made denser, would sink to
the earth with its water, and not rise to the formation of a cloud.

18. But if every particle of water attaching itself to air brings
with it a particle of common fire, the repulsion of the air being
assisted and strengthened by the fire, more than obstructed by the
mutual attraction of the particles of water, the triangle dilates,
and that portion of air, becoming rarer and specifically lighter,
rises.

19. If the particles of water bring electrical fire when they attach
themselves to air, the repulsion between the particles of water
electrified, joins with the natural repulsion of the air, to force
its particles to a greater distance, whereby the triangles are
dilated, and the air rises, carrying up with it the water.

20. If the particles of water bring with them portions of _both
sorts_ of fire, the repulsion of the particles of air is still more
strengthened and increased, and the triangles farther enlarged.

21. One particle of air may be surrounded by twelve particles of
water of equal size with itself, all in contact with it; and by more
added to those.

22. Particles of air, thus loaded, would be drawn nearer together by
the mutual attraction of the particles of water, did not the fire,
common or electrical, assist their repulsion.

23. If air, thus loaded, be compressed by adverse winds, or by being
driven against mountains, &c. or condensed by taking away the fire
that assisted it in expanding; the triangles contract, the air with
its water will descend as a dew; or, if the water surrounding one
particle of air comes in contact with the water surrounding another,
they coalesce and form a drop, and we have rain.

24. The sun supplies (or seems to supply) common fire to vapours,
whether raised from earth or sea.

25. Those vapours, which have both common and electrical fire in
them, are better supported than those which have only common fire in
them; for when vapours rise into the coldest region above the earth,
the cold will not diminish the electrical fire, if it doth the common.

26. Hence clouds, formed by vapours, raised from fresh waters within
land, from growing vegetables, moist earth, &c. more speedily and
easily deposite their water, having but little electrical fire to
repel and keep the particles separate. So that the greatest part of
the water raised from the land, is let fall on the land again; and
winds blowing from the land to the sea are dry; there being little
use for rain on the sea, and to rob the land of its moisture, in
order to rain on the sea, would not appear reasonable.

27. But clouds, formed by vapours raised from the sea, having both
fires, and particularly a great quantity of the electrical, support
their water strongly, raise it high, and being moved by winds, may
bring it over the middle of the broadest continent from the middle of
the widest ocean.

28. How these ocean clouds, so strongly supporting their water, are
made to deposite it on the land where it is wanted, is next to be
considered.

29. If they are driven by winds against mountains, those mountains
being less electrified attract them, and on contact take away their
electrical fire (and being cold, the common fire also;) hence the
particles close towards the mountains and towards each other. If the
air was not much loaded, it only falls in dews on the mountain tops
and sides, forms springs, and descends to the vales in rivulets,
which, united, make larger streams and rivers. If much loaded,
the electrical fire is at once taken from the whole cloud; and,
in leaving it, flashes brightly and cracks loudly; the particles
instantly coalescing for want of that fire, and falling in a heavy
shower.

30. When a ridge of mountains thus dams the clouds, and draws the
electrical fire from the cloud first approaching it; that which next
follows, when it comes near the first cloud, now deprived of its
fire, flashes into it, and begins to deposite its own water; the
first cloud again flashing into the mountains; the third approaching
cloud, and all succeeding ones, acting in the same manner as far back
as they extend, which may be over many hundred miles of country.

31. Hence the continual storms of rain, thunder, and lightning on
the east side of the Andes, which running north and south, and being
vastly high, intercept all the clouds brought against them from the
Atlantic ocean by the trade winds, and oblige them to deposite their
waters, by which the vast rivers Amazons, La Plata, and Oroonoko
are formed, which return the water into the same sea, after having
fertilized a country of very great extent.

32. If a country be plain, having no mountains to intercept the
electrified clouds, yet it is not without means to make them deposite
their water. For if an electrified cloud, coming from the sea,
meets in the air a cloud raised from the land, and therefore not
electrified; the first will flash its fire into the latter, and
thereby both clouds shall be made suddenly to deposite water.

33. The electrified particles of the first cloud close when they lose
their fire; the particles of the other clouds close in receiving
it: in both, they have thereby an opportunity of coalescing into
drops.--The concussion, or jerk given to the air, contributes also to
shake down the water, not only from those two clouds, but from others
near them. Hence the sudden fall of rain immediately after flashes of
lightning.

34. To shew this by an easy experiment: Take two round pieces of
pasteboard two inches diameter; from the centre and circumference of
each of them suspend by fine silk threads eighteen inches long, seven
small balls of wood, or seven peas equal in goodness: so will the
balls appending to each pasteboard, form equal equilateral triangles,
one ball being in the centre, and six at equal distances from that,
and from each other; and thus they represent particles of air.
Dip both sets in water, and some adhering to each ball, they will
represent air loaded. Dexterously electrify one set, and its ball
will repel each other to a greater distance, enlarging the triangles.
Could the water supported by seven balls come into contact, it would
form a drop or drops so heavy as to break the cohesion it had with
the balls, and so fall. Let the two sets then represent two clouds,
the one a sea cloud electrified, the other a land cloud. Bring them
within the sphere of attraction, and they will draw towards each
other, and you will see the separated balls close thus; the first
electrified ball that comes near an unelectrified ball by attraction
joins it, and gives it fire; instantly they separate, and each flies
to another ball of its own party, one to give, the other to receive
fire; and so it proceeds through both sets, but so quick as to be in
a manner instantaneous. In the cohesion they shake off and drop their
water, which represents rain.

35. Thus when sea and land clouds would pass at too great a distance
for the flash, they are attracted towards each other till within that
distance; for the sphere of electrical attraction is far beyond the
distance of flashing.

36. When a great number of clouds from the sea meet a number of
clouds raised from the land, the electrical flashes appear to strike
in different parts; and as the clouds are jostled and mixed by the
winds, or brought near by the electrical attraction, they continue
to give and receive flash after flash, till the electrical fire is
equally diffused.

37. When the gun-barrel, (in electrical experiments) has but little
electrical fire in it, you must approach it very near with your
knuckle before you can draw a spark. Give it more fire, and it will
give a spark at a greater distance. Two gun-barrels united, and as
highly electrified, will give a spark at a still greater distance.
But if two gun-barrels electrified will strike at two inches
distance, and make a loud snap, to what a great distance may 10,000
acres of electrified cloud strike and give its fire, and how loud
must be that crack?

38. It is a common thing to see clouds at different heights passing
different ways, which shews different currents of air one under the
other. As the air between the tropics is rarefied by the sun, it
rises, the denser northern and southern air pressing into its place.
The air so rarefied and forced up, passes northward and southward,
and must descend in the polar regions, if it has no opportunity
before, that the circulation may be carried on.

39. As currents of air, with the clouds therein, pass different ways,
it is easy to conceive how the clouds, passing over each other,
may attract each other, and so come near enough for the electrical
stroke. And also how electrical clouds may be carried within land
very far from the sea, before they have an opportunity to strike.

40. When the air, with its vapours raised from the ocean between
the tropics, comes to descend in the polar regions, and to be in
contact with the vapours arising there, the electrical fire they
brought begins to be communicated, and is seen in clear nights,
being first visible where it is first in motion, that is, where
the contact begins, or in the most northern part; from thence the
streams of light seem to shoot southerly, even up to the zenith of
northern countries. But though the light seems to shoot from the
north southerly, the progress of the fire is really from the south
northerly, its motion beginning in the north, being the reason that
it is there seen first.

For the electrical fire is never visible but when in motion, and
leaping from body to body, or from particle to particle through the
air. When it passes through dense bodies it is unseen. When a wire
makes part of the circle, in the explosion of the electrical phial,
the fire, though in great quantity, passes in the wire invisibly; but
in passing along a chain, it becomes visible as it leaps from link to
link. In passing along leaf gilding it is visible: for the leaf-gold
is full of pores; hold a leaf to the light and it appears like a
net, and the fire is seen in its leaping over the vacancies.--And as
when a long canal filled with still water is opened at one end, in
order to be discharged, the motion of the water begins first near
the opened end, and proceeds towards the close end, though the water
itself moves from the close towards the opened end: so the electrical
fire discharged into the polar regions, perhaps from a thousand
leagues length of vaporised air, appears first where it is first
in motion, _i. e._ in the most northern part, and the appearance
proceeds southward, though the fire really moves northward. This is
supposed to account for the _aurora borealis_.

41. When there is great heat on the land, in a particular region
(the sun having shone on it perhaps several days, while the
surrounding countries have been screened by clouds) the lower air is
rarefied and rises, the cooler denser air above descends; the clouds
in that air meet from all sides, and join over the heated place; and
if some are electrified, others not, lightning and thunder succeed,
and showers fall. Hence thunder-gusts after heats, and cool air after
gusts; the water and the clouds that bring it, coming from a higher
and therefore a cooler region.

42. An electrical spark, drawn from an irregular body at some
distance is scarcely ever strait, but shows crooked and waving in the
air. So do the flashes of lightning; the clouds being very irregular
bodies.

43. As electrified clouds pass over a country, high hills and high
trees, lofty towers, spires, masts of ships, chimneys, &c. as so many
prominencies and points, draw the electrical fire, and the whole
cloud discharges there.

44. Dangerous, therefore, is it to take shelter under a tree, during
a thunder-gust. It has been fatal to many, both men and beasts.

45. It is safer to be in the open field for another reason. When the
cloaths are wet, if a flash in its way to the ground should strike
your head, it may run in the water over the surface of your body;
whereas, if your cloaths were dry, it would go through the body,
because the blood and other humours, containing so much water, are
more ready conductors.

Hence a wet rat cannot be killed by the exploding electrical bottle,
when a dry rat may[45].

46. Common fire is in all bodies, more or less, as well as electrical
fire. Perhaps they may be different modifications of the same
element; or they may be different elements. The latter is by some
suspected.

47. If they are different things, yet they may and do subsist
together in the same body.

48. When electrical fire strikes through a body, it acts upon the
common fire contained in it, and puts that fire in motion; and if
there be a sufficient quantity of each kind of fire, the body will be
inflamed.

49. When the quantity of common fire in the body is small, the
quantity of the electrical fire (or the electrical stroke) should be
greater: if the quantity of common fire be great, less electrical
fire suffices to produce the effect.

50. Thus spirits must be heated before we can fire them by the
electrical spark.[46] If they are much heated, a small spark will do;
if not, the spark must be greater.

51. Till lately we could only fire warm vapours; but now we can burn
hard dry rosin. And when we can procure greater electrical sparks,
we may be able to fire not only unwarmed spirits, as lightning does,
but even wood, by giving sufficient agitation to the common fire
contained in it, as friction we know will do.

52. Sulphureous and inflammable vapours, arising from the earth,
are easily kindled by lightning. Besides what arise from the earth,
such vapours are sent out by stacks of moist hay, corn, or other
vegetables, which heat and reek. Wood, rotting in old trees or
buildings, does the same. Such are therefore easily and often fired.

53. Metals are often melted by lightning, though perhaps not from
heat in the lightning, nor altogether from agitated fire in the
metals.--For as whatever body can insinuate itself between the
particles of metal, and overcome the attraction by which they cohere
(as sundry menstrua can) will make the solid become a fluid, as
well as fire, yet without heating it: so the electrical fire, or
lightning, creating a violent repulsion between the particles of the
metal it passes through, the metal is fused.

54. If you would, by a violent fire, melt off the end of a nail,
which is half driven into a door, the heat given the whole nail,
before a part would melt, must burn the board it sticks in; and the
melted part would burn the floor it dropped on. But if a sword can
be melted in the scabbard, and money in a man's pocket by lightning,
without burning either, it must be a cold fusion[47].

55. Lightning rends some bodies. The electrical spark will strike a
hole through a quire of strong paper.

56. If the source of lightning, assigned in this paper, be the true
one, there should be little thunder heard at sea far from land. And
accordingly some old sea-captains, of whom enquiry has been made, do
affirm, that the fact agrees perfectly with the hypothesis; for that
in crossing the great ocean, they seldom meet with thunder till they
come into soundings; and that the islands far from the continent have
very little of it. And a curious observer, who lived thirteen years
at Bermudas, says, there was less thunder there in that whole time
than he has sometimes heard in a month at Carolina.

FOOTNOTES:

[43] An _electrified bumper_ is a small thin glass tumbler, nearly
filled with wine, and electrified as the bottle. This when brought to
the lips gives a shock, if the party be close shaved, and does not
breath on the liquor.--April 29, 1749.

[44] Thunder-gusts are sudden storms of thunder and lightning, which
are frequently of short duration, but sometimes produce mischievous
effects.

[45] This was tried with a bottle, containing about a quart. It is
since thought that one of the large glass jars, mentioned in these
papers, might have killed him, though wet.

[46] We have since fired spirits without heating them, when the
weather is warm. A little, poured into the palm of the hand, will be
warmed sufficiently by the hand, if the spirit be well rectified.
Ether takes fire most readily.

[47] These facts, though related in several accounts, are now
doubted; since it has been observed that the parts of a bell-wire
which fell on the floor, being broken and partly melted by lightning,
did actually burn into the boards. (See Philosophical Transactions,
Vol. LI. part I.) And Mr. Kinnersley has found that a fine iron wire,
melted by Electricity, has had the same effect.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Introductory Letter to some additional Papers._


  _Philadelphia, July 29, 1750._

  SIR,

As you first put us on electrical experiments, by sending to our
Library Company a tube, with directions how to use it; and as our
honorable Proprietary enabled us to carry those experiments to a
greater height, by his generous present of a complete electrical
apparatus; it is fit that both should know, from time to time, what
progress we make. It was in this view I wrote and sent you my former
papers on this subject, desiring, that as I had not the honour of a
direct correspondence with that bountiful benefactor to our library,
they might be communicated to him through your hands. In the same
view I write and send you this additional paper. If it happens to
bring you nothing new, (which may well be, considering the number of
ingenious men in Europe, continually engaged in the same researches)
at least it will shew, that the instruments put into our hands are
not neglected; and that if no valuable discoveries are made by us,
whatever the cause may be, it is not want of industry and application.

  I am, Sir,

  Your much obliged humble Servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Opinions and Conjectures, concerning the Properties and
  Effects of the electrical Matter, and the Means of preserving
  Buildings, Ships, &c. from Lightning, arising from Experiments and
  Observations made at Philadelphia, 1749.--Golden Fish.--Extraction
  of effluvial Virtues by Electricity impracticable._


§ 1. The electrical matter consists of particles extremely subtile
since it can permeate common matter, even the densest metals, with
such ease and freedom as not to receive any perceptible resistance.

2. If any one should doubt whether the electrical matter passes
through the substance of bodies, or only over and along their
surfaces, a shock from an electrified large glass jar, taken through
his own body, will probably convince him.

3. Electrical matter differs from common matter in this, that the
parts of the latter mutually attract, those of the former mutually
repel each other. Hence the appearing divergency in a stream of
electrified effluvia.

4. But though the particles of electrical matter do repel each other,
they are strongly attracted by all other matter[48].

5. From these three things, the extreme subtilty of the electrical
matter, the mutual repulsion of its parts, and the strong attraction
between them and other matter, arise this effect, that, when a
quantity of electrical matter is applied to a mass of common matter,
of any bigness or length, within our observation (which hath not
already got its quantity) it is immediately and equally diffused
through the whole.

6. Thus, common matter is a kind of spunge to the electrical fluid.
And as a spunge would receive no water, if the parts of water were
not smaller than the pores of the spunge; and even then but slowly,
if there were not a mutual attraction between those parts and the
parts of the spunge; and would still imbibe it faster, if the
mutual attraction among the parts of the water did not impede, some
force being required to separate them; and fastest, if, instead of
attraction, there were a mutual repulsion among those parts, which
would act in conjunction with the attraction of the spunge: so is the
case between the electrical and common matter.

7. But in common matter there is (generally) as much of the
electrical as it will contain within its substance. If more is
added, it lies without upon the surface, and forms what we call an
electrical atmosphere; and then the body is said to be electrified.

8. It is supposed, that all kinds of common matter do not attract and
retain the electrical, with equal strength and force, for reasons
to be given hereafter. And that those called electrics _per se_, as
glass, &c. attract and retain it strongest, and contain the greatest
quantity.

9. We know that the electrical fluid is _in_ common matter, because
we can pump it _out_ by the globe or tube. We know that common
matter has near as much as it can contain, because, when we add a
little more to any portion of it, the additional quantity does not
enter, but forms an electrical atmosphere. And we know that common
matter has not (generally) more than it can contain, otherwise all
loose portions of it would repel each other, as they constantly do
when they have electric atmospheres.

10. The beneficial uses of this electric fluid in the creation we are
not yet well acquainted with, though doubtless such there are, and
those very considerable; but we may see some pernicious consequences
that would attend a much greater proportion of it. For, had this
globe we live on, as much of it in proportion as we can give to a
globe of iron, wood, or the like, the particles of dust and other
light matters that get loose from it, would, by virtue of their
separate electrical atmospheres, not only repel each other, but be
repelled from the earth, and not easily be brought to unite with it
again; whence our air would continually be more and more clogged with
foreign matter, and grow unfit for respiration. This affords another
occasion of adoring that wisdom which has made all things by weight
and measure!

11. If a piece of common matter be supposed entirely free from
electrical matter, and a single particle of the latter be brought
nigh, it will be attracted, and enter the body, and take place in the
centre, or where the attraction is every way equal. If more particles
enter, they take their places where the balance is equal between the
attraction of the common matter, and their own mutual repulsion. It
is supposed they form triangles, whose sides shorten as their number
encreases; till the common matter has drawn in so many, that its
whole power of compressing those triangles by attraction, is equal to
their whole power of expanding themselves by repulsion; and then will
such piece of matter receive no more.

12. When part of this natural proportion of electrical fluid is
taken out of a piece of common matter, the triangles formed by the
remainder, are supposed to widen by the mutual repulsion of the
parts, until they occupy the whole piece.

13. When the quantity of electrical fluid, taken from a piece of
common matter, is restored again, it enters, the expanded triangles,
being again compressed till there is room for the whole.

14. To explain this: take two apples, or two balls of wood or other
matter, each having its own natural quantity of the electrical fluid.
Suspend them by silk lines from the cieling. Apply the wire of a
well-charged vial, held in your hand, to one of them (A) _Fig. 7_,
and it will receive from the wire a quantity of the electrical fluid;
but will not imbibe it, being already full. The fluid therefore will
flow round its surface, and form an electrical atmosphere. Bring A
into contact with B, and half the electrical fluid is communicated,
so that each has now an electrical atmosphere, and therefore they
repel each other. Take away these atmospheres, by touching the balls,
and leave them in their natural state: then, having fixed a stick of
sealing-wax to the middle of the vial to hold it by, apply the wire
to A, at the same time the coating touches B. Thus will a quantity
of the electrical fluid be drawn out of B, and thrown on A. So that
A will have a redundance of this fluid, which forms an atmosphere
round, and B an exactly equal deficiency. Now, bring these balls
again into contact, and the electrical atmosphere will not be divided
between A and B, into two smaller atmospheres as before; for B will
drink up the whole atmosphere of A, and both will be found again in
their natural state.

15. The form of the electrical atmosphere is that of the body it
surrounds. This shape may be rendered visible in a still air, by
raising a smoke from dry rosin dropt into a hot tea-spoon under the
electrified body, which will be attracted, and spread itself equally
on all sides, covering and concealing the body[49]. And this form it
takes, because it is attracted by all parts of the surface of the
body, though it cannot enter the substance already replete. Without
this attraction, it would not remain round the body, but dissipate in
the air.

16. The atmosphere of electrical particles surrounding an electrified
sphere, is not more disposed to leave it, or more easily drawn off
from any one part of the sphere than another, because it is equally
attracted by every part. But that is not the case with bodies of any
other figure. From a cube it is more easily drawn at the corners
than at the plane sides, and so from the angles of a body of any
other form, and still most easily from the angle that is most acute.
Thus, if a body shaped as A, B, C, D, E, in Fig. 8. be electrified,
or have an electrical atmosphere communicated to it, and we consider
every side as a base on which the particles rest, and by which they
are attracted, one may see, by imagining a line from A to F, and
another from E to G, that the portion of the atmosphere included
in F, A, E, G, has the line A, E, for its basis. So the portion of
atmosphere included in H, A, B, I, has the line A B for its basis.
And likewise the portion included in K, B, C, L, has B, C, to rest
on; and so on the other side of the figure. Now if you would draw
off this atmosphere with any blunt smooth body, and approach the
middle of the side A, B, you must come very near, before the force
of your attracter exceeds the force or power with which that side
holds its atmosphere. But there is a small portion between I, B, K,
that has less of the surface to rest on, and to be attracted by,
than the neighbouring portions, while at the same time there is a
mutual repulsion between its particles, and the particles of those
portions, therefore here you can get it with more ease, or at a
greater distance. Between F, A, H, there is a larger portion that has
yet a less surface to rest on, and to attract it; here, therefore,
you can get it away still more easily. But easiest of all between
L, C, M, where the quantity is largest, and the surface to attract
and keep it back the least. When you have drawn away one of these
angular portions of the fluid, another succeeds in its place, from
the nature of fluidity, and the mutual repulsion before-mentioned;
and so the atmosphere continues flowing off at such angle, like a
stream, till no more is remaining. The extremities of the portions
of atmosphere over these angular parts, are likewise at a greater
distance from the electrified body, as may be seen by the inspection
of the above figure; the point of the atmosphere of the angle C,
being much farther from C, than any other part of the atmosphere
over the lines C, B, or B, A: and, besides the distance arising
from the nature of the figure, where the attraction is less, the
particles will naturally expand to a greater distance by their mutual
repulsion. On these accounts we suppose electrified bodies discharge
their atmospheres upon unelectrified bodies more easily, and at a
greater distance from their angles and points than from their smooth
sides.--Those points will also discharge into the air, when the
body has too great an electrical atmosphere, without bringing any
non-electric near, to receive what is thrown off: For the air, though
an electric _per se_, yet has always more or less water and other
non-electric matters mixed with it: and these attract and receive
what is so discharged.

17. But points have a property, by which they _draw on_ as well as
_throw off_ the electrical fluid, at greater distances than blunt
bodies can. That is, as the pointed part of an electrified body will
discharge the atmosphere of that body, or communicate it farthest to
another body, so the point of an unelectrified body will draw off
the electrical atmosphere from an electrified body, farther than a
blunter part of the same unelectrified body will do. Thus, a pin
held by the head, and the point presented to an electrified body,
will draw off its atmosphere at a foot distance; where, if the head
were presented instead of the point, no such effect would follow. To
understand this, we may consider, that if a person standing on the
floor would draw off the electrical atmosphere from an electrified
body, an iron crow and a blunt knitting-needle held alternately in
his hand, and presented for that purpose, do not draw with different
forces in proportion to their different masses. For the man, and
what he holds in his hand, be it large or small, are connected with
the common mass of unelectrified matter; and the force with which
he draws is the same in both cases, it consisting in the different
proportion of electricity in the electrified body, and that common
mass. But the force with which the electrified body retains its
atmosphere by attracting it, is proportioned to the surface over
which the particles are placed; _i. e._ four square inches of that
surface retain their atmosphere with four times the force that one
square inch retains its atmosphere. And as in plucking the hairs from
the horse's tail, a degree of strength not sufficient to pull away a
handful at once, could yet easily strip it hair by hair; so a blunt
body presented cannot draw off a number of particles at once, but a
pointed one, with no greater force, takes them away easily, particle
by particle.

18. These explanations of the power and operation of points, when
they first occurred to me, and while they first floated in my mind,
appeared perfectly satisfactory; but now I have written them, and
considered them more closely, I must own I have some doubts about
them; yet, as I have at present nothing better to offer in their
stead, I do not cross them out: for, even a bad solution read, and
its faults discovered, has often given rise to a good one, in the
mind of an ingenious reader.

19. Nor is it of much importance to us to know the manner in
which nature executes her laws; it is enough if we know the laws
themselves. It is of real use to know that china left in the air
unsupported will fall and break; but _how_ it comes to fall and _why_
it breaks are matters of speculation. It is a pleasure indeed to
know them, but we can preserve our china without it.

20. Thus in the present case, to know this power of points may
possibly be of some use to mankind, though we should never be able
to explain it. The following experiments, as well as those in my
first paper, show this power. I have a large prime conductor, made
of several thin sheets of clothier's pasteboard, formed into a tube,
near ten feet long and a foot diameter. It is covered with Dutch
embossed-paper, almost totally gilt. This large metallic surface
supports a much greater electrical atmosphere than a rod of iron of
50 times the weight would do. It is suspended by silk lines, and
when charged will strike, at near two inches distance, a pretty hard
stroke, so as to make ones knuckle ach. Let a person standing on the
floor present the point of a needle at 12 or more inches distance
from it, and while the needle is so presented, the conductor cannot
be charged, the point drawing off the fire as fast as it is thrown
on by the electrical globe. Let it be charged, and then present the
point at the same distance, and it will suddenly be discharged. In
the dark you may see the light on the point, when the experiment is
made. And if the person holding the point stands upon wax, he will
be electrified by receiving the fire at that distance. Attempt to
draw off the electricity with a blunt body, as a bolt of iron round
at the end, and smooth (a silversmith's iron punch, inch thick, is
what I use) and you must bring it within the distance of three inches
before you can do it, and then it is done with a stroke and crack. As
the pasteboard tube hangs loose on silk lines, when you approach it
with the punch-iron, it likewise will move towards the punch, being
attracted while it is charged; but if, at the same instant, a point
be presented as before, it retires again, for the point discharges
it. Take a pair of large brass scales, of two or more feet beam, the
cords of the scales being silk. Suspend the beam by a pack-thread
from the cieling, so that the bottom of the scales may be about a
foot from the floor: the scales will move round in a circle by the
untwisting of the pack-thread. Set the iron punch on the end upon
the floor, in such a place as that the scales may pass over it in
making their circle: then electrify one scale, by applying the wire
of a charged phial to it. As they move round, you see that scale
draw nigher to the floor, and dip more when it comes over the punch;
and if that be placed at a proper distance, the scale will snap and
discharge its fire into it. But if a needle be stuck on the end of
the punch, its point upwards, the scale, instead of drawing nigh to
the punch, and snapping, discharges its fire silently through the
point, and rises higher from the punch. Nay, even if the needle be
placed upon the floor near the punch, its point upwards, the end of
the punch, though so much higher than the needle, will not attract
the scale and receive its fire, for the needle will get it and convey
it away, before it comes nigh enough for the punch to act. And this
is constantly observable in these experiments, that the greater
quantity of electricity on the pasteboard-tube, the farther it
strikes or discharges its fire, and the point likewise will draw it
off at a still greater distance.

Now if the fire of electricity and that of lightning be the same,
as I have endeavoured to shew at large, in a former paper, this
pasteboard tube and these scales may represent electrified clouds.
If a tube of only ten feet long will strike and discharge its fire
on the punch at two or three inches distance, an electrified cloud
of perhaps 10,000 acres may strike and discharge on the earth at a
proportionably greater distance. The horizontal motion of the scales
over the floor, may represent the motion of the clouds over the
earth; and the erect iron punch, a hill or high building; and then
we see how electrified clouds passing over hills or high buildings
at too great a height to strike, may be attracted lower till within
their striking distance. And lastly, if a needle fixed on the punch
with its point upright, or even on the floor below the punch, will
draw the fire from the scale silently at a much greater than the
striking distance, and so prevent its descending towards the punch;
or if in its course it would have come nigh enough to strike, yet
being first deprived of its fire it cannot, and the punch is thereby
secured from the stroke; I say, if these things are so, may not the
knowledge of this power of points be of use to mankind, in preserving
houses, churches, ships, &c. from the stroke of lightning, by
directing us to fix on the highest parts of those edifices, upright
rods of iron made sharp as a needle, and gilt to prevent rusting, and
from the foot of those rods a wire down the outside of the building
into the ground, or down round one of the shrouds of a ship, and down
her side till it reaches the water? Would not these pointed rods
probably draw the electrical fire silently out of a cloud before it
came nigh enough to strike, and thereby secure us from that most
sudden and terrible mischief?

21. To determine the question, whether the clouds that contain
lightning are electrified or not, I would propose an experiment to
be tried where it may be done conveniently. On the top of some high
tower or steeple, place a kind of centry-box (as in FIG. 9) big
enough to contain a man and an electrical stand. From the middle of
the stand let an iron rod rise and pass bending out of the door, and
then upright 20 or 30 feet, pointed very sharp at the end. If the
electrical stand be kept clean and dry, a man standing on it, when
such clouds are passing low, might be electrified and afford sparks,
the rod drawing fire to him from a cloud. If any danger to the man
should be apprehended (though I think there would be none) let him
stand on the floor of his box, and now and then bring near to the rod
the loop of a wire that has one end fastened to the leads, he holding
it by a wax handle; so the sparks, if the rod is electrified, will
strike from the rod to the wire, and not affect him.

22. Before I leave this subject of lightning, I may mention some
other similarities between the effects of that, and those of
electricity. Lightning has often been known to strike people blind.
A pigeon that we struck dead to appearance by the electrical shock,
recovering life, drooped about the yard several days, eat nothing,
though crumbs were thrown to it, but declined and died. We did not
think of its being deprived of sight; but afterwards a pullet, struck
dead in like manner, being recovered by repeatedly blowing into its
lungs, when set down on the floor, ran headlong against the wall, and
on examination appeared perfectly blind. Hence we concluded that the
pigeon also had been absolutely blinded by the shock. The biggest
animal we have yet killed, or tried to kill, with the electrical
stroke, was a well-grown pullet.

23. Reading in the ingenious Dr. Miles's account of the thunder-storm
at Stretham, the effect of the lightning in stripping off all the
paint that had covered a gilt moulding of a pannel of wainscot,
without hurting the rest of the paint, I had a mind to lay a coat of
paint over the filletting of gold on the cover of a book, and try
the effect of a strong electrical flash sent through that gold from
a charged sheet of glass. But having no paint at hand, I pasted a
narrow strip of paper over it; and when dry, sent the flash through
the gilding, by which the paper was torn off from end to end, with
such force, that it was broke in several places, and in others
brought away part of the grain of the Turky-leather in which it was
bound; and convinced me, that had it been painted, the paint would
have been stript off in the same manner with that on the wainscot at
Stretham.

24. Lightning melts metals, and I hinted in my paper on that subject,
that I suspected it to be a cold fusion; I do not mean a fusion by
force of cold, but a fusion without heat[50]. We have also melted
gold, silver, and copper, in small quantities, by the electrical
flash. The manner is this: Take leaf-gold, leaf-silver, or leaf-gilt
copper, commonly called leaf-brass, or Dutch gold; cut off from the
leaf long narrow strips, the breadth of a straw. Place one of these
strips between two strips of smooth glass that are about the width of
your finger. If one strip of gold, the length of the leaf, be not
long enough for the glass, add another to the end of it, so that you
may have a little part hanging out loose at each end of the glass.
Bind the pieces of glass together from end to end with strong silk
thread; then place it so as to be part of an electrical circuit, (the
ends of gold hanging out being of use to join with the other parts of
the circuit) and send the flash through it, from a large electrified
jar or sheet of glass. Then if your strips of glass remain whole,
you will see that the gold is missing in several places, and instead
of it a metallic stain on both the glasses; the stains on the upper
and under glass exactly similar in the minutest stroke, as may be
seen by holding them to the light; the metal appeared to have been
not only melted, but even vitrified, or otherwise so driven into
the pores of the glass, as to be protected by it from the action of
the strongest _aqua fortis_, or _aqua regia_. I send you enclosed
two little pieces of glass with these metallic stains upon them,
which cannot be removed without taking part of the glass with them.
Sometimes the stain spreads a little wider than the breadth of the
leaf, and looks brighter at the edge, as by inspecting closely you
may observe in these. Sometimes the glass breaks to pieces; once the
upper glass broke into a thousand pieces, looking like coarse salt.
The pieces I send you were stained with Dutch gold. True gold makes
a darker stain, somewhat reddish; silver, a greenish stain. We once
took two pieces of thick looking-glass, as broad as a Gunter's scale,
and six inches long; and placing leaf-gold between them, put them
between two smoothly-plained pieces of wood, and fixed them tight
in a book-binder's small press; yet though they were so closely
confined, the force of the electrical shock shivered the glass into
many pieces. The gold was melted, and stained into the glass, as
usual. The circumstances of the breaking of the glass differ much
in making the experiment, and sometimes it does not break at all:
but this is constant, that the stains in the upper and under pieces
are exact counterparts of each other. And though I have taken up the
pieces of glass between my fingers immediately after this melting, I
never could perceive the least warmth in them.

25. In one of my former papers, I mentioned, that gilding on a
book, though at first it communicated the shock perfectly well, yet
failed after a few experiments, which we could not account for. We
have since found that one strong shock breaks the continuity of
the gold in the filletting, and makes it look rather like dust of
gold, abundance of its parts being broken and driven off; and it
will seldom conduct above one strong shock. Perhaps this may be
the reason: When there is not a perfect continuity in the circuit,
the fire must leap over the vacancies: there is a certain distance
which it is able to leap over according to its strength; if a number
of small vacancies, though each be very minute, taken together
exceed that distance, it cannot leap over them, and so the shock is
prevented.

26. From the before-mentioned law of electricity, that points as
they are more or less acute, draw on and throw off the electrical
fluid with more or less power, and at greater or less distances, and
in larger or smaller quantities in the same time, we may see how
to account for the situation of the leaf of gold suspended between
two plates, the upper one continually electrified, the under one
in a person's hand standing on the floor. When the upper plate is
electrified, the leaf is attracted, and raised towards it, and
would fly to that plate, were it not for its own points. The corner
that happens to be uppermost when the leaf is rising, being a sharp
point, from the extreme thinness of the gold, draws and receives
at a distance a sufficient quantity of the electric fluid to give
itself an electric atmosphere, by which its progress to the upper
plate is stopped, and it begins to be repelled from that plate, and
would be driven back to the under plate, but that its lowest corner
is likewise a point, and throws off or discharges the overplus of
the leaf's atmosphere, as fast as the upper corner draws it on.
Were these two points perfectly equal in acuteness, the leaf would
take place exactly in the middle space, for its weight is a trifle
compared to the power acting on it: but it is generally nearest
the unelectrified plate, because, when the leaf is offered to the
electrified plate, at a distance, the sharpest point is commonly
first affected and raised towards it; so _that_ point, from its
greater acuteness, receiving the fluid faster than its opposite can
discharge it at equal distances, it retires from the electrified
plate, and draws nearer to the unelectrified plate, till it comes to
a distance where the discharge can be exactly equal to the receipt,
the latter being lessened, and the former encreased; and there it
remains as long as the globe continues to supply fresh electrical
matter. This will appear plain, when the difference of acuteness in
the corners is made very great. Cut a piece of Dutch gold, (which
is fittest for these experiments on account of its great strength)
into the form of FIG. 10, the upper corner a right angle, the two
next obtuse angles, and the lowest a very acute one; and bring this
on your plate under the electrified plate, in such a manner as
that the right-angled part may be first raised (which is done by
covering the acute part with the hollow of your hand) and you will
see this leaf take place much nearer to the upper than the under
plate; because without being nearer, it cannot receive so fast at
its right-angled point, as it can discharge at its acute one. Turn
this leaf with the acute part uppermost, and then it takes place
nearest the unelectrified plate; because, otherwise, it receives
faster at its acute point, than it can discharge at its right-angled
one. Thus the difference of distance is always proportioned to the
difference of acuteness. Take care in cutting your leaf, to leave no
little ragged particles on the edges, which sometimes form points
where you would not have them. You may make this figure so acute
below, and blunt above, as to need no under plate, it discharging
fast enough into the air. When it is made narrower, as the figure
between the pricked lines, we call it the _golden fish_, from its
manner of acting. For if you take it by the tail, and hold it at a
foot or greater horizontal distance from the prime conductor, it
will, when let go, fly to it with a brisk but wavering motion, like
that of an eel through the water; it will then take place under the
prime conductor, at perhaps a quarter or half an inch distance, and
keep a continual shaking of its tail like a fish, so that it seems
animated. Turn its tail towards the prime conductor, and then it
flies to your finger, and seems to nibble it. And if you hold a plate
under it at six or eight inches distance, and cease turning the globe
when the electrical atmosphere of the conductor grows small, it will
descend to the plate and swim back again several times with the same
fish-like motion, greatly to the entertainment of spectators. By a
little practice in blunting or sharpening the heads or tails of these
figures, you may make them take place as desired, nearer or farther
from the electrified plate.

27. It is said in Section 8, of this paper, that all kinds of common
matter are supposed not to attract the electrical fluid with equal
strength; and that those called electrics _per se_, as glass, &c.
attract and retain it strongest, and contain the greatest quantity.
This latter position may seem a paradox to some, being contrary to
the hitherto received opinion; and therefore I shall now endeavour to
explain it.

28. In order to this, let it first be considered, _that we cannot
by any means we are yet acquainted with, force the electrical fluid
through glass_. I know it is commonly thought that it easily pervades
glass; and the experiment of a feather suspended by a thread, in
a bottle hermetically sealed, yet moved by bringing a rubbed tube
near the outside of the bottle, is alleged to prove it. But, if the
electrical fluid so easily pervades glass, how does the phial become
_charged_ (as we term it) when we hold it in our hands? Would not the
fire, thrown in by the wire, pass through to our hands, and so escape
into the floor? Would not the bottle in that case be left just as we
found it, uncharged, as we know a metal bottle so attempted to be
charged would be? Indeed, if there be the least crack, the minutest
solution of continuity in the glass, though it remains so tight that
nothing else we know of will pass, yet the extremely subtile electric
fluid flies through such a crack with the greatest freedom, and such
a bottle we know can never be charged: what then makes the difference
between such a bottle and one that is sound, but this, that the fluid
can pass through the one, and not through the other[51]?

29. It is true, there is an experiment that at first sight would
be apt to satisfy a slight observer, that the fire, thrown into
the bottle by the wire, does really pass through the glass. It is
this: place the bottle on a glass stand, under the prime conductor,
suspend a bullet by a chain from the prime conductor, till it comes
within a quarter of an inch right over the wire of the bottle; place
your knuckle on the glass stand, at just the same distance from
the coating of the bottle, as the bullet is from its wire. Now let
the globe be turned, and you see a spark strike from the bullet to
the wire of the bottle, and the same instant you see and feel an
exactly equal spark striking from the coating on your knuckle, and
so on, spark for spark. This looks as if the whole received by the
bottle was again discharged from it. And yet the bottle by this
means is charged[52]! And therefore the fire that thus leaves the
bottle, though the same in quantity, cannot be the very same fire
that entered at the wire, for if it were, the bottle would remain
uncharged.

30. If the fire that so leaves the bottle be not the same that is
thrown in through the wire, it must be fire that subsisted in the
bottle (that is, in the glass of the bottle) before the operation
began.

31. If so, there must be a great quantity in glass, because a great
quantity is thus discharged, even from very thin glass.

32. That this electrical fluid or fire is strongly attracted by
glass, we know from the quickness and violence with which it is
resumed by the part that had been deprived of it, when there is an
opportunity. And by this, that we cannot from a mass of glass, draw a
quantity of electric fire, or electrify the whole mass _minus_, as we
can a mass of metal. We cannot lessen or increase its whole quantity,
for the quantity it has it holds; and it has as much as it can hold.
Its pores are filled with it as full as the mutual repellency of the
particles will admit; and what is already in, refuses, or strongly
repels, any additional quantity. Nor have we any way of moving the
electrical fluid in glass, but one; that is, by covering part of the
two surfaces of thin glass with non-electrics, and then throwing an
additional quantity of this fluid on one surface, which spreading in
the non-electric, and being bound by it to that surface, acts by its
repelling force on the particles of the electrical fluid contained
in the other surface, and drives them out of the glass into the
non-electric on that side from whence they are discharged, and then
those added on the charged side can enter. But when this is done,
there is no more in the glass, nor less than before, just as much
having left it on one side as it received on the other.

33. I feel a want of terms here, and doubt much whether I shall be
able to make this part intelligible. By the word _surface_, in this
case, I do not mean mere length and breadth without thickness; but
when I speak of the upper or under surface of a piece of glass, the
outer or inner surface of the phial, I mean length, breadth, and
half the thickness, and beg the favour of being so understood. Now
I suppose, that glass in its first principles, and in the furnace,
has no more of this electrical fluid than other common matter: that
when it is blown, as it cools, and the particles of common fire leave
it, its pores become a vacuum: that the component parts of glass are
extremely small and fine, I guess from its never showing a rough
face when it breaks, but always a polish; and from the smallness of
its particles I suppose the pores between them must be exceedingly
small, which is the reason that aqua-fortis, nor any other menstruum
we have, can enter to separate them and dissolve the substance; nor
is any fluid we know of, fine enough to enter, except common fire,
and the electric fluid. Now the departing fire, leaving a vacuum, as
aforesaid, between these pores, which air nor water are fine enough
to enter and fill, the electric fluid (which is every where ready
in what we call the non-electrics, and in the non-electric mixtures
that are in the air) is attracted in; yet does not become fixed with
the substance of the glass, but subsists there as water in a porous
stone, retained only by the attraction of the fixed parts, itself
still loose and a fluid. But I suppose farther, that in the cooling
of the glass, its texture becomes closest in the middle, and forms
a kind of partition, in which the pores are so narrow, that the
particles of the electrical fluid, which enter both surfaces at the
same time, cannot go through, or pass and repass from one surface to
the other, and so mix together; yet, though the particles of electric
fluid, imbibed by each surface, cannot themselves pass through to
those of the other, their repellency can, and by this means they
act on one another. The particles of the electric fluid have a
mutual repellency, but by the power of attraction in the glass they
are condensed or forced nearer to each other. When the glass has
received, and, by its attraction, forced closer together so much of
this electric fluid, as that the power of attracting and condensing
in the one, is equal to the power of expansion in the other, it can
imbibe no more, and that remains its constant whole quantity; but
each surface would receive more, if the repellency of what is in
the opposite surface did not resist its entrance. The quantities of
this fluid in each surface being equal, their repelling action on
each other is equal; and therefore those of one surface cannot drive
out those of the other; but, if a greater quantity is forced into
one surface than the glass would naturally draw in, this increases
the repelling power on that side, and overpowering the attraction
on the other, drives out part of the fluid that had been imbibed by
that surface, if there be any non-electric ready to receive it: such
there is in all cases where glass is electrified to give a shock.
The surface that has been thus emptied, by having its electrical
fluid driven out, resumes again an equal quantity with violence, as
soon as the glass has an opportunity to discharge that over quantity
more than it could retain by attraction in its other surface, by the
additional repellency of which the vacuum had been occasioned. For
experiments favouring (if I may not say confirming) this hypothesis,
I must, to avoid repetition, beg leave to refer you back to what is
said of the electrical phial in my former papers.

34. Let us now see how it will account for several other
appearances.--Glass, a body extremely elastic, (and perhaps its
elasticity may be owing in some degree to the subsisting of so great
a quantity of this repelling fluid in its pores) must, when rubbed,
have its rubbed surface somewhat stretched, or its solid parts
drawn a little farther asunder, so that the vacancies in which the
electrical fluid resides, become larger, affording room for more of
that fluid, which is immediately attracted into it from the cushion
or hand rubbing, they being supplied from the common stock. But the
instant the parts of the glass so opened and filled, have passed the
friction, they close again, and force the additional quantity out
upon the surface, where it must rest till that part comes round to
the cushion again, unless some non-electric (as the prime conductor,
first presents to receive it[53]). But if the inside of the globe
be lined with a non-electric, the additional repellency of the
electrical fluid, thus collected by friction on the rubbed part
of the globe's outer surface, drives an equal quantity out of the
inner surface into that non-electric lining, which receiving it, and
carrying it away from the rubbed part into the common mass, through
the axis of the globe, and frame of the machine, the new collected
electrical fluid can enter and remain in the outer surface, and none
of it (or a very little) will be received by the prime conductor. As
this charged part of the globe comes round to the cushion again,
the outer surface delivers its overplus fire into the cushion, the
opposite inner surface receiving at the same time an equal quantity
from the floor. Every electrician knows that a globe wet within
will afford little or no fire, but the reason has not before been
attempted to be given, that I know of.

34. So if a tube lined with a non-electric be rubbed[54], little or
no fire is obtained from it; what is collected from the hand, in the
downward rubbing stroke, entering the pores of the glass, and driving
an equal quantity out of the inner surface into the non-electric
lining: and the hand in passing up to take a second stroke, takes out
again what had been thrown into the outer surface, and then the inner
surface receives back again what it had given to the non-electric
lining. Thus the particles of electrical fluid belonging to the
inside surface go in and out of their pores every stroke given to the
tube. Put a wire into the tube, the inward end in contact with the
non-electric lining, so it will represent the Leyden bottle. Let a
second person touch the wire while you rub, and the fire driven out
of the inward surface when you give the stroke, will pass through him
into the common mass, and return through him when the inner surface
resumes its quantity, and therefore this new kind of Leyden bottle
cannot be so charged. But thus it may: after every stroke, before
you pass your hand up to make another, let a second person apply his
finger to the wire, take the spark, and then withdraw his finger;
and so on till he has drawn a number of sparks; thus will the inner
surface be exhausted, and the outer surface charged; then wrap a
sheet of gilt paper close round the outer surface, and grasping it
in your hand you may receive a shock by applying the finger of the
other hand to the wire: for now the vacant pores in the inner surface
resume their quantity, and the overcharged pores in the outer surface
discharge that overplus; the equilibrium being restored through your
body, which could not be restored through the glass[55]. If the tube
be exhausted of air, a non-electric lining, in contact with the
wire, is not necessary; for _in vacuo_ the electrical fire will fly
freely from the inner surface, without a non-electric conductor: but
air resists in motion; for being itself an electric _per se_, it
does not attract it, having already its quantity. So the air never
draws off an electric atmosphere from any body, but in proportion to
the non-electrics mixed with it: it rather keeps such an atmosphere
confined, which, from the mutual repulsion of its particles, tends to
dissipation, and would immediately dissipate _in vacuo_.--And thus
the experiment of the feather inclosed in a glass vessel hermetically
sealed, but moving on the approach of the rubbed tube, is explained.
When an additional quantity of the electrical fluid is applied to
the side of the vessel by the atmosphere of the tube, a quantity
is repelled and driven out of the inner surface of that side into
the vessel, and there affects the feather, returning again into its
pores, when the tube with its atmosphere is withdrawn; not that the
particles of that atmosphere did themselves pass through the glass to
the feather. And every other appearance I have yet seen, in which
glass and electricity are concerned, are, I think, explained with
equal ease by the same hypothesis. Yet, perhaps, it may not be a true
one, and I shall be obliged to him that affords me a better.

35. Thus I take the difference between non-electrics, and glass, an
electric _per se_, to consist in these two particulars. 1st, That a
non-electric easily suffers a change in the quantity of the electric
fluid it contains. You may lessen its whole quantity, by drawing
out a part, which the whole body will again resume; but of glass
you can only lessen the quantity contained in one of its surfaces;
and not that, but by supplying an equal quantity at the same time
to the other surface: so that the whole glass may always have the
same quantity in the two surfaces, their two different quantities
being added together. And this can only be done in glass that is
thin; beyond a certain thickness we have yet no power that can make
this change. And, 2dly, that the electric fire freely removes from
place to place, in and through the substance of a non-electric, but
not so through the substance of glass. If you offer a quantity to
one end of a long rod of metal, it receives it, and when it enters,
every particle that was before in the rod pushes its neighbour quite
to the farther end, where the overplus is discharged; and this
instantaneously where the rod is part of the circle in the experiment
of the shock. But glass, from the smallness of its pores, or stronger
attraction of what it contains, refuses to admit so free a motion:
a glass rod will not conduct a shock, nor will the thinnest glass
suffer any particle entering one of its surfaces to pass through to
the other.

36. Hence we see the impossibility of success in the experiments
proposed, to draw out the effluvial virtues of a non-electric, as
cinnamon, for instance, and mixing them with the electric fluid, to
convey them with that into the body, by including it in the globe,
and then applying friction, &c. For though the effluvia of cinnamon,
and the electric fluid should mix within the globe, they would never
come out together through the pores of the glass, and so go to the
prime conductor; for the electric fluid itself cannot come through;
and the prime conductor is always supplied from the cushion, and that
from the floor. And besides, when the globe is filled with cinnamon,
or other non-electric, no electric fluid can be obtained from its
outer surface, for the reason before-mentioned. I have tried another
way, which I thought more likely to obtain a mixture of the electric
and other effluvia together, if such a mixture had been possible. I
placed a glass plate under my cushion, to cut off the communication
between the cushion and floor; then brought a small chain from the
cushion into a glass of oil of turpentine, and carried another chain
from the oil of turpentine to the floor, taking care that the chain
from the cushion to the glass, touched no part of the frame of the
machine. Another chain was fixed to the prime conductor, and held in
the hand of a person to be electrified. The ends of the two chains
in the glass were near an inch distant from each other, the oil of
turpentine between. Now the globe being turned could draw no fire
from the floor through the machine, the communication that way being
cut off by the thick glass plate under the cushion: it must then
draw it through the chains whose ends were dipped in the oil of
turpentine. And as the oil of turpentine, being an electric _per
se_, would not conduct, what came up from the floor was obliged to
jump from the end of one chain to the end of the other, through the
substance of that oil, which we could see in large sparks, and so
it had a fair opportunity of seizing some of the finest particles
of the oil in its passage, and carrying them off with it: but no
such effect followed, nor could I perceive the least difference in
the smell of the electric effluvia thus collected, from what it has
when collected otherwise, nor does it otherwise affect the body
of a person electrised. I likewise put into a phial, instead of
water, a strong purgative liquid, and then charged the phial, and
took repeated shocks from it, in which case every particle of the
electrical fluid must, before it went through my body, have first
gone through the liquid when the phial is charging, and returned
through it when discharging, yet no other effect followed than if
it had been charged with water. I have also smelt the electric fire
when drawn through gold, silver, copper, lead, iron, wood, and the
human body, and could perceive no difference: the odour is always the
same, where the spark does not burn what it strikes; and therefore I
imagine it does not take that smell from any quality of the bodies
it passes through. And indeed, as that smell so readily leaves the
electric matter, and adheres to the knuckle receiving the sparks, and
to other things; I suspect that it never was connected with it, but
arises instantaneously from something in the air acted upon by it.
For if it was fine enough to come with the electric fluid through the
body of one person, why should it stop on the skin of another?

But I shall never have done, if I tell you all my conjectures,
thoughts, and imaginations on the nature and operations of this
electric fluid, and relate the variety of little experiments we
have tried. I have already made this paper too long, for which I
must crave pardon, not having now time to abridge it. I shall only
add, that as it has been observed here that spirits will fire by
the electric spark in the summer time, without heating them, when
Fahrenheit's thermometer is above 70; so when colder, if the operator
puts a small flat bottle of spirits in his bosom, or a close pocket,
with the spoon, some little time before he uses them, the heat of his
body will communicate warmth more than sufficient for the purpose.


ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS:

  _Proving that the Leyden Bottle has no more electrical Fire in
  it when charged, than before: nor less when discharged: that, in
  discharging, the Fire does not issue from the Wire and the Coating
  at the same Time, as some have thought, but that the Coating always
  receives what is discharged by the Wire, or an equal Quantity; the
  outer Surface being always in a negative State of Electricity, when
  the inner Surface is in a positive State._


Place a thick plate of glass under the rubbing cushion, to cut off
the communication of electrical fire from the floor to the cushion;
then if there be no fine points or hairy threads sticking out from
the cushion, or from the parts of the machine opposite to the
cushion, (of which you must be careful) you can get but a few sparks
from the prime conductor, which are all the cushion will part with.

Hang a phial then on the prime conductor, and it will not charge
though you hold it by the coating.--But,

Form a communication by a chain from the coating to the cushion, and
the phial will charge.

For the globe then draws the electric fire out of the outside surface
of the phial and forces it through the prime conductor and wire of
the phial into the inside surface.

Thus the bottle is charged with its own fire, no other being to be
had while the glass plate is under the cushion.

Hang two cork balls by flaxen threads to the prime conductor; then
touch the coating of the bottle, and they will be electrified and
recede from each other.

For just as much fire as you give the coating, so much is discharged
through the wire upon the prime conductor, whence the cork balls
receive an electrical atmosphere.--But,

Take a wire bent in the form of a C, with a stick of wax fixed to
the outside of the curve, to hold it by; and apply one end of this
wire to the coating, and the other at the same time to the prime
conductor, the phial will be discharged; and if the balls are not
electrified before the discharge, neither will they appear to be so
after the discharge, for they will not repel each other.

If the phial really exploded at both ends, and discharged fire from
both coating and wire, the balls would be _more_ electrified, and
recede _farther_; for none of the fire can escape, the wax handle
preventing.

But if the fire with which the inside surface is surcharged be
so much precisely as is wanted by the outside surface, it will
pass round through the wire fixed to the wax handle, restore the
equilibrium in the glass, and make no alteration in the state of the
prime conductor.

Accordingly we find, that if the prime conductor be electrified,
and the cork balls in a state of repellency before the bottle is
discharged, they continue so afterwards. If not, they are not
electrified by that discharge.

FOOTNOTES:

[48] See the ingenious Essays on Electricity, in the Transactions, by
Mr. Ellicot.

[49] See page 173.

[50] See note in page 214.

[51] See the first sixteen Sections of the former paper, called
_Farther Experiments_, &c.

[52] See Sect. 10, of _Farther Experiments_, &c.

[53] In the dark the electric fluid may be seen on the cushion in two
semi-circles or half-moons, one on the fore-part, the other on the
back part of the cushion, just where the globe and cushion separate.
In the fore crescent the fire is passing out of the cushion into the
glass; in the other it is leaving the glass, and returning into the
back part of the cushion. When the prime conductor is applied to take
it off the glass, the back crescent disappears.

[54] Gilt paper, with the gilt face next the glass, does well

[55] See _Further Experiments_, Sect. 15.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Accumulation of the electrical Fire proved to be in the
  electrified Glass.--Effect of Lightning on the Needle of Compasses,
  explained.--Gunpowder fired by the electric Flame._

  _Philadelphia, July 27, 1750._

  SIR,

Mr. Watson, I believe, wrote his Observations on my last paper
in haste, without having first well considered the experiments
related §. 17[56], which still appear to me decisive in the
question,--_Whether the accumulation of the electrical fire be in the
electrified glass, or in the non-electric matter connected with the
glass?_ and to demonstrate that it is really in the glass.

As to the experiment that ingenious gentleman mentions, and which he
thinks conclusive on the other side, I persuade myself he will change
his opinion of it, when he considers, that as one person applying
the wire of the charged bottle to warm spirits, in a spoon held by
another person, both standing on the floor, will fire the spirits,
and yet such firing will not determine whether the accumulation
was in the glass or the non-electric; so the placing another person
between them, standing on wax, with a bason in his hand, into which
the water from the phial is poured, _while he at the instant of
pouring_ presents a finger of his other hand to the spirits, does not
at all alter the case; the stream from the phial, the side of the
bason, with the arms and body of the person on the wax, being all
together but as one long wire, reaching from the internal surface of
the phial to the spirits.

_June 29, 1751._ In Capt. Waddell's account of the effects of
lightning on his ship, I could not but take notice of the large
comazants (as he calls them) that settled on the spintles at the
top-mast heads, and burnt like very large torches (before the
stroke.) According to my opinion, the electrical fire was then
drawing off, as by points, from the cloud; the largeness of the flame
betokening the great quantity of electricity in the cloud: and had
there been a good wire communication from the spintle heads to the
sea, that could have conducted more freely than tarred ropes, or
masts of turpentine wood, I imagine there would either have been no
stroke, or, if a stroke, the wire would have conducted it all into
the sea without damage to the ship.

His compasses lost the virtue of the load-stone, or the poles were
reversed; the north point turning to the south.--By electricity we
have (_here_ at _Philadelphia_) frequently given polarity to needles,
and reversed it at pleasure. Mr. Wilson, at London, tried it on too
large masses, and with too small force.

A shock from four large glass jars, sent through a fine
sewing-needle, gives it polarity, and it will traverse when laid
on water.--If the needle, when struck, lies east and west, the end
entered by the electric blast points north.--If it lies north and
south, the end that lay towards the north will continue to point
north when placed on water, whether the fire entered at that end, or
at the contrary end.

The polarity given is strongest when the needle is struck lying north
and south, weakest when lying east and west; perhaps if the force was
still greater, the south end, entered by the fire (when the needle
lies north and south) might become the north, otherwise it puzzles us
to account for the inverting of compasses by lightning; since their
needles must always be found in that situation, and by our little
experiments, whether the blast entered the north and went out at the
south end of the needle, or the contrary, still the end that lay to
the north should continue to point north.

In these experiments the ends of the needles are sometimes finely
blued like a watch-spring by the electric flame.--This colour given
by the flash from two jars only, will wipe off, but four jars fix
it, and frequently melt the needles. I send you some that have had
their heads and points melted off by our mimic lightning; and a pin
that had its point melted off, and some part of its head and neck
run. Sometimes the surface on the body of the needle is also run,
and appears blistered when examined by a magnifying glass: the jars
I make use off hold seven or eight gallons, and are coated and lined
with tin foil; each of them takes a thousand turns[57] of a globe
nine inches diameter to charge it.

I send you two specimens of tin-foil melted between glass, by the
force of two jars only.

I have not heard that any of your European electricians have ever
been able to fire gun-powder by the electric flame. We do it here
in this manner:--A small cartridge is filled with dry powder, hard
rammed, so as to bruise some of the grains; two pointed wires are
then thrust in, one at each end, the points approaching each other in
the middle of the cartridge till within the distance of half an inch;
then, the cartridge being placed in the circuit, when the four jars
are discharged, the electric flame leaping from the point of one wire
to the point of the other, within the cartridge amongst the powder,
_fires it_, and the explosion of the powder is at the same instant
with the crack of the discharge.

  Your's, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[56] See the paper entitled, _Farther Experiments, &c._

[57] The cushion being afterwards covered with a long flap of
buckskin, which might cling to the globe; and care being taken to
keep that flap of a due temperature, between too dry and too moist,
we found so much more of the electric fluid was obtained, as that 150
turns were sufficient. 1753.




TO C. C[58]. ESQ. AT NEW-YORK, COMMUNICATED TO MR. COLLINSON.

  _Unlimited Nature of the electric Force._


  _Philadelphia, 1751._

  SIR,

I inclose you answers, such as my present hurry of business will
permit me to make, to the principal queries contained in your's of
the 28th instant, and beg leave to refer you to the latter piece
in the printed collection of my papers, for farther explanation
of the difference between what is called _electrics per se_, and
_non-electrics_. When you have had time to read and consider these
papers, I will endeavour to make any new experiments you shall
propose, that you think may afford farther light or satisfaction to
either of us; and shall be much obliged to you for such remarks,
objections, &c. as may occur to you.--I forget whether I wrote to you
that I have melted brass pins and steel needles, inverted the poles
of the magnetic needle, given a magnetism and polarity to needles
that had none, and fired dry gunpowder by the electric spark. I have
five bottles that contain eight or nine gallons each, two of which
charged are sufficient for those purposes: but I can charge and
discharge them altogether. There are no bounds (but what expence and
labour give) to the force man may raise and use in the electrical
way: for bottle may be added to bottle _in infinitum_, and all united
and discharged together as one, the force and effect proportioned to
their number and size. The greatest known effects of common lightning
may, I think, without much difficulty, be exceeded in this way, which
a few years since could not have been believed, and even now may
seem to many a little extravagant to suppose.--So we are got beyond
the skill of Rabelais's devils of two years old, who, he humourously
says, had only learnt to thunder and lighten a little round the head
of a cabbage.

  I am, with sincere respect,

  Your most obliged humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.


QUERIES AND ANSWERS REFERRED TO IN THE FOREGOING LETTER.

  _The Terms, electric per se, and non-electric, improper.--New
  Relation between Metals and Water.--Effects of Air in electrical
  Experiments.--Experiment for discovering more of the Qualities of
  the electric Fluid._


_Query_, Wherein consists the difference between an _electric_ and a
_non-electric_ body?

_Answer._ The terms electric _per se_, and non-electric, were first
used to distinguish bodies, on a mistaken supposition that those
called electrics _per se_, alone contained electric matter in their
substance, which was capable of being excited by friction, and of
being produced or drawn from them, and communicated to those called
non-electrics, supposed to be destitute of it: for the glass, &c.
being rubbed, discovered signs of having it, by snapping to the
finger, attracting, repelling, &c. and could communicate those signs
to metals and water.--Afterwards it was found, that rubbing of
glass would not produce the electric matter, unless a communication
was preserved between the rubber and the floor; and subsequent
experiments proved that the electric matter was really drawn from
those bodies that at first were thought to have none in them. Then
it was doubted whether glass, and other bodies called _electrics per
se_, had really any electric matter in them, since they apparently
afforded none but what they first extracted from those which had
been called non-electrics. But some of my experiments show, that
glass contains it in great quantity, and I now suspect it to be
pretty equally diffused in all the matter of this terraqueous globe.
If so, the terms _electric per se_, and _non-electric_, should be
laid aside as improper: and (the only difference being this, that
some bodies will conduct electric matter, and others will not) the
terms _conductor_ and _non-conductor_ may supply their place. If
any portion of electric matter is applied to a piece of conducting
matter, it penetrates and flows through it, or spreads equally on
its surface; if applied to a piece of non-conducting matter, it will
do neither. Perfect conductors of electric matter are only metals
and water. Other bodies conducting only as they contain a mixture
of those; without more or less of which they will not conduct at
all[59]. This (by the way) shews a new relation between metals and
water heretofore unknown.

To illustrate this by a comparison, which, however, can only give
a faint resemblance. Electric matter passes through conductors as
water passes through a porous stone, or spreads on their surfaces as
water spreads on a wet stone; but when applied to non-conductors, it
is like water dropt on a greasy stone, it neither penetrates, passes
through, nor spreads on the surface, but remains in drops where it
falls. See farther on this head, in my last printed piece, entitled,
_Opinions and Conjectures, &c._ 1749.

_Query_, What are the effects of air in electrical experiments?

_Answer._ All I have hitherto observed are these. Moist air receives
and conducts the electrical matter in proportion to its moisture,
quite dry air not at all: air is therefore to be classed with the
non-conductors.

Dry air assists in confining the electrical atmosphere to the body
it surrounds, and prevents its dissipating: for in vacuo it quits
easily, and points operate stronger, _i. e._ they throw off or
attract the electrical matter more freely, and at greater distances;
so that air intervening obstructs its passage from body to body
in some degree. A clean electrical phial and wire, containing air
instead of water, will not be charged nor give a shock, any more
than if it was filled with powder of glass; but exhausted of air, it
operates as well as if filled with water. Yet an electric atmosphere
and air do not seem to exclude each other, for we breathe freely
in such an atmosphere, and dry air will blow through it without
displacing or driving it away. I question whether the strongest dry
north-wester[60] would dissipate it. I once electrified a large
cork-ball at the end of a silk thread three feet long, the other end
of which I held in my fingers, and whirl'd it round, like a sling one
hundred times, in the air, with the swiftest motion I could possibly
give it, yet it retained its electric atmosphere, though it must have
passed through eight hundred yards of air, allowing my arm in giving
the motion to add a foot to the semi-diameter of the circle.--By
quite dry air, I mean the dryest we have: for perhaps we never have
any perfectly free from moisture. An electrical atmosphere raised
round a thick wire, inserted in a phial of air, drives out none of
the air, nor on withdrawing that atmosphere will any air rush in, as
I have found by a curious experiment[61] accurately made, whence we
concluded that the air's elasticity was not affected thereby.


AN EXPERIMENT TOWARDS DISCOVERING MORE OF THE QUALITIES OF THE
ELECTRIC FLUID.

From the prime conductor, hang a bullet by a wire hook; under the
bullet, at half an inch distance, place a bright piece of silver
to receive the sparks; then let the wheel be turned, and in a few
minutes, (if the repeated sparks continually strike in the same spot)
the silver will receive a blue stain, nearly the colour of a watch
spring.

A bright piece of iron will also be spotted, but not with that
colour; it rather seems corroded.

On gold, brass, or tin, I have not perceived it makes any impression.
But the spots on the silver or iron will be the same, whether the
bullet be lead, brass, gold, or silver.

On a silver bullet there will also appear a small spot, as well as on
the plate below it.

FOOTNOTES:

[58] Cadwallader Colden, who was afterwards lieutenant-governor of
New-York. _Editor._

[59] This proposition is since found to be too general; Mr. Wilson
having discovered that melted wax and rosin will also conduct.

[60] A cold dry wind of North America.

[61] The experiment here mentioned was thus made. An empty phial
was stopped with a cork. Through the cork passed a thick wire,
as usual in the Leyden experiment, which wire almost reached the
bottom. Through another part of the cork passed one leg of a small
glass syphon, the other leg on the outside came down almost to the
bottom of the phial. This phial was first held a short time in the
hand, which, warming, and of course rarefying the air within, drove
a small part of it out through the syphon. Then a little red ink
in a tea-spoon was applied to the opening of the outer leg of the
syphon; so that as the air within cooled, a little of the ink might
rise in that leg. When the air within the bottle came to be of the
same temperature of that without, the drop of red ink would rest in
a certain part of the leg. But the warmth of a finger applied to the
phial would cause that drop to descend, as the least outward coolness
applied would make it ascend. When it had found its situation, and
was at rest, the wire was electrified by a communication from the
prime conductor. This was supposed to give an electric atmosphere to
the wire within the bottle, which might likewise rarefy the included
air, and of course depress the drop of ink in the syphon. But no such
effect followed.




TO C. C[62]. ESQ. AT NEW YORK.

  _Mistake, that only Metals and Water were Conductors,
  rectified.--Supposition of a Region of electric Fire above our
  Atmosphere.--Theorem concerning Light.--Poke-Weed a Cure for
  Cancers._

  Read at the Royal Society, Nov. 11, 1756.


  _Philadelphia, April 23, 1752._

  SIR,

In considering your favour of the 16th past, I recollected my
having wrote you answers to some queries concerning the difference
between electrics _per se_, and non-electrics, and the effects of
air in electrical experiments, which, I apprehend, you may not have
received. The date I have forgotten.

We have been used to call those bodies electrics _per se_, which
would not conduct the electric fluid: We once imagined that only
such bodies contained that fluid; afterwards that they had none of
it, and only educed it from other bodies: but further experiments
shewed our mistake. It is to be found in all matter we know of; and
the distinctions of electrics _per se_, and non-electrics, should now
be dropt as improper, and that of _conductors_ and _non-conductors_
assumed in its place, as I mentioned in those answers.

I do not remember any experiment by which it appeared that high
rectified spirit will not conduct; perhaps you have made such. This
I know, that wax, rosin, brimstone, and even glass, commonly reputed
electrics _per se_, will, when in a fluid state, conduct pretty
well. Glass will do it when only red hot. So that my former position,
that only metals and water were conductors, and other bodies more or
less such, as they partook of metal or moisture, was too general.

Your conception of the electric fluid, that it is incomparably more
subtle than air, is undoubtedly just. It pervades dense matter
with the greatest ease; but it does not seem to mix or incorporate
willingly with mere air, as it does with other matter. It will not
quit common matter to join with air. Air obstructs, in some degree,
its motion. An electric atmosphere cannot be communicated at so
great a distance, through intervening air, by far, as through a
vacuum.--Who knows then, but there may be, as the ancients thought,
a region of this fire above our atmosphere, prevented by our air,
and its own too great distance for attraction, from joining our
earth? Perhaps where the atmosphere is rarest, this fluid may be
densest, and nearer the earth where the atmosphere grows denser,
this fluid may be rarer; yet some of it be low enough to attach
itself to our highest clouds, and thence they becoming electrified,
may be attracted by, and descend towards the earth, and discharge
their watry contents, together with that etherial fire. Perhaps the
_auroræ boreales_ are currents of this fluid in its own region, above
our atmosphere, becoming from their motion visible. There is no end
to conjectures. As yet we are but novices in this branch of natural
knowledge.

You mention several differences of salts in electrical experiments.
Were they all equally dry? Salt is apt to acquire moisture from a
moist air, and some sorts more than others. When perfectly dried by
lying before a fire, or on a stove, none that I have tried will
conduct any better than so much glass.

New flannel, if dry and warm, will draw the electric fluid from
non-electrics, as well as that which has been worn.

I wish you had the convenience of trying the experiments you seem to
have such expectations from, upon various kinds of spirits, salts,
earth, &c. Frequently, in a variety of experiments, though we miss
what we expected to find, yet something valuable turns out, something
surprising, and instructing, though unthought of.

I thank you for communicating the illustration of the theorem
concerning light. It is very curious. But I must own I am much in
the _dark_ about _light_. I am not satisfied with the doctrine that
supposes particles of matter called light, continually driven off
from the sun's surface, with a swiftness so prodigious! Must not
the smallest particle conceivable have, with such a motion, a force
exceeding that of a twenty-four pounder, discharged from a cannon?
Must not the Sun diminish exceedingly by such a waste of matter; and
the planets, instead of drawing nearer to him, as some have feared,
recede to greater distances through the lessened attraction. Yet
these particles, with this amazing motion, will not drive before
them, or remove, the least and lightest dust they meet with: And the
Sun, for aught we know, continues of his antient dimensions, and his
attendants move in their antient orbits.

May not all the phenomena of light be more conveniently solved, by
supposing universal space filled with a subtle elastic fluid, which,
when at rest, is not visible, but whose vibrations affect that fine
sense in the eye, as those of air do the grosser organs of the ear?
We do not, in the case of sound, imagine that any sonorous particles
are thrown off from a bell, for instance, and fly in strait lines to
the ear; why must we believe that luminous particles leave the sun
and proceed to the eye? Some diamonds, if rubbed, shine in the dark,
without losing any part of their matter. I can make an electrical
spark as big as the flame of a candle, much brighter, and, therefore,
visible further; yet this is without fuel; and, I am persuaded,
no part of the electric fluid flies off in such case to distant
places, but all goes directly, and is to be found in the place to
which I destine it. May not different degrees of the vibration of
the above-mentioned universal medium, occasion the appearances of
different colours? I think the electric fluid is always the same; yet
I find that weaker and stronger sparks differ in apparent colour,
some white, blue, purple, red; the strongest, white; weak ones red.
Thus different degrees of vibration given to the air produce the
seven, different sounds in music, analagous to the seven colours, yet
the medium, air, is the same.

If the Sun is not wasted by expence of light, I can easily conceive
that he shall otherwise always retain the same quantity of matter;
though we should suppose him made of sulphur constantly flaming. The
action of fire only _separates_ the particles of matter, it does not
_annihilate_ them. Water, by heat raised in vapour, returns to the
earth in rain; and if we could collect all the particles of burning
matter that go off in smoak, perhaps they might, with the ashes,
weigh as much as the body before it was fired: and if we could put
them into the same position with regard to each other, the mass would
be the same as before, and might be burnt over again. The chymists
have analysed sulphur, and find it composed, in certain proportions,
of oil, salt, and earth; and having, by the analysis, discovered
those proportions, they can, of those ingredients, make sulphur.
So we have only to suppose, that the parts of the Sun's sulphur,
separated by fire, rise into his atmosphere, and there being freed
from the immediate action of the fire, they collect into cloudy
masses, and growing, by degrees, too heavy to be longer supported,
they descend to the Sun, and are burnt over again. Hence the spots
appearing on his face, which are observed to diminish daily in size,
their consuming edges being of particular brightness.

It is well we are not, as poor Galileo was, subject to the
inquisition for _philosophical heresy_. My whispers against the
orthodox doctrine, in private letters, would be dangerous; but your
writing and printing would be highly criminal. As it is, you must
expect some censure, but one heretic will surely excuse another.

I am heartily glad to hear more instances of the success of the
poke-weed, in the cure of that horrible evil to the human body, a
cancer. You will deserve highly of mankind for the communication. But
I find in Boston they are at a loss to know the right plant, some
asserting it is what they call _Mechoachan_, others other things.
In one of their late papers it is publicly requested that a perfect
description may be given of the plant, its places of growth, &c. I
have mislaid the paper, or would send it to you. I thought you had
described it pretty fully[63].

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[62] Cadwallader Colden. See note, page 250. _Editor._

[63] As the poke-weed, though out of place, is introduced here, we
shall translate and insert two extracts of letters from Dr. Franklin
to M. Dubourg, the French translator of his works, on the same
subject.

  "LONDON, MARCH 27, 1773.

"I apprehend that our poke-weed is what the botanists term
_phytolacca_. This plant bears berries as large as peas; the skin is
black, but it contains a crimson juice. It is this juice, thickened
by evaporation in the sun, which was employed. It caused great pain,
but some persons were said to have been cured. I am not quite certain
of the facts; all that I know is, that Dr. Colden had a good opinion
of the remedy."

  "LONDON, APRIL 23, 1773.

"You will see by the annexed paper by Dr. Solander, that this herb,
poke-weed, in which has been found a specific remedy for cancers, is
the most common species of phytolacca. (Phytolacca decandra L.)"

  _Editor._




MR. E. KINNERSLEY, AT BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT
PHILADELPHIA.

  _New Experiments.--Paradoxes inferred from them.--Difference
  in the Electricity of a Globe of Glass charged, and a Globe of
  Sulphur.--Difficulty of ascertaining which is positive and which
  negative._


  _Feb. 3, 1752._

  SIR,

I have the following experiments to communicate: I held in one hand a
wire, which was fastened at the other end to the handle of a pump, in
order to try whether the stroke from the prime conductor, through my
arms, would be any greater than when conveyed only to the surface of
the earth, but could discover no difference.

I placed the needle of a compass on the point of a long pin, and
holding it in the atmosphere of the prime conductor, at the distance
of about three inches, found it to whirl round like the flyers of a
jack, with great rapidity.

I suspended with silk a cork ball, about the bigness of a pea, and
presented to it rubbed amber, sealing-wax, and sulphur, by each of
which it was strongly repelled; then I tried rubbed glass and china,
and found that each of these would attract it, until it became
electrified again, and then it would be repelled as at first; and
while thus repelled by the rubbed glass or china, either of the
others when rubbed would attract it. Then I electrified the ball,
with the wire of a charged phial, and presented to it rubbed glass
(the stopper of a decanter) and a china tea-cup, by which it was as
strongly repelled as by the wire; but when I presented either of the
other rubbed electrics, it would be strongly attracted, and when I
electrified it by either of these, till it became repelled, it would
be attracted by the wire of the phial, but be repelled by its coating.

These experiments surprised me very much, and have induced me to
infer the following paradoxes.

1. If a glass globe be placed at one end of a prime-conductor, and
a sulphur one at the other end, both being equally in good order,
and in equal motion, not a spark of fire can be obtained from the
conductor; but one globe will draw out, as fast as the other gives in.

2. If a phial be suspended on the conductor, with a chain from its
coating to the table, and only one of the globes be made use of at
a time, 20 turns of the wheel, for instance, will charge it; after
which, so many tarns of the other wheel will discharge it; and as
many more will charge it again.

3. The globes being both in motion, each having a separate conductor,
with a phial suspended on one of them, and the chain of it fastened
to the other, the phial will become charged; one globe charging
positively, the other negatively.

4. The phial being thus charged, hang it in like manner on the other
conductor; set both wheels a going again, and the same number of
turns that charged it before, will now discharge it; and the same
number repeated, will charge it again.

5. When each globe communicates with the same prime conductor, having
a chain hanging from it to the table, one of them, when in motion
(but which I cannot say) will draw fire up through the cushion, and
discharge it through the chain; the other will draw it up through the
chain, and discharge it through the cushion.

I should be glad if you would send to my house for my sulphur globe,
and the cushion belonging to it, and make the trial; but must caution
you not to use chalk on the cushion, some fine powdered sulphur will
do better. If, as I expect, you should find the globes to charge the
prime conductor differently, I hope you will be able to discover some
method of determining which it is that charges positively.

  I am, &c.

  E. KINNERSLEY.




TO MR. E. KINNERSLEY, AT BOSTON.

  _Probable Cause of the Different Attractions and Repulsions of the
  two electrified Globes mentioned in the two preceding Letters._


  _Philadelphia, March 2, 1752._

  SIR,

I thank you for the experiments communicated. I sent immediately for
your brimstone globe, in order to make the trials you desired, but
found it wanted centres, which I have not time now to supply; but the
first leisure I will get it fitted for use, try the experiments, and
acquaint you with the result.

In the mean time I suspect, that the different attractions and
repulsions you observed, proceeded rather from the greater or smaller
quantities of the fire you obtained from different bodies, than from
its being of a different _kind_, or having a different _direction_.
In haste,

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MR. E. KINNERSLEY, AT BOSTON.

  _Reasons for supposing, that the glass Globe charges positively,
  and the Sulphur negatively.--Hint respecting a leather Globe for
  Experiments when travelling._


  _Philadelphia, March 16, 1752._

  SIR,

Having brought your brimstone globe to work, I tried one of the
experiments you proposed, and was agreeably surprised to find, that
the glass globe being at one end of the conductor, and the sulphur
globe at the other end, both globes in motion, no spark could be
obtained from the conductor, unless when one globe turned slower, or
was not in so good order as the other; and then the spark was only
in proportion to the difference, so that turning equally, or turning
that slowest which worked best, would again bring the conductor to
afford no spark.

I found also, that the wire of a phial charged by the glass globe,
attracted a cork ball that had touched the wire of a phial charged
by the brimstone globe, and _vice versa_, so that the cork continued
to play between the two phials, just as when one phial was charged
through the wire, the other through the coating, by the glass globe
alone. And two phials charged, the one by the brimstone globe, the
other by the glass globe, would be both discharged by bringing their
wires together, and shock the person holding the phials.

From these experiments one may be certain that your 2d, 3d, and 4th
proposed experiments, would succeed exactly as you suppose, though I
have not tried them, wanting time. I imagine it is the glass globe
that charges positively, and the sulphur negatively, for these
reasons: 1. Though the sulphur globe seems to work equally well
with the glass one, yet it can never occasion so large and distant
a spark between my knuckle and the conductor, when the sulphur
one is working, as when the glass one is used; which, I suppose,
is occasioned by this, that bodies of a certain bigness cannot so
easily part with a quantity of electrical fluid they have and hold
attracted _within_ their substance, as they can receive an additional
quantity _upon_ their surface by way of atmosphere. Therefore so
much cannot be drawn _out_ of the conductor, as can be thrown _on_
it. 2. I observe that the stream or brush of fire, appearing at the
end of a wire, connected with the conductor, is long, large, and
much diverging, when the glass globe is used, and makes a snapping
(or rattling) noise: but when the sulphur one is used, it is short,
small, and makes a hissing noise; and just the reverse of both
happens, when you hold the same wire in your hand, and the globes
are worked alternately: the brush is large, long, diverging, and
snapping (or rattling) when the sulphur globe is turned; short,
small, and hissing, when the glass globe is turned.--When the brush
is long, large, and much diverging, the body to which it joins seems
to me to be throwing the fire out; and when the contrary appears, it
seems to be drinking in. 3. I observe, that when I hold my knuckle
before the sulphur globe, while turning, the stream of fire between
my knuckle and the globe seems to spread on its surface, as if it
flowed from the finger; on the glass globe it is otherwise. 4. The
cool wind (or what was called so) that we used to feel as coming from
an electrified point, is, I think, more sensible when the glass globe
is used, than when the sulphur one.--But these are hasty thoughts. As
to your fifth paradox, it must likewise be true, if the globes are
alternately worked; but if worked together, the fire will neither
come up nor go down by the chain, because one globe will drink it as
fast as the other produces it.

I should be glad to know, whether the effects would be contrary if
the glass globe is solid, and the sulphur globe is hollow; but I have
no means at present of trying.

In your journeys, your glass globes meet with accidents, and sulphur
ones are heavy and inconvenient.--_Query._ Would not a thin plane of
brimstone, cast on a board, serve on occasion as a cushion, while a
globe of leather stuffed (properly mounted) might receive the fire
from the sulphur, and charge the conductor positively? Such a globe
would be in no danger of breaking[64]. I think I can conceive how it
may be done; but have not time to add more than that I am,

  Yours, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[64] The discoveries of the late ingenious Mr. Symmer, on the
positive and negative electricity produced by the mutual friction of
white and black silk, &c. afford hints for farther improvements to be
made with this view.


  [In Mr. Collinson's edition, several papers followed here, by
  the Abbé Mazeas, and others, upon the subject of Dr. Franklin's
  experiments, which, that the letters of our author might not be too
  much interrupted, we have thought proper to transfer to an Appendix.
  A subsequent paper by Mr. David Colden, entitled Remarks on the Abbé
  Nollet's Letters to Benjamin Franklin, esq. on Electricity, will be
  found transferred in the same manner.]




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Electrical Kite._


  _Philadelphia, Oct. 19, 1752._

  SIR,

As frequent mention is made in public papers from Europe of the
success of the Philadelphia experiment for drawing the electric
fire from clouds by means of pointed rods of iron erected on high
buildings, &c. it may be agreeable to the curious to be informed that
the same experiment has succeeded in Philadelphia, though made in a
different and more easy manner, which is as follows:

Make a small cross of two light strips of cedar, the arms so long as
to reach to the four corners of a large thin silk handkerchief when
extended; tie the corners of the handkerchief to the extremities
of the cross, so you have the body of a kite; which being properly
accommodated with a tail, loop, and string, will rise in the air,
like those made of paper; but this being of silk is fitter to bear
the wet and wind of a thunder-gust without tearing. To the top of
the upright stick of the cross is to be fixed a very sharp pointed
wire, rising a foot or more above the wood. To the end of the twine,
next the hand, is to be tied a silk ribbon, and where the silk and
twine join, a key may be fastened. This kite is to be raised when a
thunder-gust appears to be coming on, and the person who holds the
string must stand within a door or window, or under some cover, so
that the silk ribbon may not be wet; and care must be taken that the
twine does not touch the frame of the door or window. As soon as
any of the thunder clouds come over the kite, the pointed wire will
draw the electric fire from them, and the kite, with all the twine,
will be electrified, and the loose filaments of the twine will stand
out every way, and be attracted by an approaching finger. And when
the rain has wetted the kite and twine, so that it can conduct the
electric fire freely, you will find it stream out plentifully from
the key on the approach of your knuckle. At this key the phial may
be charged; and from electric fire thus obtained, spirits may be
kindled, and all the other electric experiments be performed, which
are usually done by the help of a rubbed glass globe or tube, and
thereby the sameness of the electric matter with that of lightning
completely demonstrated.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Hypothesis, of the Sea being the grand Source of Lightning,
  retracted. Positive, and sometimes negative, Electricity of the
  Clouds discovered.--New Experiments and Conjectures in Support of
  this Discovery.--Observations recommended for ascertaining the
  Direction of the electric Fluid.--Size of Rods for Conductors to
  Buildings.--Appearance of a Thunder-Cloud described._


  _Philadelphia, September, 1753._

  SIR,

In my former paper on this subject, written first in 1747, enlarged
and sent to England in 1749, I considered the sea as the grand source
of lightning, imagining its luminous appearance to be owing to
electric fire, produced by friction between the particles of water
and those of salt. Living far from the sea, I had then no opportunity
of making experiments on the sea-water, and so embraced this opinion
too hastily.

For in 1750, and 1751, being occasionally on the sea-coast, I found,
by experiments, that sea-water in a bottle, though at first it would
by agitation appear luminous, yet in a few hours it lost that virtue:
_hence and from this_, that I could not by agitating a solution of
sea-salt in water produce any light, I first began to doubt of my
former hypothesis, and to suspect that the luminous appearance in
sea-water must be owing to some other principles.

I then considered whether it were not possible, that the particles
of air, being electrics _per se_, might, in hard gales of wind,
by their friction against trees, hills, buildings, &c. as so many
minute electric globes, rubbing against non-electric cushions, draw
the electric fire from the earth, and that the rising vapours might
receive that fire from the air, and by such means the clouds become
electrified.

If this were so, I imagined that by forcing a constant violent stream
of air against my prime conductor, by bellows, I should electrify it
_negatively_; the rubbing particles of air, drawing from it part of
its natural quantity of the electric fluid. I accordingly made the
experiment, but it did not succeed.

In September 1752, I erected an iron rod to draw the lightning
down into my house, in order to make some experiments on it, with
two bells to give notice when the rod should be electrified: a
contrivance obvious to every electrician.

I found the bells rang sometimes when there was no lightning or
thunder, but only a dark cloud over the rod; that sometimes after
a flash of lightning they would suddenly stop; and at other times,
when they had not rang before, they would, after a flash, suddenly
begin to ring; that the electricity was sometimes very faint, so
that when a small spark was obtained, another could not be got for
some time after; at other times the sparks would follow extremely
quick, and once I had a continual stream from bell to bell, the size
of a crow-quill: even during the same gust there were considerable
variations.

In the winter following I conceived an experiment, to try whether the
clouds were electrified _positively_ or _negatively_; but my pointed
rod, with its apparatus, becoming out of order, I did not refit it
till towards the spring, when I expected the warm weather would bring
on more frequent thunder-clouds.

The experiment was this: To take two phials; charge one of them with
lightning from the iron rod, and give the other an equal charge by
the electric glass globe, through the prime conductor: when charged,
to place them on a table within three or four inches of each other,
a small cork ball being suspended by a fine silk thread from the
cieling, so as it might play between the wires. If both bottles then
were electrified _positively_, the ball being attracted and repelled
by one, must be also repelled by the other. If the one _positively_,
and the other _negatively_; then the ball would be attracted and
repelled alternately by each, and continue to play between them as
long as any considerable charge remained.

Being very intent on making this experiment, it was no small
mortification to me, that I happened to be abroad during two of the
greatest thunder-storms we had early in the spring, and though I had
given orders in my family, that if the bells rang when I was from
home, they should catch some of the lightning for me in electrical
phials, and they did so, yet it was mostly dissipated before my
return, and in some of the other gusts, the quantity of lightning
I was able to obtain was so small, and the charge so weak, that I
could not satisfy myself: yet I sometimes saw what heightened my
suspicions, and inflamed my curiosity.

At last, on the 12th of April, 1753, there being a smart gust of some
continuance, I charged one phial pretty well with lightning, and the
other equally, as near as I could judge, with electricity from my
glass globe; and, having placed them properly, I beheld, with great
surprize and pleasure, the cork ball play briskly between them; and
was convinced that one bottle was electrised _negatively_.

I repeated this experiment several times during the gust, and in
eight succeeding gusts, always with the same success; and being
of opinion (for reasons I formerly gave in my letter to Mr.
Kinnersley, since printed in London) that the glass globe electrises
_positively_, I concluded that the clouds are _always_ electrised
_negatively_, or have always in them less than their natural quantity
of the electric fluid.

Yet notwithstanding so many experiments, it seems I concluded too
soon; for at last, June the 6th, in a gust which continued from five
o'clock, P. M. to seven, I met with one cloud that was electrised
positively, though several that passed over my rod before, during the
same gust, were in the negative state. This was thus discovered:

I had another concurring experiment, which I often repeated, to prove
the negative state of the clouds, viz. while the bells were ringing,
I took the phial charged from the glass globe, and applied its wire
to the erected rod, considering, that if the clouds were electrised
_positively_, the rod which received its electricity from them must
be so too; and then the additional _positive_ electricity of the
phial would make the bells ring faster:--But, if the clouds were in a
_negative_ state, they must exhaust the electric fluid from my rod,
and bring that into the same negative state with themselves, and then
the wire of a positively charged phial, supplying the rod with what
it wanted (which it was obliged otherwise to draw from the earth by
means of the pendulous brass ball playing between the two bells) the
ringing would cease till the bottle was discharged.

In this manner I quite discharged into the rod several phials that
were charged from the glass globe, the electric fluid streaming from
the wire to the rod, till the wire would receive no spark from the
finger; and, during this supply to the rod from the phial, the bells
stopped ringing; but by continuing the application of the phial wire
to the rod, I exhausted the natural quantity from the inside surface
of the same phials, or, as I call it, charged them _negatively_.

At length, while I was charging a phial by my glass globe, to repeat
this experiment, my bells, of themselves, stopped ringing, and, after
some pause, began to ring again.--But now, when I approached the
wire of the charged phial to the rod, instead of the usual stream
that I expected from the wire to the rod, there was no spark; not
even when I brought the wire and the rod to touch; yet the bells
continued ringing vigorously, which proved to me, that the rod was
then _positively_ electrified, as well as the wire of the phial, and
equally so; and, consequently, that the particular cloud then over
the rod was in the same positive state. This was near the end of the
gust.

But this was a single experiment, which, however, destroys my first
too general conclusion, and reduces me to this: _That the clouds of
a thunder-gust are most commonly in a negative state of electricity,
but sometimes in a positive state._

The latter I believe is rare; for though I soon after the last
experiment set out on a journey to Boston, and was from home most
part of the summer, which prevented my making farther trials and
observations; yet Mr. Kinnersley returning from the Islands just as I
left home, pursued the experiments during my absence, and informs me
that he always found the clouds in the _negative_ state.

So that, for the most part, in thunder-strokes, _it is the earth that
strikes into the clouds, and not the clouds that strike into the
earth_.

Those who are versed in electric experiments, will easily conceive,
that the effects and appearances must be nearly the same in either
case; the same explosion, and the same flash between one cloud and
another, and between the clouds and mountains, &c. the same rending
of trees, walls, &c. which the electric fluid meets with in its
passage, and the same fatal shock to animal bodies; and that pointed
rods fixed on buildings, or masts of ships, and communicating with
the earth or sea, must be of the same service in restoring the
equilibrium silently between the earth and clouds, or in conducting a
flash or stroke, if one should be, so as to save harmless the house
or vessel: for points have equal power to throw off, as to draw on
the electric fire, and, rods will conduct up as well as down.

But though the light gained from these experiments makes no
alteration in the practice, it makes a considerable one in the
theory. And now we as much need an hypothesis to explain by what
means the clouds become negatively, as before to shew how they
became positively electrified.

I cannot forbear venturing some few conjectures on this occasion:
they are what occur to me at present, and though future discoveries
should prove them not wholly right, yet they may in the mean time be
of some use, by stirring up the curious to make more experiments, and
occasion more exact disquisitions.

I conceive then, that this globe of earth and water, with its plants,
animals, and buildings, have diffused throughout their substance, a
quantity of the electric fluid, just as much as they can contain,
which I call the _natural quantity_.

That this natural quantity is not the same in all kinds of common
matter under the same dimensions, nor in the same kind of common
matter in all circumstances; but a solid foot, for instance, of one
kind of common matter, may contain more of the electric fluid than a
solid foot of some other kind of common matter; and a pound weight of
the same kind of common matter may, when in a rarer state, contain
more of the electric fluid than when in a denser state.

For the electric fluid, being attracted by any portion of common
matter, the parts of that fluid, (which have among themselves a
mutual repulsion) are brought so near to each other by the attraction
of the common matter that absorbs them, as that their repulsion is
equal to the condensing power of attraction in common matter; and
then such portion of common matter will absorb no more.

Bodies of different kinds having thus attracted and absorbed what I
call their _natural quantity, i. e._ just as much of the electric
fluid as is suited to their circumstances of density, rarity, and
power of attracting, do not then show any signs of electricity among
each other.

And if more electric fluid be added to one of these bodies, it does
not enter, but spreads on the surface, forming an atmosphere; and
then such body shews signs of electricity.

I have in a former paper compared common matter to a spunge, and the
electric fluid to water: I beg leave once more to make use of the
same comparison, to illustrate farther my meaning in this particular.

When a spunge is somewhat condensed by being squeezed between the
fingers, it will not receive and retain so much water as when in its
more loose and open state.

If _more_ squeezed and condensed, some of the water will come out of
its inner parts, and flow on the surface.

If the pressure of the fingers be entirely removed, the spunge will
not only resume what was lately forced out, but attract an additional
quantity.

As the spunge in its rarer state will _naturally_ attract and absorb
_more_ water, and in its denser state will _naturally_ attract and
absorb _less_ water; we may call the quantity it attacks and absorbs
in either state, its _natural quantity_, the state being considered.

Now what the spunge is to water, the same is water to the electric
fluid.

When a portion of water is in its common dense state, it can hold no
more electric fluid than it has: if any be added, it spreads on the
surface.

When the same portion of water is rarefied into vapour, and forms
a cloud, it is then capable of receiving and absorbing a much
greater quantity; there is room for each particle to have an electric
atmosphere.

Thus water, in its rarefied state, or in the form of a cloud, will
be in a negative state of electricity; it will have less than its
_natural quantity_; that is, less than it is naturally capable of
attracting and absorbing in that state.

Such a cloud, then, coming so near the earth as to be within the
striking distance, will receive from the earth a flash of the
electric fluid; which flash, to supply a great extent of cloud, must
sometimes contain a very great quantity of that fluid.

Or such a cloud, passing over woods of tall trees, may from the
points and sharp edges of their moist top leaves, receive silently
some supply.

A cloud being by any means supplied from the earth, may strike into
other clouds that have not been supplied, or not so much supplied;
and those to others, till an equilibrium is produced among all the
clouds that are within striking distance of each other.

The cloud thus supplied, having parted with much of what it first
received, may require and receive a fresh supply from the earth,
or from some other cloud, which by the wind is brought into such a
situation as to receive it more readily from the earth.

Hence repeated and continual strokes and flashes till the clouds have
all got nearly their natural quantity as clouds, or till they have
descended in showers, and are united again with this terraqueous
globe, their original.

Thus, thunder-clouds are generally in a negative state of electricity
compared with the earth, agreeable to most of our experiments; yet
as by one experiment we found a cloud electrised positively, I
conjecture that, in that case, such cloud, after having received
what was, in its rare state, only its _natural quantity_, became
compressed by the driving winds, or some other means, so that part
of what it had absorbed was forced out, and formed an electric
atmosphere around it in its denser state. Hence it was capable of
communicating positive electricity to my rod.

To show that a body in different circumstances of dilatation and
contraction is capable of receiving and retaining more or less of
the electric fluid on its surface, I would relate the following
experiment: I placed a clean wine glass on the floor, and on it a
small silver can. In the can I put about three yards of brass chain;
to one end of which I fastened a silk thread, which went right up to
the cieling, where it passed over a pulley, and came down again to
my hand, that I might at pleasure draw the chain up out of the can,
extending it till within a foot of the cieling, and let it gradually
sink into the can again.--From the cieling, by another thread of
fine raw silk, I suspended a small light lock of cotton, so as that
when it hung perpendicularly, it came in contact with the side of
the can.--Then approaching the wire of a charged phial to the can,
I gave it a spark, which flowed round in an electric atmosphere;
and the lock of cotton was repelled from the side of the can to the
distance of about nine or ten inches. The can would not then receive
another spark from the wire of the phial; but as I gradually drew
up the chain, the atmosphere of the can diminished by flowing over
the rising chain, and the lock of cotton accordingly drew nearer and
nearer to the can; and then, if I again brought the phial wire near
the can, it would receive another spark, and the cotton fly off
again to its first distance; and thus, as the chain was drawn higher,
the can would receive more sparks; because the can and extended chain
were capable of supporting a greater atmosphere than the can with
the chain gathered up into its belly.--And that the atmosphere round
the can was diminished by raising the chain, and increased again by
lowering it, is not only agreeable to reason, since the atmosphere
of the chain, must be drawn from that of the can, when it rose, and
returned to it again when it fell; but was also evident to the eye,
the lock of cotton always approaching the can when the chain was
drawn up, and receding when it was let down again.

Thus we see that increase of surface makes a body capable of
receiving a greater electric atmosphere: but this experiment does
not, I own, fully demonstrate my new hypothesis; for the brass and
silver still continue in their solid state, and are not rarefied into
vapour, as the water is in clouds. Perhaps some future experiments on
vapourized water may set this matter in a clearer light.

One seemingly material objection arises to the new hypothesis, and it
is this: If water, in its rarefied state, as a cloud, requires, and
will absorb more of the electric fluid than when in its dense state
as water, why does it not acquire from the earth all it wants at the
instant of its leaving the surface, while it is yet near, and but
just rising in vapour? To this difficulty I own I cannot at present
give a solution satisfactory to myself: I thought, however, that I
ought to state it in its full force, as I have done, and submit the
whole to examination.

And I would beg leave to recommend it to the curious in this branch
of natural philosophy, to repeat with care and accurate observation
the experiments I have reported in this and former papers relating to
_positive_ and _negative_ electricity, with such other relative ones
as shall occur to them, that it may be certainly known whether the
electricity communicated by a glass globe, be _really positive_. And
also I would request all who may have an opportunity of observing the
recent effects of lightning on buildings, trees, &c. that they would
consider them particularly with a view to discover the direction. But
in these examinations, this one thing is always to be understood,
viz. that a stream of the electric fluid passing through wood,
brick, metal, &c. while such fluid passes in _small quantity_, the
mutually repulsive power of its parts is confined and overcome by the
cohesion of the parts of the body it passes through, so as to prevent
an explosion; but when the fluid comes in a quantity too great to
be confined by such cohesion, it explodes, and rends or fuses the
body that endeavoured to confine it. If it be wood, brick, stone,
or the like, the splinters will fly off on that side where there is
least resistance. And thus, when a hole is struck through pasteboard
by the electrified jar, if the surfaces of the pasteboard are not
confined or compressed, there will be a bur raised all round the hole
on both sides the pasteboard; but if one side be confined, so that
the bur cannot be raised on that side, it will be all raised on the
other, which way soever the fluid was directed. For the bur round the
outside of the hole, is the effect of the explosion every way from
the centre of the stream, and not an effect of the direction.

In every stroke of lightning, I am of opinion that the stream of the
electric fluid, moving to restore the equilibrium between the cloud
and the earth, does always previously find its passage, and mark out,
as I may say, its own course, taking in its way all the conductors
it can find, such as metals, damp walls, moist wood, &c. and will go
considerably out of a direct course, for the sake of the assistance
of good conductors; and that, in this course, it is actually moving,
though silently and imperceptibly, before the explosion, in and among
the conductors; which explosion happens only when the conductors
cannot discharge it as fast as they receive it, by reason of their
being incomplete, dis-united, too small, or not of the best materials
for conducting. Metalline rods, therefore, of sufficient thickness,
and extending from the highest part of an edifice to the ground,
being of the best materials and complete conductors, will, I think,
secure the building from damage, either by restoring the equilibrium
so fast as to prevent a stroke, or by conducting it in the substance
of the rod as far as the rod goes, so that there shall be no
explosion but what is above its point, between that and the clouds.

If it be asked, what thickness of a metalline rod may be supposed
sufficient? In answer, I would remark, that five large glass jars,
such as I have described in my former papers, discharge a very great
quantity of electricity, which nevertheless will be all conducted
round the corner of a book, by the fine filleting of gold on the
cover, it following the gold the farthest way about, rather than
take the shorter course through the cover, that not being so good
a conductor. Now in this line of gold, the metal is so extremely
thin as to be little more than the colour of gold, and on an octavo
book is not in the whole an inch square, and therefore not the
thirty-sixth part of a grain, according to M. Reaumur; yet it is
sufficient to conduct the charge of five large jars, and how many
more I know not. Now, I suppose a wire of a quarter of an inch
diameter to contain about five thousand times as much metal as there
is in that gold line, and if so, it will conduct the charge of
twenty-five thousand such glass jars, which is a quantity, I imagine,
far beyond what was ever contained in any one stroke of natural
lightning. But a rod of half an inch diameter would conduct four
times as much as one of a quarter.

And with regard to conducting, though a certain thickness of metal
be required to conduct a great quantity of electricity, and, at the
same time, keep its own substance firm and unseparated; and a less
quantity, as a very small wire for instance, will be destroyed by
the explosion; yet such small wire will have answered the end of
conducting that stroke, though it become incapable of conducting
another. And considering the extreme rapidity with which the electric
fluid moves without exploding, when it has a free passage, or
compleat metal communication, I should think a vast quantity would
be conducted in a short time, either to or from a cloud, to restore
its equilibrium with the earth, by means of a very small wire; and
therefore thick rods should seem not so necessary.--However, as
the quantity of lightning discharged in one stroke, cannot well be
measured, and, in different strokes, is certainly very various, in
some much greater than others; and as iron (the best metal for the
purpose, being least apt to fuse) is cheap, it may be well enough
to provide a larger canal to guide that impetuous blast than we
imagine necessary: for, though one middling wire may be sufficient,
two or three can do no harm. And time, with careful observations
well compared, will at length point out the proper size to greater
certainty.

Pointed rods erected on edifices may likewise often prevent a stroke,
in the following manner: An eye so situated as to view horizontally
the under side of a thunder-cloud, will see it very ragged, with a
number of separate fragments, or petty clouds, one under another,
the lowest sometimes not far from the earth. These, as so many
stepping-stones, assist in conducting a stroke between the cloud
and a building. To represent these by an experiment, take two or
three locks of fine loose cotton, connect one of them with the prime
conductor by a fine thread of two inches (which may be spun out of
the same lock by the fingers) another to that, and the third to the
second, by like threads.--Turn the globe and you will see these locks
extend themselves towards the table (as the lower small clouds do
towards the earth) being attracted by it: but on presenting a sharp
point erect under the lowest, it will shrink up to the second, the
second to the first, and all together to the prime conductor, where
they will continue as long as the point continues under them. May
not, in like manner, the small electrised clouds, whose equilibrium
with the earth is soon restored by the point, rise up to the main
body, and by that means occasion so large a vacancy, as that the
grand cloud cannot strike in that place?

These thoughts, my dear friend, are many of them crude and hasty;
and if I were merely ambitious of acquiring some reputation
in philosophy, I ought to keep them by me, till corrected and
improved by time, and farther experience. But since even short
hints and imperfect experiments in any new branch of science,
being communicated, have oftentimes a good effect, in exciting the
attention of the ingenious to the subject, and so become the occasion
of more exact disquisition, and more compleat discoveries, you are
at liberty to communicate this paper to whom you please; it being of
more importance that knowledge should increase, than that your friend
should be thought an accurate philosopher.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Additional Proofs of the positive and negative State of
  Electricity in the Clouds.--New Method of ascertaining it._


  _Philadelphia, April 18, 1754._

  SIR,

Since September last, having been abroad on two long journeys, and
otherwise much engaged, I have made but few observations on the
_positive_ and _negative_ state of electricity in the clouds. But Mr.
Kinnersley kept his rod and bells in good order, and has made many.

Once this winter the bells rang a long time, during a fall of snow,
though no thunder was heard, or lightning seen. Sometimes the flashes
and cracks of the electric matter between bell and bell were so
large and loud as to be heard all over the house: but by all his
observations, the clouds were constantly in a negative state, till
about six weeks ago, when he found them once to change in a few
minutes from the negative to the positive. About a fortnight after
that, he made another observation of the same kind; and last Monday
afternoon, the wind blowing hard at S. E. and veering round to N. E.
with many thick driving clouds, there were five or six successive
changes from negative to positive, and from positive to negative,
the bells stopping a minute or two between every change. Besides
the methods mentioned in my paper of September last, of discovering
the electrical state of the clouds, the following may be used. When
your bells are ringing, pass a rubbed tube by the edge of the bell,
connected with your pointed rod: if the cloud is then in a negative
state, the ringing will stop; if in a positive state, it will
continue, and perhaps be quicker. Or, suspend a very small cork-ball
by a fine silk thread, so that it may hang close to the edge of the
rod-bell: then whenever the bell is electrified, whether positively
or negatively, the little ball will be repelled, and continue at some
distance from the bell. Have ready a round-headed glass stopper of a
decanter, rub it on your side till it is electrified, then present
it to the cork-ball. If the electricity in the ball is positive, it
will be repelled from the glass stopper as well as from the bell. If
negative, it will fly to the stopper.

  B. FRANKLIN.




ELECTRICAL EXPERIMENTS,

  _With an attempt to account for their several phænomena. Together
  with some observations on thunder-clouds, in further confirmation
  of Mr. Franklin's observations on the positive and negative
  electrical state of the clouds, by John Canton, M. A. and F. R. S._


  _Dec. 6, 1753._

EXPERIMENT I.

From the cieling, or any convenient part of a room, let two
cork-balls, each about the bigness of a small pea, be suspended by
linen threads of eight or nine inches in length, so as to be in
contact with each other. Bring the excited glass tube under the
balls, and they will be separated by it, when held at the distance
of three or four feet; let it be brought nearer, and they will stand
farther apart; entirely withdraw it, and they will immediately come
together. This experiment may be made with very small brass balls
hung by silver wire; and will succeed as well with sealing-wax made
electrical, as with glass.


EXPERIMENT II.

If two cork-balls be suspended by dry silk threads, the excited tube
must be brought within eighteen inches before they will repel each
other; which they will continue to do, for some time, after the tube
is taken away.

As the balls in the first experiment are not insulated, they cannot
properly be said to be electrified: but when they hang within the
atmosphere of the excited tube, they may attract and condense the
electrical fluid round about them, and be separated by the repulsion
of its particles. It is conjectured also, that the balls at this
time contain less than their common share of the electrical fluid,
on account of the repelling power of that which surrounds them;
though some, perhaps, is continually entering and passing through
the threads. And if that be the case, the reason is plain why the
balls hung by silk, in the second experiment, must be in a much more
dense part of the atmosphere of the tube, before they will repel each
other. At the approach of an excited stick of wax to the balls, in
the first experiment, the electrical fire is supposed to come through
the threads into the balls, and be condensed there, in its passage
towards the wax; for, according to Mr. Franklin, excited glass
_emits_ the electrical fluid, but excited wax _receives_ it.


EXPERIMENT III.

Let a tin tube, of four or five feet in length, and about two inches
in diameter, be insulated by silk; and from one end of it let the
cork-balls be suspended by linen threads. Electrify it, by bringing
the excited glass tube near the other end, so as that the balls
may stand an inch and an half, or two inches, apart: then, at the
approach of the excited tube, they will, by degrees, lose their
repelling power, and come into contact; and as the tube is brought
still nearer, they will separate again to as great a distance as
before: in the return of the tube they will approach each other
till they touch, and then repel as at first. If the tin tube be
electrified by wax, or the wire of a charged phial, the balls will be
affected in the same manner at the approach of excited wax, or the
wire of the phial.


EXPERIMENT IV.

Electrify the cork-balls as in the last experiment by glass, and
at the approach of an excited stick of wax their repulsion will be
increased. The effect will be the same, if the excited glass be
brought towards them, when they have been electrified by wax.

The bringing the excited glass to the end, or edge of the tin-tube,
in the third experiment, is supposed to electrify it positively, or
to add to the electrical fire it before contained; and therefore
some will be running off through the balls, and they will repel each
other. But at the approach of excited glass, which likewise _emits_
the electrical fluid, the discharge of it from the balls will be
diminished; or part will be driven back, by a force acting in a
contrary direction: and they will come nearer together. If the tube
be held at such a distance from the balls, that the excess of the
density of the fluid round about them, above the common quantity in
air, be equal to the excess of the density of that within them, above
the common quantity contained in cork; their repulsion will be quite
destroyed. But if the tube be brought nearer; the fluid without being
more dense than that within the balls, it will be attracted by them,
and they will recede from each other again.

When the apparatus has lost part of its natural share of this fluid,
by the approach of excited wax to one end of it, or is electrified
negatively; the electrical fire is attracted and imbibed by the balls
to supply the deficiency; and that more plentifully at the approach
of excited glass; or a body positively electrified, than before;
whence the distance between the balls will be increased, as the
fluid surrounding them is augmented. And in general, whether by the
approach or recess of any body; if the difference between the density
of the internal and external fluid be increased, or diminished; the
repulsion of the balls will be increased, or diminished, accordingly.


EXPERIMENT V.

When the insulated tin tube is not electrified, bring the excited
glass tube towards the middle of it, so as to be nearly at right
angles with it, and the balls at the end will repel each other;
and the more so, as the excited tube is brought nearer. When it
has been held a few seconds, at the distance of about six inches,
withdraw it, and the balls will approach each other till they touch;
and then separating again, as the tube is moved farther off, will
continue to repel when it is taken quite away. And this repulsion
between the balls will be increased by the approach of excited
glass, but diminished by excited wax; just as if the apparatus had
been electrified by wax, after the manner described in the third
experiment.


EXPERIMENT VI.

Insulate two tin tubes, distinguished by A and B, so as to be in
a line with each other, and about half an inch apart; and at the
remote end of each, let a pair of cork balls be suspended. Towards
the middle of A, bring the excited glass tube, and holding it a short
time, at the distance of a few inches, each pair of balls will be
observed to separate: withdraw the tube, and the balls of A will
come together, and then repel each other again; but those of B will
hardly be affected. By the approach of the excited glass tube, held
under the balls of A, their repulsion will be increased: but if the
tube be brought, in the same manner, towards the balls of B, their
repulsion will be diminished.

In the fifth experiment, the common stock of electrical matter in the
tin tube, is supposed to be attenuated about the middle, and to be
condensed at the ends, by the repelling power of the atmosphere of
the excited glass tube, when held near it. And perhaps the tin tube
may lose some of its natural quantity of the electrical fluid, before
it receives any from the glass; as that fluid will more readily run
off from the ends and edges of it, than enter at the middle: and
accordingly, when the glass tube is withdrawn, and the fluid is again
equally diffused through the apparatus, it is found to be electrified
negatively: for excited glass brought under the balls will increase
their repulsion.

In the sixth experiment, part of the fluid driven out of one tin tube
enters the other; which is found to be electrified positively, by the
decreasing of the repulsion of its balls, at the approach of excited
glass.


EXPERIMENT VII.

Let the tin tube, with a pair of balls at one end, be placed three
feet at least from any part of the room, and the air rendered very
dry by means of a fire: electrify the apparatus to a considerable
degree; then touch the tin tube with a finger, or any other
conductor, and the balls will, notwithstanding, continue to repel
each other; though not at so great a distance as before.

The air surrounding the apparatus to the distance of two or three
feet, is supposed to contain more or less of the electrical fire,
than its common share, as the tin tube is electrified positively,
or negatively; and when very dry, may not part with its overplus,
or have its deficiency supplied so suddenly, as the tin; but may
continue to be electrified, after that has been touched for a
considerable time.


EXPERIMENT VIII.

Having made the Torricellian vacuum about five feet long, after the
manner described in the _Philosophical Transactions_, vol. xlvii. p.
370, if the excited tube be brought within a small distance of it,
a light will be seen through more than half its length; which soon
vanishes, if the tube be not brought nearer; but will appear again,
as that is moved farther off. This may be repeated several times,
without exciting the tube afresh.

This experiment may be considered as a kind of ocular demonstration
of the truth of Mr. Franklin's hypothesis; that when the electrical
fluid is condensed on one side of thin glass, it will be repelled
from the other, if it meets with no resistance. According to which,
at the approach of the excited tube, the fire is supposed to be
repelled from the inside of the glass surrounding the vacuum, and to
be carried off through the columns of mercury; but, as the tube is
withdrawn, the fire is supposed to return.


EXPERIMENT IX.

Let an excited stick of wax, of two feet and an half in length, and
about an inch in diameter, be held near its middle. Excite the glass
tube, and draw it over one half of it; then, turning it a little
about its axis, let the tube be excited again, and drawn over the
same half; and let this operation be repeated several times: then
will that half destroy the repelling power of balls electrified by
glass, and the other half will increase it.

By this experiment it appears, that wax also may be electrified
positively and negatively. And it is probable, that all bodies
whatsoever may have the quantity they contain of the electrical
fluid, increased, or diminished. The clouds, I have observed, by a
great number of experiments, to be some in a positive, and others
in a negative state of electricity. For the cork balls, electrified
by them, will sometimes close at the approach of excited glass; and
at other times be separated to a greater distance. And this change
I have known to happen five or six times in less than half an hour;
the balls coming together each time and remaining in contact a few
seconds, before they repel each other again. It may likewise easily
be discovered, by a charged phial, whether the electrical fire be
drawn out of the apparatus by a negative cloud, or forced into it
by a positive one: and by which soever it be electrified, should
that cloud either part with its overplus, or have its deficiency
supplied suddenly, the apparatus will lose its electricity: which
is frequently observed to be the case, immediately after a flash of
lightning. Yet when the air is very dry, the apparatus will continue
to be electrised for ten minutes, or a quarter of an hour, after
the clouds have passed the zenith; and sometimes till they appear
more than half-way towards the horizon. Rain, especially when the
drops are large, generally brings down the electrical fire: and
hail, in summer, I believe never fails. When the apparatus was last
electrified, it was by the fall of thawing snow, which happened so
lately, as on the 12th of November; that being the twenty-sixth
day, and sixty-first time it has been electrified, since it was
first set up; which was about the middle of May. And as Fahrenheit's
thermometer was but seven degrees above freezing, it is supposed the
winter will not entirely put a stop to observations of this sort.
At London, no more than two thunder-storms have happened during the
whole summer; and the apparatus was sometimes so strongly electrified
in one of them, that the bells, which have been frequently rung by
the clouds, so loud as to be heard in every room of the house (the
doors being open) were silenced by the almost constant stream of
dense electrical fire, between each bell and the brass ball, which
would not suffer it to strike.

I shall conclude this paper, already too long, with the following
queries:

1. May not air, suddenly rarefied, give electrical fire to, and air
suddenly condensed, receive electrical fire from, clouds and vapours
passing through it?

2. Is not the _aurora borealis_, the flashing of electrical fire from
positive, towards negative clouds at a great distance, through the
upper part of the atmosphere, where the resistance is least?




EXPERIMENTS

  _Made in Pursuance of those made by Mr. Canton, dated December 6,
  1753; with Explanations, by Mr. Benjamin Franklin._

  Read at the Royal Society, Dec. 18, 1755.


  _Philadelphia, March 14, 1755._

PRINCIPLES.

I. Electric atmospheres, that flow round non-electric bodies, being
brought near each other, do not readily mix and unite into one
atmosphere, but remain separate, and repel each other.

This is plainly seen in suspended cork balls, and other bodies
electrified.

II. An electric atmosphere not only repels another electric
atmosphere, but will also repel the electric matter contained in the
substance of a body approaching it; and without joining or mixing
with it, force it to other parts of the body that contained it.

This is shewn by some of the following experiments.

III. Bodies electrified negatively, or deprived of their natural
quantity of electricity, repel each other, (or at least appear to do
so, by a mutual receding) as well as those electrified positively, or
which have electric atmospheres.

This is shewn by applying the negatively charged wire of a phial to
two cork balls, suspended by silk threads, and many other experiments.


PREPARATION.

Fix a tassel of fifteen or twenty threads, three inches long, at one
end of a tin prime conductor (mine is about five feet long, and four
inches diameter) supported by silk lines.

Let the threads be a little damp, but not wet.


EXPERIMENT I.

  _Pass an excited glass tube near the other end of the prime
  conductor, so as to give it some sparks, and the threads will
  diverge._

Because each thread, as well as the prime conductor, has acquired an
electric atmosphere, which repels and is repelled by the atmospheres
of the other threads: if those several atmospheres would readily mix,
the threads might unite, and hang in the middle of one atmosphere,
common to them all.

  _Rub the tube afresh, and approach the prime conductor therewith,
  crossways, near that end, but not nigh enough to give sparks; and
  the threads will diverge a little more._

Because the atmosphere of the prime conductor is pressed by the
atmosphere of the excited tube, and driven towards the end where the
threads are, by which each thread acquires more atmosphere.

  _Withdraw the tube, and they will close as much._

They close as much, and no more; because the atmosphere of the glass
tube not having mixed with the atmosphere of the prime conductor, is
withdrawn intire, having made no addition to, or diminution from it.

  _Bring the excited tube under the tuft of threads, and they will
  close a little._

They close, because the atmosphere of the glass tube repels their
atmospheres, and drives part of them back on the prime conductor.

  _Withdraw it, and they will diverge as much._

For the portion of atmosphere which they had lost, returns to them
again.


EXPERIMENT II.

  _Excite the glass tube, and approach the prime conductor with
  it, holding it across, near the end opposite to that on which
  the threads hang, at the distance of five or six inches. Keep it
  there a few seconds, and the threads of the tassels will diverge.
  Withdraw it, and they will close._

They diverge, because they have received electric atmospheres
from the electric matter before contained in the substance of the
prime conductor; but which is now repelled and driven away, by the
atmosphere of the glass tube, from the parts of the prime conductor
opposite and nearest to that atmosphere, and forced out upon the
surface of the prime conductor at its other end, and upon the threads
hanging thereto. Were it any part of the atmosphere of the glass
tube that flowed over and along the prime conductor to the threads,
and gave them atmospheres (as is the case when a spark is given to
the prime conductor from the glass tube) such part of the tube's
atmosphere would have remained, and the threads continue to diverge;
but they close on withdrawing the tube, because the tube takes with
it _all its own atmosphere_, and the electric matter, which had
been driven out of the substance of the prime conductor, and formed
atmospheres round the threads, is thereby permitted to return to its
place.

  _Take a spark from the prime conductor near the threads, when they
  are diverged as before, and they will close._

For by so doing you take away their atmospheres, composed of the
electric matter driven out of the substance of the prime conductor,
as aforesaid, by the repellency of the atmosphere of the glass tube.
By taking this spark you rob the prime conductor of part of its
natural quantity of the electric matter; which part so taken is not
supplied by the glass tube, for when that is afterwards withdrawn, it
takes with it its whole atmosphere, and leaves the prime conductor
electrised negatively, as appears by the next operation.

  _Then withdraw the tube, and they will open again._

For now the electric matter in the prime conductor, returning to its
equilibrium, or equal diffusion, in all parts of its substance, and
the prime conductor having lost some of its natural quantity, the
threads connected with it lose part of theirs, and so are electrised
negatively, and therefore repel each other, by _Pr. III._

  _Approach the prime conductor with the tube near the same place as
  at first, and they will close again._

Because the part of their natural quantity of electric fluid, which
they had lost, is now restored to them again, by the repulsion of the
glass tube forcing that fluid to them from other parts of the prime
conductor; so they are now again in their natural state.

  _Withdraw it, and they will open again._

For what had been restored to them, is now taken from them again,
flowing back into the prime conductor, and leaving them once more
electrised negatively.

  _Bring the excited tube under the threads, and they will diverge
  more._

Because more of their natural quantity is driven from them into the
prime conductor, and thereby their negative electricity increased.


EXPERIMENT III.

  _The prime conductor not being electrified, bring the excited tube
  under the tassel, and the threads will diverge._

Part of their natural quantity is thereby driven out of them into the
prime conductor, and they become negatively electrised, and therefore
repel each other.

  _Keeping the tube in the same place with one hand, attempt to touch
  the threads with the finger of the other hand, and they will recede
  from the finger._

Because the finger being plunged into the atmosphere of the glass
tube, as well as the threads, part of its natural quantity is
driven back through the hand and body, by that atmosphere, and the
finger becomes, as well as the threads, negatively electrised,
and so repels, and is repelled by them. To confirm this, hold a
slender light lock of cotton, two or three inches long, near a
prime conductor, that is electrified by a glass globe, or tube. You
will see the cotton stretch itself out towards the prime conductor.
Attempt to touch it with the finger of the other hand, and it will be
repelled by the finger. Approach it with a positively charged wire of
a bottle, and it will fly to the wire. Bring it near a negatively
charged wire of a bottle, it will recede from that wire in the same
manner that it did from the finger; which demonstrates the finger to
be negatively electrised, as well as the lock of cotton so situated.




  _Turkey killed by Electricity_.--_Effect of a Shock on the Operator
  in making the Experiment._


As Mr. Franklin, in a former letter to Mr. Collinson, mentioned his
intending to try the power of a very strong electrical shock upon a
turkey, that gentleman accordingly has been so very obliging as to
send an account of it, which is to the following purpose.

He made first several experiments on fowls, and found, that two
large thin glass jars gilt, holding each about six gallons, were
sufficient, when fully charged, to kill common hens outright; but
the turkeys, though thrown into violent convulsions, and then lying
as dead for some minutes, would recover in less than a quarter of
an hour. However, having added three other such to the former two,
though not fully charged, he killed a turkey of about ten pounds
weight, and believes that they would have killed a much larger. He
conceited, as himself says, that the birds killed in this manner eat
uncommonly tender.

In making these experiments, he found, that a man could, without
great detriment, bear a much greater shock than he had imagined: for
he inadvertently received the stroke of two of these jars through his
arms and body, when they were very near fully charged. It seemed
to him an universal blow throughout the body from head to foot, and
was followed by a violent quick trembling in the trunk, which went
off gradually, in a few seconds. It was some minutes before he could
recollect his thoughts, so as to know what was the matter; for he
did not see the flash, though his eye was on the spot of the prime
conductor, from whence it struck the back of his hand; nor did he
hear the crack, though the by-standers said it was a loud one; nor
did he particularly feel the stroke on his hand, though he afterwards
found it had raised a swelling there, of the bigness of half a
pistol-bullet. His arms and the back of the neck felt somewhat numbed
the remainder of the evening, and his breast was sore for a week
after as if it had been bruised. From this experiment may be seen the
danger, even under the greatest caution, to the operator, when making
these experiments with large jars; for it is not to be doubted, but
several of these fully charged would as certainly, by increasing
them, in proportion to the size, kill a man, as they before did a
turkey.

_N. B._ The original of this letter, which was read at the Royal
Society, has been mislaid.




TO DR. L----[65], AT CHARLES TOWN, SOUTH CAROLINA.

  _Differences in the Qualities of Glass.--Account of Domien, an
  Electrician and Traveller.--Conjectures respecting the Pores of
  Glass.--Origin of the Author's Idea of drawing down Lightning.--No
  satisfactory Hypothesis respecting the Manner in which Clouds
  become electrified.--Six Men knocked down at once by an electrical
  Shock.--Reflections on the Spirit of Invention._


  _Philadelphia, March 18, 1755._

  SIR,

I send you enclosed a paper containing some new experiments I have
made, in pursuance of those by Mr. Canton that are printed with my
last letters. I hope these, with my explanation of them, will afford
you some entertainment[66].

In answer to your several enquiries. The tubes and globes we use
here, are chiefly made here. The glass has a greenish cast, but is
clear and hard, and, I think, better for electrical experiments than
the white glass of London, which is not so hard. There are certainly
great differences in glass. A white globe I had made here some years
since, would never, by any means, be excited. Two of my friends tried
it, as well as myself, without success. At length, putting it on an
electric stand, a chain from the prime conductor being in contact
with it, I found it had the properties of a non-electric; for I could
draw sparks from any part of it, though it was very clean and dry.

All I know of Domien, is, that by his own account he was a native of
Transylvania, of Tartar descent, but a priest of the Greek church:
he spoke and wrote Latin very readily and correctly. He set out
from his own country with an intention of going round the world, as
much as possible by land. He travelled through Germany, France, and
Holland, to England. Resided some time at Oxford. From England he
came to Maryland; thence went to New England; returned by land to
Philadelphia; and from hence travelled through Maryland, Virginia,
and North Carolina to you. He thought it might be of service to him
in his travels to know something of electricity. I taught him the
use of the tube; how to charge the Leyden phial, and some other
experiments. He wrote to me from Charles-Town, that he had lived
eight hundred miles upon electricity, it had been meat, drink, and
cloathing to him. His last letter to me was, I think, from Jamaica,
desiring me to send the tubes you mention, to meet him at the
Havannah, from whence he expected to get a passage to La Vera Cruz;
designed travelling over land through Mexico to Acapulco; thence to
get a passage to Manilla, and so through China, India, Persia, and
Turkey, home to his own country; proposing to support himself chiefly
by electricity. A strange project! But he was, as you observe, a very
singular character. I was sorry the tubes did not get to the Havannah
in time for him. If they are still in being, please to send for them,
and accept of them. What became of him afterwards I have never heard.
He promised to write to me as often as he could on his journey, and
as soon as he should get home after finishing his tour. It is now
seven years since he was here. If he is still in New Spain, as
you imagine from that loose report, I suppose it must be that they
confine him there, and prevent his writing: but I think it more
likely that he may be dead.

The questions you ask about the pores of glass, I cannot answer
otherwise, than that I know nothing of their nature; and
suppositions, however ingenious, are often mere mistakes. My
hypothesis, that they were smaller near the middle of the glass, too
small to admit the passage of electricity, which could pass through
the surface till it came near the middle, was certainly wrong: For
soon after I had written that letter, I did, in order to _confirm_
the hypothesis (which indeed I ought to have done before I wrote it)
make an experiment. I ground away five-sixths of the thickness of the
glass, from the side of one of my phials, expecting that the supposed
denser part being so removed, the electric fluid might come through
the remainder of the glass, which I had imagined more open; but I
found myself mistaken. The bottle charged as well after the grinding
as before. I am now, as much as ever, at a loss to know how or where
the quantity of electric fluid, on the positive side of the glass, is
disposed of.

As to the difference of conductors, there is not only this, that some
will conduct electricity in small quantities, and yet do not conduct
it fast enough to produce the shock; but even among those that will
conduct a shock, there are some that do it better than others. Mr.
Kinnersley has found, by a very good experiment, that when the charge
of a bottle hath an opportunity of passing two ways, _i. e._ straight
through a trough of water ten feet long, and six inches square; or
round about through twenty feet of wire, it passes through the wire,
and not through the water, though that is the shortest course; the
wire being the better conductor. When the wire is taken away, it
passes through the water, as may be felt by a hand plunged in the
water; but it cannot be felt in the water when the wire is used at
the same time. Thus, though a small phial containing water will give
a smart shock, one containing the same quantity of mercury will give
one much stronger, the mercury being the better conductor; while one
containing oil, only, will scarce give any shock at all.

Your question, how I came first to think of proposing the experiment
of drawing down the lightning, in order to ascertain its sameness
with the electric fluid, I cannot answer better than by giving you an
extract from the minutes I used to keep of the experiments I made,
with memorandums of such as I purposed to make, the reasons for
making them, and the observations that arose upon them, from which
minutes my letters were afterwards drawn. By this extract you will
see that the thought was not so much "an out-of-the-way one," but
that it might have occurred to an electrician.

"Nov. 7, 1749. Electrical fluid agrees with lightning in these
particulars: 1. Giving light. 2. Colour of the light. 3. Crooked
direction. 4. Swift motion. 5. Being conducted by metals. 6. Crack or
noise in exploding. 7. Subsisting in water or ice. 8. Rending bodies
it passes through. 9. Destroying animals. 10. Melting metals. 11.
Firing inflammable substances. 12. Sulphureous smell.--The electric
fluid is attracted by points.--We do not know whether this property
is in lightning.--But since they agree in all the particulars
wherein we can already compare them, is it not probable they agree
likewise in this?--Let the experiment be made."

I wish I could give you any satisfaction in the article of clouds. I
am still at a loss about the manner in which they become charged with
electricity; no hypothesis I have yet formed perfectly satisfying me.
Some time since, I heated very hot a brass plate, two feet square,
and placed it on an electric stand. From the plate a wire extended
horizontally four or five feet, and, at the end of it, hung, by linen
threads, a pair of cork balls. I then repeatedly sprinkled water over
the plate, that it might be raised from it in vapour, hoping that if
the vapour either carried off the electricity of the plate, or left
behind it that of the water (one of which I supposed it must do, if,
like the clouds, it became electrised itself, either positively or
negatively) I should perceive and determine it by the separation of
the balls, and by finding whether they were positive or negative; but
no alteration was made at all, nor could I perceive that the steam
was itself electrised, though I have still some suspicion that the
steam was not fully examined, and I think the experiment should be
repeated. Whether the first state of electrised clouds is positive or
negative, if I could find the cause of that, I should be at no loss
about the other, for either is easily deduced from the other, as one
state is easily produced by the other. A strongly positive cloud may
drive out of a neighbouring cloud much of its natural quantity of the
electric fluid, and, passing by it, leave it in a negative state. In
the same way, a strongly negative cloud may occasion a neighbouring
cloud to draw into itself from others, an additional quantity, and,
passing by it, leave it in a positive state. How these effects may
be produced, you will easily conceive, on perusing and considering
the experiments in the enclosed paper: and from them too it appears
probable, that every change from positive to negative, and from
negative to positive, that, during a thunder-gust, we see in the
cork-balls annexed to the apparatus, is not owing to the presence
of clouds in the same state, but often to the absence of positive
or negative clouds, that, having just passed, leave the rod in the
opposite state.

The knocking down of the six men was performed with two of my large
jars not fully charged. I laid one end of my discharging rod upon the
head of the first; he laid his hand on the head of the second; the
second his hand on the head of the third, and so to the last, who
held, in his hand, the chain that was connected with the outside of
the jars. When they were thus placed, I applied the other end of my
rod to the prime conductor, and they all dropped together. When they
got up, they all declared they had not felt any stroke, and wondered
how they came to fall; nor did any of them either hear the crack, or
see the light of it. You suppose it a dangerous experiment; but I
had once suffered the same myself, receiving, by accident, an equal
stroke through my head, that struck me down, without hurting me: and
I had seen a young woman that was about to be electrified through the
feet (for some indisposition) receive a greater charge through the
head, by inadvertently stooping forward to look at the placing of her
feet, till her forehead (as she was very tall) came too near my prime
conductor: she dropped, but instantly got up again, complaining of
nothing. A person so struck, sinks down doubled, or folded together
as it were, the joints losing their strength and stiffness at once,
so that he drops on the spot where he stood, instantly, and there is
no previous staggering, nor does he ever fall lengthwise. Too great
charge might, indeed, kill a man, but I have not yet seen any hurt
done by it. It would certainly, as you observe, be the easiest of all
deaths.

The experiment you have heard so imperfect an account of, is merely
this: I electrified a silver pint can, on an electric stand, and then
lowered into it a cork ball, of about an inch diameter, hanging by a
silk string, till the cork touched the bottom of the can. The cork
was not attracted to the inside of the can as it would have been
to the outside, and though it touched the bottom, yet, when drawn
out, it was not found to be electrified by that touch, as it would
have been by touching the outside. The fact is singular. You require
the reason; I do not know it. Perhaps you may discover it, and then
you will be so good as to communicate it to me[67]. I find a frank
acknowledgment of one's ignorance is not only the easiest way to get
rid of a difficulty, but the likeliest way to obtain information,
and therefore I practise it: I think it an honest policy. Those who
affect to be thought to know every thing, and so undertake to explain
every thing, often remain long ignorant of many things that others
could and would instruct them in, if they appeared less conceited.

The treatment your friend has met with is so common, that no man
who knows what the world is, and ever has been, should expect to
escape it. There are every where a number of people, who, being
totally destitute of any inventive faculty themselves, do not readily
conceive that others may possess it: they think of inventions as of
miracles; there might be such formerly, but they are ceased. With
these, every one who offers a new invention is deemed a pretender: he
had it from some other country, or from some book: a man of _their
own acquaintance_; one who has no more sense than themselves, could
not possibly, in their opinion, have been the inventor of any thing.
They are confirmed, too, in these sentiments, by frequent instances
of pretensions to invention, which vanity is daily producing. That
vanity too, though an incitement to invention, is, at the same time,
the pest of inventors. Jealousy and envy deny the merit or the
novelty of your invention; but vanity, when the novelty and merit
are established, claims it for its own. The smaller your invention
is, the more mortification you receive in having the credit of it
disputed with you by a rival, whom the jealousy and envy of others
are ready to support against you, at least so far as to make the
point doubtful. It is not in itself of importance enough for a
dispute; no one would think your proofs and reasons worth their
attention: and yet, if you do not dispute the point, and demonstrate
your right, you not only lose the credit of being in that instance
_ingenious_, but you suffer the disgrace of not being _ingenuous_;
not only of being a plagiary, but of being a plagiary for trifles.
Had the invention been greater it would have disgraced you less;
for men have not so contemptible an idea of him that robs for gold
on the highway, as of him that can pick pockets for half-pence
and farthings. Thus, through envy, jealousy, and the vanity of
competitors for fame, the origin of many of the most extraordinary
inventions, though produced within but a few centuries past, is
involved in doubt and uncertainty. We scarce know to whom we are
indebted for the _compass_, and for _spectacles_, nor have even
_paper_ and _printing_, that record every thing else, been able to
preserve with certainty the name and reputation of their inventors.
One would not, therefore, of all faculties, or qualities of the
mind, wish, for a friend, or a child, that he should have that of
invention. For his attempts to benefit mankind in that way, however
well imagined, if they do not succeed, expose him, though very
unjustly, to general ridicule and contempt; and, if they do succeed,
to envy, robbery, and abuse.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[65] Dr. Lining.--EDITOR.

[66] See page 286, for the paper here mentioned.

[67] Mr. F. has since thought, that, possibly, the mutual repulsion
of the inner opposite sides of the electrised can may prevent the
accumulating an electric atmosphere upon them, and occasion it to
stand chiefly on the outside. But recommends it to the farther
examination of the curious.




TO MONS. DALIBARD, AT PARIS, INCLOSED IN A LETTER TO MR. PETER
COLLINSON, F. R. S.

  _Beccaria's Work on Electricity.--Sentiments of Franklin on pointed
  Rods, not fully understood in Europe.--Effect of Lightning on the
  Church of Newbury, in New England.--Remarks on the Subject._

  Read at the Royal Society, Dec. 18, 1755.


  _Philadelphia, June 29, 1755._

  SIR,

You desire my opinion of Pere Beccaria's Italian book[68]. I have
read it with much pleasure, and think it one of the best pieces on
the subject that I have seen in any language. Yet as to the article
of water-spouts, I am not at present of his sentiments; though I must
own with you, that he has handled it very ingeniously. Mr. Collinson
has my opinion of whirlwinds and water-spouts at large, written some
time since. I know not whether they will be published; if not, I
will get them transcribed for your perusal[69]. It does not appear
to me that Pere Beccaria doubts of the _absolute impermeability
of glass_ in the sense I meant it; for the instances he gives of
holes made through glass by the electric stroke are such as we have
all experienced, and only show that the electric fluid could not
pass without making a hole. In the same manner we say, glass is
impermeable to water, and yet a stream from a fire-engine will force
through the strongest panes of a window. As to the effect of points
in drawing the electric matter from clouds, and thereby securing
buildings, &c. which, you say, he seems to doubt, I must own I think
he only speaks modestly and judiciously. I find I have been but
partly understood in that matter. I have mentioned it in several of
my letters, and except once, always in the _alternative, viz_. that
pointed rods erected on buildings, and communicating with the moist
earth, would either _prevent_ a stroke, _or_, if not prevented, would
_conduct_ it, so as that the building should suffer no damage. Yet
whenever my opinion is examined in Europe, nothing is considered but
the probability of those rods _preventing_ a stroke or explosion,
which is only a _part_ of the use I proposed for them; and the
other part, their conducting a stroke, which they may happen not to
prevent, seems to be totally forgotten, though of equal importance
and advantage.

I thank you for communicating M. de Buffon's relation of the effect
of lightning at Dijon, on the 7th of June last. In return, give me
leave to relate an instance I lately saw of the same kind. Being in
the town of Newbury in New England, in November last, I was shewn
the effect of lightning on their church, which had been struck a
few months before. The steeple was a square tower of wood, reaching
seventy feet up from the ground to the place where the bell hung,
over which rose a taper spire, of wood likewise, reaching seventy
feet higher, to the vane of the weather-cock. Near the bell was fixed
an iron hammer to strike the hours; and from the tail of the hammer
a wire went down through a small gimlet-hole in the floor that the
bell stood upon, and through a second floor in like manner; then
horizontally under and near the plaistered cieling of that second
floor, till it came near a plaistered wall; then down by the side of
that wall to a clock, which stood about twenty feet below the bell.
The wire was not bigger than a common knitting-needle. The spire was
split all to pieces by the lightning, and the parts flung in all
directions over the square in which the church stood, so that nothing
remained above the bell.

The lightning passed between the hammer and the clock in the
above-mentioned wire, without hurting either of the floors, or
having any effect upon them (except making the gimlet-holes, through
which the wire passed, a little bigger,) and without hurting the
plaistered wall, or any part of the building, so far as the aforesaid
wire and the pendulum wire of the clock extended; which latter
wire was about the thickness of a goose-quill. From the end of the
pendulum, down quite to the ground, the building was exceedingly
rent and damaged, and some stones in the foundation-wall torn out,
and thrown to the distance of twenty or thirty feet. No part of the
afore-mentioned long small wire, between the clock and the hammer,
could be found, except about two inches that hung to the tail of
the hammer, and about as much that was fastened to the clock; the
rest being exploded, and its particles dissipated in smoke and air,
as gunpowder is by common fire, and had only left a black smutty
track on the plaistering, three or four inches broad, darkest in
the middle, and fainter toward the edges, all along the cieling,
under which it passed, and down the wall. These were the effects and
appearances; on which I would only make the few following remarks,
viz.

1. That lightning, in its passage through a building, will leave wood
to pass as far as it can in metal, and not enter the wood again till
the conductor of metal ceases.

And the same I have observed in other instances, as to walls of brick
or stone.

2. The quantity of lightning that passed through this steeple must
have been very great, by its effects on the lofty spire above the
bell, and on the square tower all below the end of the clock pendulum.

3. Great as this quantity was, it was conducted by a small wire and
a clock pendulum, without the least damage to the building so far as
they extended.

4. The pendulum rod being of a sufficient thickness, conducted the
lightning without damage to itself; but the small wire was utterly
destroyed.

5. Though the small wire was itself destroyed, yet it had conducted
the lightning with safety to the building.

6. And from the whole it seems probable, that if even such a small
wire had been extended from the spindle of the vane to the earth,
before the storm, no damage would have been done to the steeple by
that stroke of lightning, though the wire itself had been destroyed.

FOOTNOTES:

[68] This work is written conformable to Mr. Franklin's theory, upon
artificial and natural electricity, which compose the two parts
of it. It was printed in Italian, at Turin, in 4to. 1753; between
the two parts is a letter to the Abbé Nollet, in defence of Mr.
Franklin's system. _J. Bevis._

[69] These papers will be found in Vol II. _Editor._




TO PETER COLLINSON, ESQ. F. R. S. LONDON.

  _Notice of another Packet of Letters._


  _Philadelphia, Nov. 23, 1753_.

  DEAR FRIEND.

In my last, via Virginia, I promised to send you per next ship, a
small philosophical packet: but now having got the materials (old
letters and rough drafts) before me, I fear you will find it a great
one. Nevertheless, as I am like to have a few days leisure before
this ship sails, which I may not have again in a long time, I shall
transcribe the whole, and send it; for you will be under no necessity
of reading it all at once, but may take it a little at a time, now
and then of a winter evening. When you happen to have nothing else to
do (if that ever happens) it may afford you some amusement[70].

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[70] These letters and papers are a philosophical correspondence
between Mr. Franklin and some of his American Friends[71]. Mr.
Collinson communicated them to the Royal Society, where they were
read at different meetings during the year 1756. But Mr. Franklin
having particularly requested that they might not be printed, none
of them were inserted in the transactions. Mr. F. had at that time
an intention of revising them, and pursuing some of the enquiries
farther; but finding that he is not like to have sufficient leisure,
he has at length been induced, imperfect as they are, to permit their
publication, as some of the hints they contain may possibly be useful
to others in their philosophical researches. Note in Mr. Collinson's
edition.

[71] As some of these papers are upon subjects not immediately
connected with electricity, we have taken such papers from the order
in which they were placed by Mr. Collinson, and transferred them to
other parts of the work. _Editor._




  _Extract of a Letter from a Gentleman in Boston[72], to Benjamin
  Franklin, Esq. concerning the crooked Direction, and the Source of
  Lightning, and the Swiftness of the electric Fire._


  _Boston, Dec. 21, 1751._

  SIR,

The experiments Mr. K. has exhibited here, have been greatly pleasing
to all sorts of people that have seen them; and I hope, by the time
he returns to Philadelphia, his tour this way will turn to good
account. His experiments are very curious, and I think prove most
effectually your doctrine of electricity; that it is a real element,
annexed to, and diffused among all bodies we are acquainted with;
that it differs in nothing from lightning, the effects of both being
similar, and their properties, so far as they are known, the same, &c.

The remarkable effect of lightning on iron, lately discovered, in
giving it the magnetic virtue, and the same effect produced on
small needles by the electrical fire, is a further and convincing
proof that they are both the same element; but, which is very
unaccountable, Mr. K. tells me, it is necessary to produce this
effect, that the direction of the needle and the electric fire should
be north and south; from either to the other, and that just so far
as they deviate therefrom, the magnetic power in the needle is less,
till their direction being at right angles with the north and south,
the effect entirely ceases. We made at Faneuil Hall, where Mr.
K----'s apparatus is, several experiments to give some small needles
the magnetic virtue; previously examining, by putting them in water,
on which they will be supported, whether or not they had any of that
virtue; and I think we found all of them to have some small degree of
it, their points turning to the north: we had nothing to do then but
to invert the poles, which accordingly was done, by sending through
them the charge of two large glass jars; the eye of the needle
turning to the north, as the point before had done; that end of the
needle which the fire is thrown upon, Mr. K. tells me always points
to the north.

The electrical fire passing through air has the same crooked
direction as lightning[73]. This appearance I endeavour to account
for thus: Air is an electric _per se_, therefore there must be a
mutual repulsion betwixt air and the electrical fire. A column
or cylinder of air, having the diameter of its base equal to the
diameter of the electrical spark, intervenes that part of the body
which the spark is taken from, and of the body it aims at. The spark
acts upon this column, and is acted upon by it, more strongly than
any other neighbouring portion of air.

The column, being thus acted upon, becomes more dense, and, being
more dense, repels the spark more strongly; its repellency being in
proportion to its density: Having acquired, by being condensed, a
degree of repellency greater than its natural, it turns the spark out
of its strait course; the neighbouring air, which must be less dense,
and therefore has a smaller degree of repellency, giving it a more
ready passage.

The spark, having taken a new direction, must now act on, or most
strongly repel the column of air which lies in that direction, and
consequently must condense that column in the same manner as the
former, when the spark must again change its course, which course
will be thus repeatedly changed, till the spark reaches the body that
attracted it.

To this account one objection occurs; that as air is very fluid and
elastic, and so endeavours to diffuse itself equally, the supposed
accumulated air within the column aforesaid, would be immediately
diffused among the contiguous air, and circulate to fill the space
it was driven from; and consequently that the said column, on the
greater density of which the phenomenon is supposed to depend, would
not repel the spark more strongly than the neighbouring air.

This might be an objection, if the electrical fire was as sluggish
and inactive as air. Air takes a sensible time to diffuse
itself equally, as is manifest from winds which often blow for
a considerable time together from the same point, and with a
velocity even in the greatest storms, not exceeding, as it is
said, sixty miles an hour: but the electric fire seems propagated
instantaneously, taking up no perceptible time in going very great
distances. It must then be an inconceivably short time in its
progress from an electrified to an unelectrified body, which, in the
present case, can be but a few inches apart: but this small portion
of time is not sufficient for the elasticity of the air to exert
itself, and therefore the column aforesaid must be in a denser state
than its neighbouring air.

About the velocity of the electric fire more is said below, which
perhaps may more fully obviate this objection. But let us have
recourse to experiments. Experiments will obviate all objections,
or confound the hypothesis. The electric spark, if the foregoing be
true, will pass through a vacuum in a right line. To try this, let a
wire be fixed perpendicularly on the plate of an air pump, having a
leaden ball on its upper end; let another wire, passing through the
top of a receiver, have on each end a leaden ball; let the leaden
balls within the receiver, when put on the air pump, be within two
or three inches of each other: the receiver being exhausted, the
spark given from a charged phial to the upper wire will pass through
rarefied air, nearly approaching to a vacuum, to the lower wire, and
I suppose in a right line, or nearly so; the small portion of air
remaining in the receiver, which cannot be entirely exhausted, may
possibly cause it to deviate a little, but perhaps not sensibly,
from a right line. The spark also might be made to pass through air
greatly condensed, which perhaps would give a still more crooked
direction. I have not had opportunity to make any experiments of this
sort, not knowing of an air-pump nearer than Cambridge, but you can
easily make them. If these experiments answer, I think the crooked
direction of lightning will be also accounted for.

With respect to your letters on electricity, * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * *. Your hypothesis in particular for explaining the phenomena
of lightning is very ingenious. That some clouds are highly charged
with electrical fire, and that their communicating it to those that
have less, to mountains and other eminencies, makes it visible and
audible, when it is denominated lightning and thunder, is highly
probable: but that the sea, which you suppose the grand source of
it, can collect it, I think admits of a doubt: for though the sea be
composed of salt and water, an electric _per se_ and non-electric,
and though the friction of electrics _per se_ and non-electrics,
will collect that fire, yet it is only under certain circumstances,
which water will not admit. For it seems necessary, that the
electrics _per se_ and non-electrics rubbing one another, should
be of such substances as will not adhere to, or incorporate with
each other. Thus a glass or sulphur sphere turned in water, and so
a friction between them, will not collect any fire; nor, I suppose,
would a sphere of salt revolving in water; the water adhering to,
or incorporating with those electrics _per se_. But granting that
the friction between salt and water would collect the electrical
fire, that fire, being so extremely subtle and active, would be
immediately communicated, either to those lower parts of the sea
from which it was drawn, and so only perform quick revolutions; or
be communicated to the adjacent islands or continent, and so be
diffused instantaneously through the general mass of the earth. I say
instantaneously, for the greatest distances we can conceive within
the limits of our globe, even that of the two most opposite points,
it will take no sensible time in passing through: and therefore
it seems a little difficult to conceive how there can be any
accumulation of the electrical fire upon the surface of the sea or
how the vapours arising from the sea should have a greater share of
that fire than other vapours.

That the progress of the electrical fire is so amazingly swift, seems
evident from an experiment you yourself (not out of choice) made,
when two or three large glass jars were discharged through your body.
You neither heard the crack, was sensible of the stroke, nor, which
is more extraordinary, saw the light; which gave you just reason to
conclude, that it was swifter than sound, than animal sensation, and
even light itself. Now light (as astronomers have demonstrated) is
about six minutes passing from the sun to the earth; a distance, they
say, of more than eighty millions of miles. The greatest rectilinear
distance within the compass of the earth is about eight thousand
miles, equal to its diameter. Supposing then, that the velocity of
the electric fire be the same as that of light, it will go through a
space equal to the earth's diameter in about 2/60 of one second of a
minute. It seems inconceivable then, that it should be accumulated
upon the sea, in its present state, which, as it is a non-electric,
must give the fire an instantaneous passage to the neighbouring
shores, and they convey it to the general mass of the earth. But such
accumulation seems still more inconceivable when the electrical fire
has but a few feet depth of water to penetrate, to return to the
place from whence it is supposed to be collected.

Your thoughts upon these remarks I shall receive with a great deal of
pleasure. I take notice that in the printed copies of your letters
several things are wanting which are in the manuscript you sent me. I
understand by your son, that you had writ, or was writing, a paper
on the effect of the electrical fire on loadstones, needles, &c.
which I would ask the favour of a copy of, as well as of any other
papers on electricity, written since I had the manuscript, for which
I repeat my obligations to you.

  I am, &c.

  J. B.

FOOTNOTES:

[72] Mr. Badouin. _Editor._

[73] This is most easily observed in large strong sparks taken at
some inches distance.




TO J. B. AT BOSTON.

  _Observations on the Subjects of the preceding Letter.--Reasons for
  supposing the Sea to be the grand source of Lightning.--Reasons for
  doubting this hypothesis.--Improvement in a Globe for raising the
  Electric Fire._

  Read at the Royal Society, May 27, 1756.


  _Philadelphia, Jan. 24, 1752._

  SIR,

I am glad to learn, by your favour of the 21st past, that Mr.
Kinnersley's lectures have been acceptable to the gentlemen of
Boston, and are like to prove serviceable to himself.

I thank you for the countenance and encouragement you have so kindly
afforded my fellow-citizen.

I send you enclosed an extract of a letter containing the substance
of what I observed concerning the communication of magnetism to
needles by electricity. The minutes I took at the time of the
experiments are mislaid. I am very little acquainted with the nature
of magnetism. Dr. Gawin Knight, inventor of the steel magnets, has
wrote largely on that subject, but I have not yet had leisure to
peruse his writings with the attention necessary to become master of
his doctrine.

Your explication of the crooked direction of lightning appears to
me both ingenious and solid. When we can account as satisfactorily
for the electrification of clouds, I think that branch of natural
philosophy will be nearly complete.

The air, undoubtedly, obstructs the motion of the electric fluid. Dry
air prevents the dissipation of an electric atmosphere, the denser
the more, as in cold weather. I question whether such an atmosphere
can be retained by a body _in vacuo_. A common electrical phial
requires a non-electric communication from the wire to every part of
the charged glass; otherwise, being dry and clean, and filled with
air only, it charges slowly, and discharges gradually, by sparks,
without a shock: but, exhausted of air, the communication is so open
and free between the inserted wire and surface of the glass, that it
charges as readily, and shocks as smartly as if filled with water:
and I doubt not, but that in the experiment you propose, the sparks
would not only be near strait _in vacuo_, but strike at a greater
distance than in the open air, though perhaps there would not be a
loud explosion. As soon as I have a little leisure, I will make the
experiment, and send you the result.

My supposition, that the sea might possibly be the grand source
of lightning, arose from the common observation of its luminous
appearance in the night, on the least motion; an appearance never
observed in fresh water. Then I knew that the electric fluid may be
pumped up out of the earth, by the friction of a glass globe, on
a non-electric cushion; and that, notwithstanding the surprising
activity and swiftness of that fluid, and the non-electric
communication between all parts of the cushion and the earth, yet
quantities would be snatched up by the revolving surface of the
globe, thrown on the prime conductor, and dissipated in air. How
this was done, and why that subtle active spirit did not immediately
return again from the globe, into some part or other of the cushion,
and so into the earth, was difficult to conceive; but whether from
its being opposed by a current setting upwards to the cushion, or
from whatever other cause, that it did not so return was an evident
fact. Then I considered the separate particles of water as so many
hard spherules, capable of touching the salt only in points, and
imagined a particle of salt could therefore no more be wet by a
particle of water, than a globe by a cushion; that there might
therefore be such a friction between these originally constituent
particles of salt and water, as in a sea of globes and cushions; that
each particle of water on the surface might obtain from the common
mass, some particles of the universally diffused, much finer, and
more subtle electric fluid, and forming to itself an atmosphere of
those particles, be repelled from the then generally electrified
surface of the sea, and fly away with them into the air. I thought
too, that possibly the great mixture of particles electric _per se_,
in the ocean water, might, in some degree, impede the swift motion
and dissipation of the electric fluid, through it to the shores,
&c.--But having since found, that salt in the water of an electric
phial does not lessen the shock; and having endeavoured in vain to
produce that luminous appearance from a mixture of salt and water
agitated; and observed, that even the sea-water will not produce it
after some hours standing in a bottle; I suspect it to proceed from
some principle yet unknown to us (which I would gladly make some
experiments to discover, if I lived near the sea) and I grow more
doubtful of my former supposition, and more ready to allow weight to
that objection (drawn from the activity of the electric fluid, and
the readiness of water to conduct) which you have indeed stated with
great strength and clearness.

In the mean time, before we part with this hypothesis, let us think
what to substitute in its place. I have sometimes queried whether the
friction of the air, an electric _per se_, in violent winds, among
trees, and against the surface of the earth, might not pump up, as so
many glass globes, quantities of the electric fluid, which the rising
vapours might receive from the air, and retain in the clouds they
form? on which I should be glad to have your sentiments. An ingenious
friend of mine supposes the land-clouds more likely to be electrified
than the sea-clouds. I send his letter for your perusal, which please
to return me.

I have wrote nothing lately on electricity, nor observed any thing
new that is material, my time being much taken up with other affairs.
Yesterday I discharged four jars through a fine wire, tied up between
two strips of glass: the wire was in part melted, and the rest broke
into small pieces, from half an inch long, to half a quarter of an
inch. My globe raises the electric fire with greater ease, in much
greater quantities, by the means of a wire extended from the cushion,
to the iron pin of a pump handle behind my house, which communicates
by the pump spear with the water in the well.

By this post I send to ****, who is curious in that way, some
meteorological observations and conjectures, and desire him to
communicate them to you, as they may afford you some amusement, and
I know you will look over them with a candid eye. By throwing our
occasional thoughts on paper, we more readily discover the defects
of our opinions, or we digest them better and find new arguments to
support them. This I sometimes practise: but such pieces are fit only
to be seen by friends.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.




FROM J. B. ESQ. OF BOSTON, TO BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQ. AT PHILADELPHIA.

  _Effect of Lightning on Captain Waddel's Compass, and the Dutch
  Church at New York._

  Read at the Royal Society, June 3, 1756.


  _Boston, March 2, 1752._

  SIR,


I have received your favour of the 24th of January past, inclosing
an extract from your letter to Mr. Collinson, and ****'s letter to
yourself, which I have read with a great deal of pleasure, and am
much obliged to you for. Your extract confirms a correction Mr.
Kinnersley made a few days ago, of a mistake I was under respecting
the polarity given to needles by the electrical fire, "that the end
which receives the fire always points north;" and, "that the needle
being situated east and west, will not have a polar direction." You
find, however, the polarity strongest when the needle is shocked
lying north and south; weakest when lying east and west; which makes
it probable that the communicated magnetism is less, as the needle
varies from a north and south situation. As to the needle of Captain
Waddel's compass, if its polarity was reversed by the lightning,
the effect of lightning and electricity, in regard of that, seems
dissimilar; for a magnetic needle in a north and south situation (as
the compass needle was) instead of having its power reversed, or even
diminished, would have it confirmed or increased by the electric
fire. But perhaps the lightning communicated to some nails in the
binnacle (where the compass is placed) the magnetic virtue, which
might disturb the compass.

This I have heard was the case; if so, the seeming dissimilarity
vanishes: but this remarkable circumstance (if it took place) I
should think would not be omitted in Captain Waddel's account.

I am very much pleased that the explication I sent you, of the
crooked direction of lightning, meets with your approbation.

As to your supposition about the source of lightning, the luminous
appearance of the sea in the night, and the similitude between the
friction of the particles of salt and water, as you considered them
in their original separate state, and the friction of the globe and
cushion, very naturally led you to the ocean, as the grand source of
lightning: but the activity of lightning, or the electric element,
and the fitness of water to conduct it, together with the experiments
you mention of salt and water, seem to make against it, and to
prepare the way for some other hypothesis. Accordingly you propose
a new one, which is very curious, and not so liable, I think, to
objections as the former. But there is not as yet, I believe, a
sufficient variety of experiments to establish any theory, though
this seems the most hopeful of any I have heard of.

The effect which the discharge of your four glass jars had upon a
fine wire, tied between two strips of glass, puts me in mind of a
very similar one of lightning, that I observed at New-York, October,
1750, a few days after I left Philadelphia. In company with a number
of gentlemen, I went to take a view of the city from the Dutch
church steeple, in which is a clock about twenty or twenty-five feet
below the bell. From the clock went a wire through two floors, to
the clock-hammer near the bell, the holes in the floor for the wire
being perhaps about a quarter of an inch diameter. We were told, that
in the spring of 1750, the lightning struck the clock hammer, and
descended along the wire to the clock, melting in its way several
spots of the wire, from three to nine inches long, through one-third
of its substance, till coming within a few feet of the lower end, it
melted the wire quite through, in several places, so that it fell
down in several pieces; which spots and pieces we saw. When it got to
the end of the wire, it flew off to the hinge of a door, shattered
the door, and dissipated. In its passage through the holes of the
floors it did not do the least damage, which evidences that wire is a
good conductor of lightning (as it is of electricity) provided it be
substantial enough, and might, in this case, had it been continued to
the earth, have conducted it without damaging the building.[74]

Your information about your globe's raising the electric fire in
greater quantities, by means of a wire extended from the cushion to
the earth, will enable me, I hope, to remedy a great inconvenience
I have been under, to collect the fire with the electrifying glass
I use, which is fixed in a very dry room, three stories from the
ground. When you send your meteorological observations to ****, I
hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing them.

  I am, &c.

  J. B.

FOOTNOTE:

[74] The wire mentioned in this account was re-placed by a small
brass chain. In the summer of 1763, the lightning again struck that
steeple, and from the clock-hammer near the bell, it pursued the
chain as it had before done the wire, went off to the same hinge,
and again shattered the same door. In its passage through the same
holes of the same floors, it did no damage to the floors, nor to the
building during the whole extent of the chain. But the chain itself
was destroyed, being partly scattered about in fragments of two or
three links melted and stuck together, and partly blown up or reduced
to smoke, and dissipated. [See an account of the same effect of
lightning on a wire at Newbury, p. 311.] The steeple, when repaired,
was guarded by an iron conductor, or rod, extending from the foot of
the vane-spindle down the outside of the building, into the earth.
The newspapers have mentioned, that in 1765, the lightning fell a
third time on the same steeple, and was safely conducted by the rod;
but the particulars are not come to hand.




  _Proposal of an Experiment to measure the Time taken up by an
  Electric Spark, in moving through any given Space. By J. A.[75]
  Esq. of New-York._

  Read at the Royal Society, Dec 26, 1756.


If I remember right, the Royal Society made one experiment to
discover the velocity of the electric fire, by a wire of about four
miles in length, supported by silk, and by turning it forwards and
backwards in a field, so that the beginning and end of the wire were
at only the distance of two people, the one holding the Leyden bottle
and the beginning of the wire, and the other holding the end of the
wire and touching the ring of the bottle; but by this experiment no
discovery was made, except that the velocity was extremely quick.

As water is a conductor as well as metals, it is to be considered
whether the velocity of the electric fire might not be discovered by
means of water; whether a river, or lake, or sea, may not be made
part of the circuit through which the electric fire passes? instead
of the circuit all of wire, as in the above experiment.

Whether in a river, lake, or sea, the electric fire will not
dissipate and not return to the bottle? or, will it proceed in strait
lines through the water the shortest courses possible back to the
bottle?

If the last, then suppose one brook that falls into Delaware doth
head very near to a brook that falls into Schuylkil, and let a wire
be stretched and supported as before, from the head of the one brook
to the head of the other, and let the one end communicate with the
water, and let one person stand in the other brook, holding the
Leyden bottle, and let another person hold that end of the wire not
in the water, and touch the ring of the bottle.--If the electric fire
will go as in the last question, then will it go down the one brook
to Delaware or Schuylkill, and down one of them to their meeting,
and up the other and the other brook; the time of its doing this
may possibly be observable, and the further upwards the brooks are
chosen, the more observable it would be.

Should this be not observable, then suppose the two brooks falling
into Sasquehana and Delaware, and proceeding as before, the electric
fire may, by that means, make a circuit round the North Cape of
Virginia, and go many hundreds of miles, and in doing that, it would
seem it must take some observable time.

If still no observable time is found in that experiment, then
suppose the brooks falling the one into the Ohio, and the other into
Sasquehana, or Potomack, in that the electric fire would have a
circuit of some thousands of miles to go down Ohio to Mississippi,
to the Bay of Mexico, round Florida, and round the South Cape of
Virginia; which, I think, would give some observable time, and
discover exactly the velocity.

But if the electric fire dissipates, or weakens in the water, as I
fear it does, these experiments will not answer.


  _Answer to the foregoing_.

  Read at the Royal Society, Dec. 25, 1756.

Suppose a tube of any length open at both ends, and containing a
moveable wire of just the same length, that fills its bore. If I
attempt to introduce the end of another wire into the same tube, it
must be done by pushing forward the wire it already contains; and the
instant I press and move one end of that wire, the other end is also
moved; and in introducing one inch of the same wire, I extrude, at
the same time, an inch of the first, from the other end of the tube.

If the tube be filled with water, and I inject an additional inch of
water at one end, I force out an equal quantity at the other, in the
very same instant.

And the water forced out at one end of the tube is not the very same
water that was forced in at the other end at the same time, it was
only in motion at the same time.

The long wire, made use of in the experiment to discover the velocity
of the electric fluid, is itself filled with what we call its natural
quantity of that fluid, before the hook of the Leyden bottle is
applied to one end of it.

The outside of the bottle being at the time of such application
in contact with the other end of the wire, the whole quantity of
electric fluid contained in the wire is, probably, put in motion at
once.

For at the instant the hook, connected with the inside of the bottle,
_gives out_; the coating, or outside of the bottle, _draws in_ a
portion of that fluid.

If such long wire contains precisely the quantity that the outside
of the bottle demands, the whole will move out of the wire to the
outside of the bottle, and the over quantity which the inside of the
bottle contained, being exactly equal, will flow into the wire, and
remain there, in the place of the quantity the wire had just parted
with to the outside of the bottle.

But if the wire be so long as that one-tenth (suppose) of its natural
quantity is sufficient to supply what the outside of the bottle
demands, in such case the outside will only receive what is contained
in one-tenth of the wire's length, from the end next to it; though
the whole will move so as to make room at the other end for an equal
quantity issuing, at the same time, from the inside of the bottle.

So that this experiment only shews the extreme facility with which
the electric fluid moves in metal; it can never determine the
velocity.

And, therefore, the proposed experiment (though well imagined, and
very ingenious) of sending the spark round through a vast length of
space, by the waters of Susquehannah, or Potowmack, and Ohio, would
not afford the satisfaction desired, though we could be sure that the
motion of the electric fluid would be in that tract, and not under
ground in the wet earth by the shortest way.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[75] James Alexander. _Editor._




FROM MR. KINNERSLEY TO B. FRANKLIN, ESQ.

  _Experiments on boiling Water, and Glass heated by boiling
  Water.--Doctrine of Repulsion in electrised Bodies
  doubted.--Electricity of the Atmosphere at different
  Heights.--Electrical Horse-race.--Electrical Thermometer.--In
  what Cases the electrical Fire produces Heat.--Wire lengthened by
  Electricity.--Good Effect of a Rod on the House of Mr. West, of
  Philadelphia._


  _Philadelphia, March 12, 1761._

  SIR,

Having lately made the following experiments, I very chearfully
communicate them, in hopes of giving you some degree of pleasure,
and exciting you to further explore your favorite, but not quite
exhausted subject, _electricity_.

I placed myself on an electric stand, and, being well electrised,
threw my hat to an unelectrised person, at a considerable distance,
on another stand, and found that the hat carried some of the
electricity with it; for, upon going immediately to the person who
received it, and holding a flaxen thread near him, I perceived he was
electrised sufficiently to attract the thread.

I then suspended, by silk, a broad plate of metal, and electrised
some boiling water under it at about four feet distance, expecting
that the vapour, which ascended plentifully to the plate, would,
upon the principle of the foregoing experiment, carry up some of the
electricity with it; but was at length fully convinced, by several
repeated trials, that it left all its share thereof behind. This I
know not how to account for; but does it not seem to corroborate your
hypothesis, That the vapours of which the clouds are formed, leave
their share of electricity behind, in the common stock, and ascend in
the negative state?

I put boiling water into a coated Florence flask, and found that
the heat so enlarged the pores of the glass, that it could not
be charged. The electricity passed through as readily, to all
appearance, as through metal; the charge of a three-pint bottle
went freely through, without injuring the flask in the least. When
it became almost cold, I could charge it as usual. Would not this
experiment convince the Abbé Nollet of his egregious mistake? For
while the electricity went fairly through the glass, as he contends
it always does, the glass could not be charged at all.

I took a slender piece of cedar, about eighteen inches long, fixed
a brass cap in the middle, thrust a pin horizontally and at right
angles, through each end (the points in contrary directions) and hung
it, nicely balanced, like the needle of a compass, on a pin, about
six inches long, fixed in the centre of an electric stand. Then,
electrising the stand, I had the pleasure of seeing what I expected;
the wooden needle turned round, carrying the pins with their heads
foremost. I then electrised the stand negatively, expecting the
needle to turn the contrary way, but was extremely disappointed, for
it went still the same way as before. When the stand was electrised
positively, I suppose that the natural quantity of electricity in
the air being increased on one side, by what issued from the points,
the needle was attracted by the lesser quantity on the other side.
When electrised negatively, I suppose that the natural quantity of
electricity in the air was diminished near the points; in consequence
whereof, the equilibrium being destroyed, the needle was attracted by
the greater quantity on the opposite side.

The doctrine of repulsion, in electrised bodies, I begin to be
somewhat doubtful of. I think all the phenomena on which it is
founded, may be well enough accounted for without it. Will not cork
balls, electrised negatively, separate as far as when electrised
positively? And may not their separation in both cases be accounted
for upon the same principle, namely, the mutual attraction of the
natural quantity in the air, and that which is denser or rarer in the
cork balls? it being one of the established laws of this fluid, that
quantities of different densities shall mutually attract each other,
in order to restore the equilibrium.

I can see no reason to conclude that the air has not its share of
the common stock of electricity, as well as glass, and perhaps, all
other electrics _per se_. For though the air will admit bodies to
be electrised in it either positively or negatively, and will not
readily carry off the redundancy in the one case, or supply the
deficiency in the other, yet let a person in the negative state,
out of doors in the dark, when the air is dry, hold, with his arm
extended, a long sharp needle, pointing upwards, and he will soon
be convinced that electricity may be drawn out of the air; not
very plentifully, for, being a bad conductor, it seems loth to part
with it, but yet some will evidently be collected. The air near the
person's body, having less than its natural quantity, will have
none to spare; but, his arm being extended, as above, some will be
collected from the remoter air, and will appear luminous, as it
converges to the point of the needle.

Let a person electrised negatively present the point of a needle,
horizontally, to a cork ball, suspended by silk, and the ball will be
attracted towards the point, till it has parted with so much of its
natural quantity of electricity as to be in the negative state in the
same degree with the person who holds the needle; then it will recede
from the point, being, as I suppose, attracted the contrary way by
the electricity of greater density in the air behind it. But, as this
opinion seems to deviate from electrical orthodoxy, I should be glad
to see these phenomena better accounted for by your superior and more
penetrating genius.

Whether the electricity in the air, in clear dry weather, be of the
same density at the height of two or three hundred yards, as near
the surface of the earth, may be satisfactorily determined by your
old experiment of the kite. The twine should have throughout a very
small wire in it, and the ends of the wire, where the several lengths
are united, ought to be tied down with a waxed thread, to prevent
their acting in the manner of points. I have tried the experiment
twice, when the air was as dry as we ever have it, and so clear that
not a cloud could be seen, and found the twine each time in a small
degree electrised positively. The kite had three metalline points
fixed to it: one on the top, and one on each side. That the twine
was electrised, appeared by the separating of two small cork balls,
suspended on the twine by fine flaxen threads, just above where the
silk was tied to it, and sheltered from the wind. That the twine
was electrised positively, was proved, by applying to it the wire
of a charged bottle, which caused the balls to separate further,
without first coming nearer together. This experiment showed, that
the electricity in the air, at those times, was denser above than
below. But that cannot be always the case; for you know we have
frequently found the thunder-clouds in the negative state, attracting
electricity from the earth; which state, it is probable, they are
always in when first formed, and till they have received a sufficient
supply. How they come afterwards, towards the latter end of the
gust, to be in the positive state, which is sometimes the case, is a
subject for further enquiry.

After the above experiments with the wooden needle, I formed a cross,
of two pieces of wood, of equal length, intersecting each other at
right angles in the middle, hung it horizontally upon a central
pin, and set a light horse with his rider, upon each extremity;
whereupon, the whole being nicely balanced, and each courser urged on
by an electrised point of a pair of spurs, I was entertained with an
electrical horse-race.

I have contrived an electrical air thermometer, and made several
experiments with it, that have afforded me much satisfaction and
pleasure. It is extremely sensible of any alteration in the state
of the included air, and fully determines that controverted point,
Whether there be any heat in the electric fire? By the enclosed
draught, and the following description, you will readily apprehend
the construction of it. (See Plate II.)

A B is a glass tube, about eleven inches long, and one inch diameter
in the bore. It has a brass ferrule cemented on each end, with a top
and bottom part, C and D, to be screwed on, air-tight, and taken off
at pleasure. In the centre of the bottom part D, is a male screw,
which goes into a brass nut, in the mahogany pedestal E. The wires
F and G are for the electric fire to pass through, darting from one
to the other. The wire G extends through the pedestal to H, and may
be raised and lowered by means of a male screw on it. The wire F may
be taken out, and the hook I be screwed into its place. K is a glass
tube, with a small bore, open at both ends, cemented in the brass
tube L which screws into the top part C. The lower end of the tube
K is immersed in water, coloured with cochineal, at the bottom of
the tube A B. (I used, at first, coloured spirits of wine, but in
one experiment I made, it took fire.) On the top of the tube K is
cemented, for ornament, a brass ferrule, with a head screwed on it,
which has a small air-hole through its side, at _a_. The wire _b_,
is a small round spring, that embraces the tube K, so as to stay
wherever it is placed. The weight M is to keep strait whatever may be
suspended in the tube A B, on the hook I. Air must be blown through
the tube K, into the tube A B, till enough is intruded to raise, by
its elastic force, a column of the coloured water in the tube K, up
to _c_, or thereabouts; and then, the gage-wire _b_, being slipt down
to the top of the column, the thermometer is ready for use.

[Illustration: (of the experiment below)

  _Plate II._        _Vol. I. page 336._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]

I set the thermometer on an electric stand, with the chain N fixed
to the prime conductor, and kept it well electrised a considerable
time; but this produced no sensible effect; which shews, that the
electric fire, when in a state of rest, has no more heat than the
air, and other matter wherein it resides.

When the wires F and G are in contact, a large charge of electricity
sent through them, even that of my case of five and thirty bottles,
containing above thirty square feet of coated glass, will produce no
rarefaction of the air included in the tube A B; which shows that the
wires are not heated by the fire's passing through them.

When the wires are about two inches apart, the charge of a three
pint bottle, darting from one to the other, rarefies the air very
evidently; which shows, I think, that the electric fire must produce
heat in itself, as well as in the air, by its rapid motion.

The charge of one of my glass jars (which will contain about five
gallons and a half, wine measure) darting from wire to wire, will,
by the disturbance it gives the air, repelling it in all directions,
raise the column in the tube K, up to _d_, or thereabouts; and
the charge of the above-mentioned case of bottles will raise it
to the top of the tube. Upon the air's coalescing, the column, by
its gravity, instantly subsides, till it is in equilibrio with the
rarefied air; it then gradually descends as the air cools, and
settles where it stood before. By carefully observing at what height
above the gage-wire _b_, the descending column first stops, the
degree of rarefaction is discovered, which, in great explosions, is
very considerable.

I hung in the thermometer, successively, a strip of wet writing
paper, a wet flaxen and woollen thread, a blade of green grass, a
filament of green wood, a fine silver thread, a very small brass
wire, and a strip of gilt paper; and found that the charge of the
above-mentioned glass jar, passing through each of these, especially
the last, produced heat enough to rarefy the air very perceptibly.

I then suspended, out of the thermometer, a piece of small
harpsichord wire, about twenty-four inches long, with a pound
weight at the lower end, and sent the charge of the case of five
and thirty bottles through it, whereby I discovered a new method of
wire-drawing. The wire was red hot the whole length, well annealed,
and above an inch longer than before. A second charge melted it;
it parted near the middle, and measured, when the ends were put
together, four inches longer than at first. This experiment, I
remember, you proposed to me before you left Philadelphia; but I
never tried it till now. That I might have no doubt of the wire's
being _hot_ as well as red, I repeated the experiment on another
piece of the same wire, encompassed with a goose-quill, filled with
loose grains of gun-powder; which took fire as readily as if it had
been touched with a red hot poker. Also tinder, tied to another piece
of the wire, kindled by it. I tried a wire about three times as big,
but could produce no such effects with that.

Hence it appears that the electric fire, though it has no sensible
heat when in a state of rest, will, by its violent motion, and the
resistance it meets with, produce heat in other bodies when passing
through them, provided they be small enough. A large quantity will
pass through a large wire, without producing any sensible heat;
when the same quantity passing through a very small one, being
there confined to a narrower passage, the particles crowding closer
together, and meeting with greater resistance, will make it red hot,
and even melt it.

Hence lightning does not melt metal by a cold fusion, as we formerly
supposed; but, when it passes through the blade of a sword, if the
quantity be not very great, it may heat the point so as to melt it,
while the broadest and thickest part may not be sensibly warmer than
before.

And when trees or houses are set on fire by the dreadful quantity
which a cloud, or the earth, sometimes discharges, must not the heat,
by which the wood is first kindled, be generated by the lightning's
violent motion, through the resisting combustible matter?

If lightning, by its rapid motion, produces heat in _itself_; as
well as in other bodies (and that it does I think is evident from
some of the foregoing experiments made with the thermometer) then
its sometimes singeing the hair of animals killed by it, may easily
be accounted for. And the reason of its not always doing so, may,
perhaps, be this: The quantity, though sufficient to kill a large
animal, may sometimes not be great enough, or not have met with
resistance enough, to become, by its motion, burning hot.

We find that dwelling-houses, struck with lightning, are seldom set
on fire by it; but when it passes through barns, with hay or straw in
them, or store-houses, containing large quantities of hemp, or such
like matter, they seldom, if ever, escape a conflagration; which may,
perhaps, be owing to such combustibles being apt to kindle with a
less degree of heat than is necessary to kindle wood.

We had four houses in this city, and a vessel at one of the wharfs,
struck and damaged by lightning last summer. One of the houses was
struck twice in the same storm. But I have the pleasure to inform
you, that your method of preventing such terrible disasters, has, by
a fact which had like to have escaped our knowledge, given a very
convincing proof of its great utility; and is now in higher repute
with us than ever.

Hearing, a few days ago, that Mr. William West, merchant in this
city, suspected that the lightning in one of the thunder-storms last
summer had passed through the iron conductor, which he had provided
for the security of his house; I waited on him, to enquire what
ground he might have for such suspicion. Mr. West informed me, that
his family and neighbours were all stunned with a very terrible
explosion, and that the flash and crack were seen and heard at the
same instant. Whence he concluded, that the lightning must have been
very near, and, as no house in the neighbourhood had suffered by it,
that it must have passed through his conductor. Mr. White, his clerk,
told me that he was sitting, at the time, by a window, about two
feet distant from the conductor, leaning against the brick wall with
which it was in contact; and that he felt a smart sensation, like an
electric shock, in that part of his body which touched the wall. Mr.
West further informed me, that a person of undoubted veracity assured
him, that, being in the door of an opposite house, on the other side
of Water-street (which you know is but narrow) he saw the lightning
diffused over the pavement, which was then very wet with rain, to
the distance of two or three yards from the foot of the conductor;
and that another person of very good credit told him, that he being
a few doors off on the other side of the street, saw the lightning
above, darting in such direction that it appeared to him to be
directly over that pointed rod.

Upon receiving this information, and being desirous of further
satisfaction, there being no traces of the lightning to be discovered
in the conductor, as far as we could examine it below, I proposed to
Mr. West our going to the top of the house, to examine the pointed
rod, assuring him, that if the lightning had passed through it, the
point must have been melted; and, to our great satisfaction, we found
it so. This iron rod extended in height about nine feet and a half
above a stack of chimneys to which it was fixed (though I suppose
three or four feet would have been sufficient.) It was somewhat more
than half an inch diameter in the thickest part, and tapering to the
upper end. The conductor, from the lower end of it to the earth,
consisted of square iron nail-rods, not much above a quarter of an
inch thick, connected together by interlinking joints. It extended
down the cedar roof to the eaves, and from thence down the wall of
the house, four story and a half, to the pavement in Water-street,
being fastened to the wall, in several places, by small iron hooks.
The lower end was fixed to a ring, in the top of an iron stake that
was drove about four or five feet into the ground.

The above-mentioned iron rod had a hole in the top of it, about two
inches deep, wherein was inserted a brass wire, about two lines
thick, and, when first put there, about ten inches long, terminating
in a very acute point; but now its whole length was no more than
seven inches and a half, and the top very blunt. Some of the metal
appears to be missing, the slenderest part of the wire being, as I
suspect, consumed into smoke. But some of it, where the wire was a
little thicker, being only melted by the lightning, sunk down, while
in a fluid state, and formed a rough irregular cap, lower on one side
than the other, round the upper end of what remained, and became
intimately united therewith.

This was all the damage that Mr. West sustained by a terrible stroke
of lightning;--a most convincing proof of the great utility of this
method of preventing its dreadful effects. Surely it will now be
thought as expedient to provide conductors for the lightning, as for
the rain.

Mr. West was so good as to make me a present of the melted wire,
which I keep as a great curiosity, and long for the pleasure of
shewing it to you. In the mean time, I beg your acceptance of the
best representation I can give of it, which you will find by the side
of the thermometer, drawn in its full dimensions as it now appears.
The dotted lines above are intended to shew the form of the wire
before the lightning melted it.

And now, Sir, I most heartily congratulate you on the pleasure you
must have in finding your great and well-grounded expectations so far
fulfilled. May this method of security from the destructive violence
of one of the most awful powers of nature, meet with such further
success, as to induce every good and grateful heart to bless God for
the important discovery! May the benefit thereof be diffused over the
whole globe! May it extend to the latest posterity of mankind, and
make the name of FRANKLIN, like that of NEWTON, _immortal_.

  I am, Sir, with sincere respect,

  Your most obedient and most humble servant,

  EBEN. KINNERSLEY.




TO MR. KINNERSLEY.

  _Answer to some of the foregoing Subjects.--How long the Leyden
  Bottle may be kept charged.--Heated Glass rendered permeable by the
  electric Fluid.--Electrical Attraction and Repulsion.--Reply to
  other Subjects in the preceding Paper.--Numerous Ways of kindling
  Fire.--Explosion of Water.--Knobs and Points._


  _London, Feb. 20, 1762._

  SIR,

I received your ingenious letter of the 12th of March last, and thank
you cordially for the account you give me of the new experiments you
have lately made in electricity.--It is a subject that still affords
me pleasure, though of late I have not much attended to it.

Your second experiment, in which you attempted, without success, to
communicate positive electricity by vapour ascending from electrised
water, reminds me of one I formerly made, to try if negative
electricity might be produced by evaporation only. I placed a large
heated brass plate, containing four or five square feet on an
electric stand; a rod of metal, about four feet long, with a bullet
at its end, extended from the plate horizontally. A light lock of
cotton, suspended a fine thread from the cieling, hung opposite to,
and within an inch of the bullet. I then sprinkled the heated plate
with water, which arose fast from it in vapour. If vapour should be
disposed to carry off the electrical, as it does the common fire from
bodies, I expected the plate would, by losing some of its natural
quantity, become negatively electrised. But I could not perceive, by
any motion in the cotton, that it was at all affected: nor by any
separation of small cork-balls suspended from the plate, could it be
observed that the plate was in any manner electrified.

Mr. Canton here has also found, that two tea-cups, set on electric
stands, and filled, one with boiling, the other with cold water,
and equally electrified, continued equally so, notwithstanding the
plentiful evaporation from the hot water. Your experiment and his
agreeing, show another remarkable difference between electric and
common fire. For the latter quits most readily the body that contains
it, where water, or any other fluid, is evaporating from the surface
of that body, and escapes with the vapour. Hence the method, long in
use in the east, of cooling liquors, by wrapping the bottles round
with a wet cloth, and exposing them to the wind. Dr. Cullen, of
Edinburgh, has given some experiments of cooling by evaporation; and
I was present at one made by Dr. Hadley, then professor of chemistry
at Cambridge, when, by repeatedly wetting the ball of a thermometer
with spirit, and quickening the evaporation by the blast of a
bellows, the mercury fell from 65, the state of warmth in the common
air, to 7, which is 22 degrees below freezing; and, accordingly,
from some water mixed with the spirit, or from the breath of the
assistants, or both, ice gathered in small spicula round the ball,
to the thickness of near a quarter of an inch. To such a degree did
the mercury lose the fire it before contained, which, as I imagine,
took the opportunity of escaping, in company with the evaporating
particles of the spirit, by adhering to those particles.

Your experiment of the Florence flask, and boiling water, is very
curious. I have repeated it, and found it to succeed as you describe
it, in two flasks out of three. The third would not charge when
filled with either hot or cold water. I repeated it, because I
remembered I had once attempted to make an electric bottle of a
Florence flask, filled with cold water, but could not charge it at
all; which I then imputed to some imperceptible cracks in the small,
extremely thin bubbles, of which that glass is full, and I concluded
none of that kind would do. But you have shown me my mistake.--Mr.
Wilson had formerly acquainted us, that red hot glass would conduct
electricity; but that so small a degree of heat, as that communicated
by boiling water, would so open the pores of extremely thin glass, as
to suffer the electric fluid freely to pass, was not before known.
Some experiments similar to yours, have, however, been made here,
before the receipt of your letter, of which I shall now give you an
account.

I formerly had an opinion that a Leyden bottle, charged and then
sealed hermetically, might retain its electricity for ever; but
having afterwards some suspicion that possibly that subtle fluid
might, by slow imperceptible degrees, soak through the glass, and in
time escape, I requested some of my friends, who had conveniences for
doing it, to make trial, whether, after some months, the charge of a
bottle so sealed would be sensibly diminished. Being at Birmingham,
in September, 1760, Mr. Bolton of that place opened a bottle that
had been charged, and its long tube neck hermetically sealed in
the January preceding. On breaking off the end of the neck, and
introducing a wire into it, we found it possessed of a considerable
quantity of electricity, which was discharged by a snap and spark.
This bottle had lain near seven months on a shelf, in a closet, in
contact with bodies that would undoubtedly have carried off all its
electricity, if it could have come readily through the glass. Yet
as the quantity manifested by the discharge was not apparently so
great as might have been expected from a bottle of that size well
charged, some doubt remained whether part had escaped while the neck
was sealing, or had since, by degrees, soaked through the glass. But
an experiment of Mr. Canton's, in which such a bottle was kept under
water a week, without having its electricity in the least impaired,
seems to show, that when the glass is cold, though extremely thin,
the electric fluid is well retained by it. As that ingenious and
accurate experimenter made a discovery, like yours, of the effect
of heat in rendering thin glass permeable by that fluid, it is but
doing him justice to give you his account of it, in his own words,
extracted from his letter to me, in which he communicated it, dated
Oct. 31, 1760, _viz_.

"Having procured some thin glass balls, of about an inch and a
half in diameter, with stems, or tubes, of eight or nine inches in
length, I electrified them, some positively on the inside, and others
negatively, after the manner of charging the Leyden bottle, and
sealed them hermetically. Soon after I applied the naked balls to my
electrometer, and could not discover the least sign of their being
electrical, but holding them, before the fire, at the distance of
six or eight inches, they became strongly electrical in a very short
time, and more so when they were cooling. These balls will, every
time they are heated, give the electrical fluid to, or take it from
other bodies, according to the _plus_ or _minus_ state of it within
them. Heating them frequently, I find will sensibly diminish their
power; but keeping one of them under water a week did not appear
in the least degree to impair it. That which I kept under water,
was charged on the 22d of September last, was several times heated
before it was kept in water, and has been heated frequently since,
and yet it still retains its virtue to a very considerable degree.
The breaking two of my balls accidentally gave me an opportunity of
measuring their thickness, which I found to be between seven and
eight parts in a thousand of an inch.

A down feather, in a thin glass ball, hermetically sealed, will not
be affected by the application of an excited tube, or the wire of a
charged phial, unless the ball be considerably heated; and if a glass
pane be heated till it begins to grow soft, and in that state be held
between the wire of a charged phial, and the discharging wire, the
course of the electrical fluid will not be through the glass, but on
the surface, round by the edge of it."

By this last experiment of Mr. Canton's, it appears, that though by
a moderate heat, thin glass becomes, in some degree, a conductor of
electricity, yet, when of the thickness of a common pane, it is not,
though in a state near melting, so good a conductor as to pass the
shock of a discharged bottle. There are other conductors which suffer
the electric fluid to pass through them gradually, and yet will not
conduct a shock. For instance, a quire of paper will conduct through
its whole length, so as to electrify a person, who, standing on wax,
presents the paper to an electrified prime conductor; but it will
not conduct a shock even through its thickness only; hence the shock
either fails, or passes by rending a hole in the paper. Thus a sieve
will pass water gradually, but a stream from a fire engine would
either be stopped by it, or tear a hole through it.

It should seem, that to make glass permeable to the electric fluid,
the heat should be proportioned to the thickness. You found the heat
of boiling water, which is but 210, sufficient to render the extreme
thin glass in a Florence flask permeable even to a shock.--Lord
Charles Cavendish, by a very ingenious experiment, has found the heat
of 400 requisite to render thicker glass permeable to the common
current.

"A glass tube, (See _Plate_ III.) of which the part C B was solid,
had wire thrust in each end, reaching to B and C.

"A small wire was tied on at D, reaching to the floor, in order to
carry off any electricity that might run along upon the tube.

"The bent part was placed in an iron pot, filled with iron filings;
a thermometer was also put into the filings; a lamp was placed under
the pot; and the whole was supported upon glass.

"The wire A being electrified by a machine, before the heat was
applied, the corks at E separated, at first upon the principle of the
Leyden phial.

"But after the part C B of the tube was heated to 600, the corks
continued to separate, though you discharged the electricity by
touching the wire at E, the electrical machine continuing in motion.

"Upon letting the whole cool, the effect remained till the
thermometer was sunk to 400."

[Illustration: (of the experiment above)

  _Plate III._        _Vol. I. page 348._
]

It were to be wished, that this noble philosopher would communicate
more of his experiments to the world, as he makes many, and with
great accuracy.

You know I have always looked upon and mentioned the equal repulsion
in cases of positive and of negative electricity, as a phenomenon
difficult to be explained. I have sometimes, too, been inclined,
with you, to resolve all into attraction; but besides that
attraction seems in itself as unintelligible as repulsion, there are
some appearances of repulsion that I cannot so easily explain by
attraction; this for one instance. When the pair of cork balls are
suspended by flaxen threads, from the end of the prime conductor,
if you bring a rubbed glass tube near the conductor, but without
touching it, you see the balls separate, as being electrified
positively; and yet you have communicated no electricity to the
conductor, for, if you had, it would have remained there, after
withdrawing the tube; but the closing of the balls immediately
thereupon, shows that the conductor has no more left in it than its
natural quantity. Then again approaching the conductor with the
rubbed tube, if, while the balls are separated, you touch with a
finger that end of the conductor to which they hang, they will come
together again, as being, with that part of the conductor, brought
to the same state with your finger, _i. e._ the natural state. But
the other end of the conductor, near which the tube is held, is not
in that state, but in the negative state, as appears on removing the
tube; for then part of the natural quantity left at the end near
the balls, leaving that end to supply what is wanting at the other,
the whole conductor is found to be equally in the negative state.
Does not this indicate that the electricity of the rubbed tube had
repelled the electric fluid, which was diffused in the conductor
while in its natural state, and forced it to quit the end to which
the tube was brought near, accumulating itself on the end to which
the balls were suspended? I own I find it difficult to account for
its quitting that end, on the approach of the rubbed tube, but on the
supposition of repulsion; for, while the conductor was in the same
state with the air, _i. e._ the natural state, it does not seem to
me easy to suppose, that an attraction should suddenly take place
between the air and the natural quantity of the electric fluid in the
conductor, so as to draw it to, and accumulate it on the end opposite
to that approached by the tube; since bodies, possessing only their
natural quantity of that fluid, are not usually seen to attract each
other, or to affect mutually the quantities of electricity each
contains.

There are likewise appearances of repulsion in other parts of nature.
Not to mention the violent force with which the particles of water,
heated to a certain degree, separate from each other, or those of
gunpowder, when touched with the smallest spark of fire, there is
the seeming repulsion between the same poles of the magnet, a body
containing a subtle moveable fluid in many respects analagous to the
electric fluid. If two magnets are so suspended by strings, as that
their poles of the same denomination are opposite to each other, they
will separate, and continue so; or if you lay a magnetic steel bar
on a smooth table, and approach it with another parallel to it, the
poles of both in the same position, the first will recede from the
second, so as to avoid the contact, and may thus be pushed (or at
least appear to be pushed) off the table. Can this be ascribed to the
attraction of any surrounding body or matter drawing them asunder,
or drawing the one away from the other? If not, and repulsion exists
in nature, and in magnetism, why may it not exist in electricity? We
should not, indeed, multiply causes in philosophy without necessity;
and the greater simplicity of your hypothesis would recommend it to
me, if I could see that all appearances would be solved by it. But
I find, or think I find, the two causes more convenient than one of
them alone. Thus I might solve the circular motion of your horizontal
stick, supported on a pivot, with two pins at their ends, pointing
contrary ways, and moving in the same direction when electrified,
whether positively or negatively: when positively, the air opposite
to the points being electrised positively, repels the points; when
negatively, the air opposite the points being also, by their means,
electrised negatively, attraction takes place between the electricity
in the air behind the heads of the pins, and the negative pins, and
so they are, in this case, drawn in the same direction that in the
other they were driven.--You see I am willing to meet you half way,
a complaisance I have not met with in our brother Nollet, or any
other hypothesis-maker, and therefore may value myself a little upon
it, especially as they say I have some ability in defending even the
wrong side of a question, when I think fit to take it in hand.

What you give as an established law of the electric fluid, "That
quantities of different densities mutually attract each other, in
order to restore the equilibrium," is, I think, not well founded,
or else not well expressed. Two large cork balls, suspended by
silk strings, and both well and equally electrified, separate to a
great distance. By bringing into contact with one of them another
ball of the same size, suspended likewise by silk, you will take
from it half its electricity. It will then, indeed, hang at a less
distance from the other, but the full and the half quantities will
not appear to attract each other, that is, the balls will not come
together. Indeed, I do not know any proof we have, that one quantity
of electric fluid is attracted by another quantity of that fluid,
whatever difference there may be in their densities. And, supposing
in nature, a mutual attraction between two parcels of any kind
of matter, it would be strange if this attraction should subsist
strongly while those parcels were unequal, and cease when more matter
of the same kind was added to the smallest parcel, so as to make it
equal to the biggest. By all the laws of attraction in matter, that
we are acquainted with, the attraction is stronger in proportion to
the increase of the masses, and never in proportion to the difference
of the masses. I should rather think the law would be, "That the
electric fluid is attracted strongly by all other matter that we
know of, while the parts of that fluid mutually repel each other."
Hence its being equally diffused (except in particular circumstances)
throughout all other matter. But this you jokingly call "electrical
orthodoxy." It is so with some at present, but not with all; and,
perhaps, it may not always be orthodoxy with any body. Opinions are
continually varying, where we cannot have mathematical evidence of
the nature of things; and they must vary. Nor is that variation
without its use, since it occasions a more thorough discussion,
whereby error is often dissipated, true knowledge is encreased, and
its principles become better understood and more firmly established.

Air should have, as you observe, "its share of the common stock of
electricity, as well as glass, and, perhaps, all other electrics
_per se_." But I suppose, that, like them, it does not easily part
with what it has, or receive more, unless when mixed with some
non-electric, as moisture for instance, of which there is some in our
driest air. This, however, is only a supposition; and your experiment
of restoring electricity to a negatively electrised person, by
extending his arm upwards into the air, with a needle between his
fingers, on the point of which light may be seen in the night, is,
indeed, a curious one. In this town the air is generally moister than
with us, and here I have seen Mr. Canton electrify the air in one
room positively, and in another, which communicated by a door, he has
electrised the air negatively. The difference was easily discovered
by his cork balls, as he passed out of one room into another.--Pere
Beccaria, too, has a pretty experiment, which shows that air may
be electrised. Suspending a pair of small light balls, by flaxen
threads, to the end of his prime conductor, he turns his globe some
time, electrising positively, the balls diverging and continuing
separate all the time. Then he presents the point of a needle to
his conductor, which gradually drawing off the electric fluid, the
balls approach each other, and touch, before all is drawn from the
conductor; opening again as more is drawn off, and separating nearly
as wide as at first, when the conductor is reduced to the natural
state. By this it appears, that when the balls came together, the air
surrounding the balls was just as much electrised as the conductor
at that time; and more than the conductor, when that was reduced to
its natural state. For the balls, though in the natural state, will
diverge, when the air that surrounds them is electrised _plus_ or
_minus_, as well as when that is in its natural state and they are
electrised _plus_ or _minus_ themselves. I foresee that you will
apply this experiment to the support of your hypothesis, and I think
you may make a good deal of it.

It was a curious enquiry of yours, Whether the electricity of the
air, in clear dry weather, be of the same density at the height of
two or three hundred yards, as near the surface of the earth; and
I am glad you made the experiment. Upon reflection, it should seem
probable, that whether the general state of the atmosphere at any
time be positive or negative, that part of it which is next the earth
will be nearer the natural state, by having given to the earth in one
case, or having received from it in the other. In electrising the
air of a room, that which is nearest the walls, or floor, is least
altered. There is only one small ambiguity in the experiment, which
may be cleared by more trials; it arises from the supposition that
bodies may be electrised positively by the friction of air blowing
strongly on them, as it does on the kite and its string. If at some
times the electricity appears to be negative, as that friction is the
same, the effect must be from a negative state of the upper air.

I am much pleased with your electrical thermometer, and the
experiments you have made with it. I formerly satisfied myself by an
experiment with my phial and syphon, that the elasticity of the air
was not increased by the mere existence of an electric atmosphere
within the phial; but I did not know, till you now inform me, that
heat may be given to it by an electric explosion. The continuance
of its rarefaction, for some time after the discharge of your glass
jar and of your case of bottles, seem to make this clear. The
other experiments on wet paper, wet thread, green grass, and green
wood, are not so satisfactory; as possibly the reducing part of
the moisture to vapour, by the electric fluid passing through it,
might occasion some expansion which would be gradually reduced by
the condensation of such vapour. The fine silver thread, the very
small brass wire, and the strip of gilt paper, are also subject to a
similar objection, as even metals, in such circumstances, are often
partly reduced to smoke, particularly the gilding on paper.

But your subsequent beautiful experiment on the wire, which you made
hot by the electric explosion, and in that state fired gunpowder
with it, puts it out of all question, that heat is produced by our
artificial electricity, and that the melting of metals in that way,
is not by what I formerly called a cold fusion. A late instance here,
of the melting a bell-wire, in a house struck by lightning, and parts
of the wire burning holes in the floor on which they fell, has proved
the same with regard to the electricity of nature. I was too easily
led into that error by accounts given, even in philosophical books,
and from remote ages downwards, of melting money in purses, swords
in scabbards, &c. without burning the inflammable matters that were
so near those melted metals. But men are, in general, such careless
observers, that a philosopher cannot be too much on his guard in
crediting their relations of things extraordinary, and should never
build an hypothesis on any thing but clear facts and experiments, or
it will be in danger of soon falling, as this does, like a house of
cards.

How many ways there are of kindling fire, or producing heat in
bodies! By the sun's rays, by collision, by friction, by hammering,
by putrefaction, by fermentation, by mixtures of fluids, by mixtures
of solids with fluids, and by electricity. And yet the fire when
produced, though in different bodies it may differ in circumstances,
as in colour, vehemence, &c. yet in the same bodies is generally the
same. Does not this seem to indicate that the fire existed in the
body, though in a quiescent state, before it was by any of these
means excited, disengaged, and brought forth to action and to view?
May it not constitute a part, and even a principal part, of the
solid substance of bodies? If this should be the case, kindling fire
in a body would be nothing more than developing this inflammable
principle, and setting it at liberty to act in separating the parts
of that body, which then exhibits the appearances of scorching,
melting, burning, &c. When a man lights an hundred candles from the
flame of one, without diminishing that flame, can it be properly
said to have _communicated_ all that fire? When a single spark from
a flint, applied to a magazine of gunpowder, is immediately attended
with this consequence, that the whole is in flame, exploding with
immense violence, could all this fire exist first in the spark? We
cannot conceive it. And thus we seem led to this supposition, that
there is fire enough in all bodies to singe, melt, or burn them,
whenever it is, by any means, set at liberty, so that it may exert
itself upon them, or be disengaged from them. This liberty seems to
be afforded it by the passage of electricity through them, which
we know can and does, of itself, separate the parts even of water;
and perhaps the immediate appearances of fire are only the effects
of such separations? If so, there would be no need of supposing that
the electric fluid _heats itself_ by the swiftness of its motion, or
heats bodies by the resistance it meets with in passing through them.
They would only be heated in proportion as such separation could be
more easily made. Thus a melting heat cannot be given to a large wire
in the flame of a candle, though it may to a small one; and this not
because the large wire resists _less_ that action of the flame which
tends to separate its parts, but because it resists it _more_ than
the smaller wire; or because the force being divided among more parts
acts weaker on each.

This reminds me, however, of a little experiment I have frequently
made, that shows, at one operation, the different effects of the same
quantity of electric fluid passing through different quantities of
metal. A strip of tinfoil, three inches long, a quarter of an inch
wide at one end, and tapering all the way to a sharp point at the
other, fixed between two pieces of glass, and having the electricity
of a large glass jar sent through it, will not be discomposed in the
broadest part; towards the middle will appear melted in spots; where
narrower, it will be quite melted; and about half an inch of it next
the point will be reduced to smoke.

You were not mistaken in supposing that your account of the effect of
the pointed rod, in securing Mr. West's house from damage by a stroke
of lightning, would give me great pleasure. I thank you for it most
heartily, and for the pains you have taken in giving me so complete a
description of its situation, form, and substance, with the draft of
the melted point. There is one circumstance, viz. that the lightning
was seen to diffuse itself from the foot of the rod over the wet
pavement, which seems, I think, to indicate, that the earth under
the pavement was very dry, and that the rod should have been sunk
deeper, till it came to earth moister, and therefore apter to receive
and dissipate the electric fluid. And although, in this instance,
a conductor formed of nail rods, not much above a quarter of an
inch thick, served well to convey the lightning, yet some accounts
I have seen from Carolina, give reason to think, that larger may
be sometimes necessary, at least for the security of the conductor
itself, which, when too small, may be destroyed in executing its
office, though it does, at the same time, preserve the house. Indeed,
in the construction of an instrument so new, and of which we could
have so little experience, it is rather lucky that we should at first
be so near the truth as we seem to be, and commit so few errors.

There is another reason for sinking deeper the lower end of the
rod, and also for turning it outwards under ground to some distance
from the foundation; it is this, that water dripping from the eaves
falls near the foundation, and sometimes soaks down there in greater
quantities, so as to come near the end of the rod, though the ground
about it be drier. In such case, this water may be exploded, that is,
blown into vapour, whereby a force is generated, that may damage the
foundation. Water reduced to vapour, is said to occupy 14,000 times
its former space. I have sent a charge through a small glass tube,
that has borne it well while empty, but when filled first with water,
was shattered to pieces and driven all about the room:--Finding no
part of the water on the table, I suspected it to have been reduced
to vapour; and was confirmed in that suspicion afterwards, when I
had filled a like piece of tube with ink, and laid it on a sheet of
clean paper, whereon, after the explosion, I could find neither any
moisture nor any sully from the ink. This experiment of the explosion
of water, which I believe was first made by that most ingenious
electrician, father Beccaria, may account for what we sometimes
see in a tree struck by lightning, when part of it is reduced to
fine splinters like a broom; the sap vessels being so many tubes
containing a watry fluid, which, when reduced to vapour, rends every
tube lengthways. And perhaps it is this rarefaction of the fluids in
animal bodies killed by lightning or electricity, that, by separating
its fibres, renders the flesh so tender, and apt so much sooner to
putrify. I think too, that much of the damage done by lightning to
stone and brick-walls may sometimes be owing to the explosion of
water, found, during showers, running or lodging in the joints or
small cavities or cracks that happen to be in the walls.

Here are some electricians that recommend knobs instead of points
on the upper end of the rods, from a supposition that the points
invite the stroke. It is true that points draw electricity at greater
distances in the gradual silent way; but knobs will draw at the
greatest distance a stroke. There is an experiment that will settle
this. Take a crooked wire of the thickness of a quill, and of such a
length as that one end of it being applied to the lower part of a
charged bottle, the upper may be brought near the ball on the top of
the wire that is in the bottle. Let one end of this wire be furnished
with a knob, and the other may be gradually tapered to a fine point.
When the point is presented to discharge the bottle, it must be
brought much nearer before it will receive the stroke, than the
knob requires to be. Points besides tend to repel the fragments of
an electrised cloud, knobs draw them nearer. An experiment, which I
believe I have shewn you, of cotton fleece hanging from an electrised
body, shows this clearly when a point or a knob is presented under it.

You seem to think highly of the importance of this discovery, as
do many others on our side of the water. Here it is very little
regarded; so little, that though it is now seven or eight years
since it was made public, I have not heard of a single house as
yet attempted to be secured by it. It is true the mischiefs done
by lightning are not so frequent here as with us, and those who
calculate chances may perhaps find that not one death (or the
destruction of one house) in a hundred thousand happens from
that cause, and that therefore it is scarce worth while to be at
any expence to guard against it.--But in all countries there are
particular situations of buildings more exposed than others to
such accidents, and there are minds so strongly impressed with the
apprehension of them, as to be very unhappy every time a little
thunder is within their hearing;--it may therefore be well to render
this little piece of new knowledge as general and as well understood
as possible, since to make us _safe_ is not all its advantage, it is
some to make us _easy_. And as the stroke it secures us from might
have chanced perhaps but once in our lives, while it may relieve us
a hundred times from those painful apprehensions, the latter may
possibly on the whole contribute more to the happiness of mankind
than the former.

Your kind wishes and congratulations are very obliging. I return them
cordially;--being, with great regard and esteem,

  My dear Sir,

  Your affectionate friend,

  And most obedient humble servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Accounts from Carolina (mentioned in the foregoing Letter) of the
  Effects of Lightning on two of the Rods commonly affixed to Houses
  there, for securing them against Lightning_.


  _Charlestown, Nov. 1, 1760._

"----It is some years since Mr. Raven's rod was struck by lightning.
I hear an account of it was published at the time, but I cannot find
it. According to the best information I can now get, he had fixed to
the outside of his chimney a large iron rod, several feet in length,
reaching above the chimney; and to the top of this rod the points
were fixed. From the lower end of this rod, a small brass wire was
continued down to the top of another iron rod driven into the earth.
On the ground-floor in the chimney stood a gun, leaning against the
back-wall, nearly opposite to where the brass wire came down on the
outside. The lightning fell upon the points, did no damage to the
rod they were fixed to; but the brass wire, all down till it came
opposite to the top of the gun-barrel, was destroyed[76]. There
the lightning made a hole through the wall or back of the chimney,
to get to the gun-barrel[77], down which it seems to have passed,
as, although it did not hurt the barrel, it damaged the butt of
the stock, and blew up some bricks of the hearth. The brass wire
below the hole in the wall remained good. No other damage, as I can
learn, was done to the house. I am told the same house had formerly
been struck by lightning, and much damaged, before these rods were
invented."----

FOOTNOTES:

[76] A proof that it was not of sufficient substance to conduct with
safety to itself (though with safety _so far_ to the wall) so large a
quantity of the electric fluid.

[77] A more substantial conductor.




  _Mr. William Maine's Account of the Effects of the Lightning on his
  Rod, dated at Indian Land, in South Carolina, Aug. 28, 1760._


----"I had a set of electrical points, consisting of three prongs, of
large brass wire tipt with silver, and perfectly sharp, each about
seven inches long; these were rivetted at equal distances into an
iron nut about three quarters of an inch square, and opened at top
equally to the distance of six or seven inches from point to point,
in a regular triangle. This nut was screwed very tight on the top
of an iron rod of above half an inch diameter, or the thickness of
a common curtain-rod, composed of several joints, annexed by hooks
turned at the ends of each joint, and the whole fixed to the chimney
of my house by iron staples. The points were elevated (_a_) six or
seven inches above the top of the chimney; and the lower joint sunk
three feet in the earth, in a perpendicular direction.

Thus stood the points on Tuesday last about five in the evening, when
the lightning broke with a violent explosion on the chimney, cut
the rod square off just under the nut, and I am persuaded, melted
the points, nut, and top of the rod, entirely up; as after the most
diligent search, nothing of either was found (_b_), and the top
of the remaining rod was cased over with a congealed solder. The
lightning ran down the rod, starting almost all the staples (_c_),
and unhooking the joints without affecting the rod (_d_), except on
the inside of each hook where the joints were coupled, the surface of
which was melted (_e_), and left as cased over with solder.--No part
of the chimney was damaged (_f_), only at the foundation (_g_), where
it was shattered almost quite round, and several bricks were torn
out (_h_). Considerable cavities were made in the earth quite round
the foundation, but most within eight or nine inches of the rod. It
also shattered the bottom weather-board (_i_) at one corner of the
house, and made a large hole in the earth by the corner post. On the
other side of the chimney, it ploughed up several furrows in the
earth, some yards in length. It ran down the inside of the chimney
(_k_), carrying only soot with it; and filled the whole house with
its flash (_l_), smoke, and dust. It tore up the hearth in several
places (_m_), and broke some pieces of china in the beaufet (_n_). A
copper tea-kettle standing in the chimney was beat together, as if
some great weight had fallen upon it (_o_); and three holes, each
about half an inch diameter, melted through the bottom (_p_). What
seems to me the most surprising is, that the hearth under the kettle
was not hurt, yet the bottom of the kettle was drove inward, as if
the lightning proceeded from under it upwards (_q_), and the cover
was thrown to the middle of the floor (_r_). The fire dogs, an iron
logger-head, an Indian pot, an earthen cup, and a cat, were all in
the chimney at the time unhurt, though a great part of the hearth was
torn up (_s_). My wife's sister, two children, and a negro wench,
were all who happened to be in the house at the time: the first,
and one child, sat within five feet of the chimney; and were so
stunned, that they never saw the lightning nor heard the explosion;
the wench, with the other child in her arms, sitting at a greater
distance, was sensible of both; though every one was so stunned that
they did not recover for some time; however it pleased God that no
farther mischief ensued. The kitchen, at 90 feet distance, was full
of negroes, who were all sensible of the shock; and some of them tell
me, that they felt the rod about a minute after, when it was so hot
that they could not bear it in hand."


REMARKS BY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

The foregoing very sensible and distinct account may afford a good
deal of instruction relating to the nature and effects of lightning,
and to the construction and use of this instrument for averting the
mischiefs of it. Like other new instruments, this appears to have
been at first in some respects imperfect; and we find that we are, in
this as in others, to expect improvement from experience chiefly: but
there seems to be nothing in the account, that should discourage us
in the use of it; since at the same time that its imperfections are
discovered, the means of removing them are pretty easily to be learnt
from the circumstances of the account itself; and its utility upon
the whole is manifest.

One intention of the pointed rod, is, to _prevent_ a stroke of
lightning. (_See pages_ 283, 310.) But to have a better chance of
obtaining this end, the points should not be too near to the top
of the chimney or highest part of the building to which they are
affixed, but should be extended five or six feet above it; otherwise
their operation in silently drawing off the fire (from such fragments
of cloud as float in the air between the great body of cloud and
the earth) will be prevented. For the experiment with the lock of
cotton hanging below the electrified prime conductor shows, that a
finger under it, being a blunt body, extends the cotton, drawing its
lower part downwards; when a needle, with its point presented to the
cotton, makes it fly up again to the prime conductor; and that this
effect is strongest when as much of the needle as possible appears
above the end of the finger; grows weaker as the needle is shortened
between the finger and thumb; and is reduced to nothing when only a
short part below the point appears above the finger. Now it seems
the points of Mr. Maine's rod were elevated only (_a_) _six or seven
inches above the top of the chimney_; which, considering the bulk of
the chimney and the house, was too small an elevation. For the great
body of matter near them would hinder their being easily brought into
a negative state by the repulsive power of the electrised cloud,
in which negative state it is that they attract most strongly and
copiously the electric fluid from other bodies, and convey it into
the earth.

(_b_) _Nothing of the points, &c. could be found._ This is a common
effect. (_See page_ 312.) Where the quantity of the electric fluid
passing is too great for the conductor through which it passes, the
metal is either melted, or reduced to smoke and dissipated; but where
the conductor is sufficiently large, the fluid passes in it without
hurting it. Thus these three wires were destroyed, while the rod to
which they were fixed, being of greater substance, remained unhurt;
its end only, to which they were joined, being a little melted, some
of the melted part of the lower ends of those wires uniting with it,
and appearing on it like solder.

(_c_)(_d_)(_e_) As the several parts of the rod were connected only
by the ends being bent round into hooks, the contact between hook and
hook was much smaller than the rod; therefore the current through
the metal being confined in those narrow passages, melted part of
the metal, as appeared on examining the inside of each hook. Where
metal is melted by lightning, some part of it is generally exploded;
and these explosions in the joints appear to have been the cause of
unhooking them; and, by that violent action, of starting also most of
the staples. We learn from hence, that a rod in one continued piece
is preferable to one composed of links or parts hooked together.

(_f_) _No part of the chimney was damaged_: because the lightning
passed in the rod. And this instance agrees with others in showing,
that the second and principal intention of the rods is obtainable,
viz. that of _conducting_ the lightning. In all the instances yet
known of the lightning's falling on any house guarded by rods, it
has pitched down upon the point of the rod, and has not fallen
upon any other part of the house. Had the lightning fallen on this
chimney, unfurnished with a rod, it would probably have rent it
from top to bottom, as we see, by the effects of the lightning on
the points and rod, that its quantity was very great; and we know
that many chimneys have been so demolished. But _no part of this
was damaged, only_ (_f_)(_g_)(_h_) _at the foundation, where it was
shattered and several bricks torn out_. Here we learn the principal
defect in fixing this rod. The lower joint being sunk but three feet
into the earth, did not it seems go low enough to come at water,
or a large body of earth so moist as to receive readily from its
end the quantity it conducted. The electric fluid therefore, thus
accumulated near the lower end of the rod, quitted it at the surface
of the earth, dividing in search of other passages. Part of it tore
up the surface in furrows, and made holes in it: part entered the
bricks of the foundation, which being near the earth are generally
moist, and, in exploding that moisture, shattered them. (_See page_
358.) Part went through or under the foundation, and got under the
hearth, blowing up great part of the bricks (_m_)(_s_), and producing
the other effects (_o_)(_p_)(_q_)(_r_). The iron dogs, loggerhead
and iron pot were not hurt, being of sufficient substance, and they
probably protected the cat. The copper tea-kettle being thin suffered
some damage. Perhaps, though found on a sound part of the hearth,
it might at the time of the stroke have stood on the part blown up,
which will account both for the bruising and melting.

That _it ran down the inside of the chimney_ (_k_) I apprehend
must be a mistake. Had it done so, I imagine it would have brought
something more than soot with it; it would probably have ripped off
the pargetting, and brought down fragments of plaster and bricks. The
shake, from the explosion on the rod, was sufficient to shake down a
good deal of loose soot. Lightning does not usually enter houses by
the doors, windows, or chimneys, as open passages, in the manner that
air enters them: its nature is, to be attracted by substances, that
are conductors of electricity; it penetrates and passes _in_ them,
and, if they are not good conductors as are neither wood, brick,
stone nor plaster, it is apt to rend them in its passage. It would
not easily pass through the air from a cloud to a building, were it
not for the aid afforded it in its passage by intervening fragments
of clouds below the main body, or by the falling rain.

It is said that _the house was filled with its flash_ (_l_).
Expressions like this are common in accounts of the effects of
lightning, from which we are apt to understand that the lightning
filled the house. Our language indeed seems to want a word to express
the _light_ of lightning as distinct from the lightning itself. When
a tree on a hill is struck by it, the lightning of that stroke exists
only in a narrow vein between the cloud and tree, but its light fills
a vast space many miles round; and people at the greatest distance
from it are apt to say, "The lightning came into our rooms through
our windows." As it is in itself extremely bright, it cannot, when
so near as to strike a house, fail illuminating highly every room
in it through the windows; and this I suppose to have been the case
at Mr. Maine's; and that, except in and near the hearth, from the
causes above-mentioned, it was not in any other part of the house;
_the flash_ meaning no more than _the light_ of the lightning.--It is
for want of considering this difference, that people suppose there
is a kind of lightning not attended with thunder. In fact there is
probably a loud explosion accompanying every flash of lightning,
and at the same instant;--but as sound travels slower than light,
we often hear the sound some seconds of time after having seen the
light; and as sound does not travel so far as light, we sometimes see
the light at a distance too great to hear the sound.

(_n_) The _breaking some pieces of china in the beaufet_, may
nevertheless seem to indicate that the lightning was there: but as
there is no mention of its having hurt any part of the beaufet, or of
the walls of the house, I should rather ascribe that effect to the
concussion of the air, or shake of the house by the explosion.

Thus, to me it appears, that the house and its inhabitants were saved
by the rod, though the rod itself was unjointed by the stroke; and
that, if it had been made of one piece, and sunk deeper in the earth,
or had entered the earth at a greater distance from the foundation,
the mentioned small damages (except the melting of the points) would
not have happened.




TO DR. H[78]. AT LONDON.

  _On the Electricity of the Tourmalin._


  _Craven-street, June 7, 1759._

  SIR,

I now return the smallest of your two tourmalins, with hearty thanks
for your kind present of the other, which, though I value highly for
its rare and wonderful properties, I shall ever esteem it more for
the friendship I am honoured with by the giver.

I hear that the negative electricity of one side of the tourmalin,
when heated, is absolutely denied (and all that has been related of
it ascribed to prejudice in favour of a system) by some ingenious
gentlemen abroad, who profess to have made the experiments on the
stone with care and exactness. The experiments have succeeded
differently with me; yet I would not call the accuracy of those
gentlemen in question. Possibly the tourmalins they have tried were
not properly cut; so that the positive and negative powers were
obliquely placed, or in some manner whereby their effects were
confused, or the negative parts more easily supplied by the positive.
Perhaps the lapidaries who have hitherto cut these stones, had no
regard to the situation of the two powers, but chose to make the
faces of the stone where they could obtain the greatest breadth,
or some other advantage in the form. If any of these stones, in
their natural state, can be procured here, I think it would be
right to endeavour finding, before they are cut, the two sides that
contain the opposite powers, and make the faces there. Possibly, in
that case, the effects might be stronger, and more distinct; for
though both these stones that I have examined have evidently the
two properties, yet, without the full heat given by boiling water,
they are somewhat confused; the virtue seems strongest towards one
end of the face; and in the middle, or near the other end, scarce
discernible; and the negative, I think, always weaker than the
positive.

I have had the large one new cut, so as to make both sides alike,
and find the change of form has made no change of power, but the
properties of each side remain the same as I found them before. It
is now set in a ring in such a manner as to turn on an axis, that I
may conveniently, in making experiments, come at both side of the
stone. The little rim of gold it is set in, has made no alteration in
its effects. The warmth of my finger, when I wear it, is sufficient
to give it some degree of electricity, so that it is always ready to
attract light bodies.

The following experiments have satisfied me that M. Æpinus's account
of the positive and negative states of the opposite sides of the
heated tourmalin is well founded.

I heated the large stone in boiling water.

As soon as it was dry, I brought it near a very small cork ball, that
was suspended by a silk thread.

The ball was attracted by one face of the stone, which I call A, and
then repelled.

The ball in that state was also repelled by the positively charged
wire of a phial, and attracted by the other side of the stone, B.

The stone being a-fresh heated, and the side B brought near the ball,
it was first attracted, and presently after repelled by that side.

In this second state it was repelled by the negatively charged wire
of a phial.

Therefore, if the principles now generally received, relating to
positive and negative electricity, are true, the side A of the large
stone, when the stone is heated in water, is in a positive state of
electricity; and the side B, in a negative state.

The same experiments being made with the small stone stuck by one
edge on the end of a small glass tube, with sealing-wax, the same
effects are produced. The flat side of the small stone gives the
signs of positive electricity; the high side gives the signs of
negative electricity.

  Again:

I suspended the small stone by a silk thread.

I heated it as it hung, in boiling water.

I heated the large one in boiling water.

Then I brought the large stone near to the suspended small one.

Which immediately turned its flat side to the side B of the large
stone, and would cling to it.

I turned the ring, so as to present the side A of the large stone, to
the flat side of the small one.

The flat side was repelled, and the small stone, turning quick,
applied its high side to the side A of the large one.

This was precisely what ought to happen, on the supposition that the
flat side of the small stone, when heated in water, is positive, and
the high side negative; the side A of the large stone positive, and
the side B negative.

The effect was apparently the same as would have been produced, if
one magnet had been suspended by a thread, and the different poles of
another brought alternately near it.

I find that the face A, of the large stone, being coated with
leaf-gold (attached by the white of an egg, which will bear dipping
in hot water) becomes quicker and stronger in its effect on the cork
ball, repelling it the instant it comes in contact; which I suppose
to be occasioned by the united force of different parts of the face,
collected and acting together through the metal.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[78] Dr. Heberden. _Editor._




FROM PROFESSOR WINTHROP, TO B. FRANKLIN.

  _New Observation relating to Electricity in the Atmosphere._


  _Cambridge, N. E. Sept. 29, 1762._

  SIR,

There is an observation relating to electricity in the atmosphere,
which seemed new to me, though perhaps it will not to you: however,
I will venture to mention it. I have some points on the top of
my house, and the wire where it passes within-side the house is
furnished with bells, according to your method, to give notice of
the passage of the electric fluid. In summer, these bells, generally
ring at the approach of a thunder-cloud; but cease soon after it
begins to rain. In winter, they sometimes though not very often, ring
while it is snowing; but never, that I remember, when it rains. But
what was unexpected to me was, that, though the bells had not rung
while it was snowing, yet, the next day, after it had done snowing,
and the weather was cleared up, while the snow was driven about by
a high wind at W. or N. W. the bells rung for several hours (though
with little intermissions) as briskly as ever I knew them, and I drew
considerable sparks from the wire. This phenomenon I never observed
but twice; viz. on the 31st of January, 1760, and the 3d of March,
1762.

  I am, Sir, &c.




FROM MR. A. S[79]. TO B. F.

  _Flash of Lightning that struck St. Bride's Steeple._


I have just recollected that in one of our great storms of lightning,
I saw an appearance, which I never observed before, nor ever heard
described. I am persuaded that I saw _the_ flash which struck St.
Bride's steeple. Sitting at my window, and looking to the north, I
saw what appeared to me a solid strait rod of fire, moving at a very
sharp angle with the horizon. It appeared to my eye as about two
inches diameter, and had nothing of the zig-zag lightning motion.
I instantly told a person sitting with me, that some place must be
struck at that instant. I was so much surprized at the vivid distinct
appearance of the fire, that I did not hear the clap of thunder,
which stunned every one besides. Considering how low it moved, I
could not have thought it had gone so far, having St. Martin's, the
New Church, and St. Clements's steeples in its way. It struck the
steeple a good way from the top, and the first impression it made in
the side is in the same direction I saw it move in. It was succeeded
by two flashes, almost united, moving in a pointed direction.

There were two distinct houses struck in Essex-street. I should have
thought the rod would have fallen in Covent-Garden, it was so low.
Perhaps the appearance is frequent, though never before seen by

  Your's,

  A. S.

FOOTNOTE:

[79] Mr. Alexander Small. _Editor._




TO MR. P. F[80]. NEWPORT.

  _Best Method of securing a Powder Magazine from Lightning._


----You may acquaint the gentleman that desired you to enquire
my opinion of the best method of securing a powder magazine from
lightning, that I think they cannot do better than to erect a mast
not far from it, which may reach fifteen or twenty feet above the top
of it, with a thick iron rod in one piece fastened to it, pointed at
the highest end, and reaching down through the earth till it comes
to water. Iron is a cheap metal; but if it were dearer, as this is
a public thing the expence is insignificant; therefore I would have
the rod at least an inch thick, to allow for its gradually wasting by
rust; it will last as long as the mast, and may be renewed with it.
The sharp point for five or six inches should be gilt.

But there is another circumstance of importance to the strength,
goodness, and usefulness of the powder, which does not seem to have
been enough attended to: I mean the keeping it perfectly dry. For
want of a method of doing this, much is spoiled in damp magazines,
and much so damaged as to become of little value.--If, instead of
barrels it were kept in cases of bottles well corked; or in large tin
canisters, with small covers shutting close by means of oiled paper
between, or covering the joining on the canister; or if in barrels,
then the barrels lined with thin sheet lead; no moisture in either of
these methods could possibly enter the powder, since glass and metals
are both impervious to water.

By the latter of these means you see tea is brought dry and crisp
from China to Europe, and thence to America, though it comes all the
way by sea in the damp hold of a ship. And by this method, grain,
meal, &c. if well dried before it is put up, may be kept for ages
sound and good.

There is another thing very proper to line small barrels with; it
is what they call tin-foil, or leaf-tin, being tin milled between
rollers till it becomes as thin as paper, and more pliant, at the
same time that its texture is extremely close. It may be applied
to the wood with common paste, made with boiling-water thickened
with flour; and, so laid on; will lie very close and stick well:
but I should prefer a hard sticky varnish for that purpose, made of
linseed oil much boiled. The heads might be lined separately, the tin
wrapping a little round their edges. The barrel, while the lining is
laid on, should have the end hoops slack, so that the staves standing
at a little distance from each other, may admit the head into its
groove. The tin-foil should be plyed into the groove. Then, one head
being put in, and that end hooped tight, the barrel would be fit to
receive the powder, and when the other head is put in and the hoops
drove up, the powder would be safe from moisture even if the barrel
were kept under water. This tin-foil is but about eighteen pence
sterling a pound, and is so extremely thin, that I imagine a pound of
it would line three or four powder-barrels.

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[80] Peter Franklin. _Editor._




  _Of Lightning, and the Methods (now used in America) of securing
  Buildings and Persons from its mischievous Effects._


Experiments made in electricity first gave philosophers a suspicion,
that the matter of lightning was the same with the electric matter.
Experiments afterwards made on lightning obtained from the clouds by
pointed rods, received into bottles, and subjected to every trial,
have since proved this suspicion to be perfectly well founded;
and that whatever properties we find in electricity, are also the
properties of lightning.

This matter of lightning, or of electricity, is an extreme subtile
fluid, penetrating other bodies, and subsisting in them, equally
diffused.

When by any operation of art or nature, there happens to be a greater
proportion of this fluid in one body than in another, the body
which has most will communicate to that which has least, till the
proportion becomes equal; provided the distance between them be not
too great; or, if it is too great, till there be proper conductors to
convey it from one to the other.

If the communication be through the air without any conductor, a
bright light is seen between the bodies, and a sound is heard. In
our small experiments, we call this light and sound the electric
spark and snap; but in the great operations of nature, the light is
what we call _lightning_, and the sound (produced at the same time,
though generally arriving later at our ears than the light does to
our eyes) is, with its echoes, called _thunder_.

If the communication of this fluid is by a conductor, it may be
without either light or sound, the subtle fluid passing in the
substance of the conductor.

If the conductor be good and of sufficient bigness, the fluid passes
through it without hurting it. If otherwise, it is damaged or
destroyed.

All metals, and water, are good conductors.--Other bodies may become
conductors by having some quantity of water in them, as wood, and
other materials used in building, but not having much water in them,
they are not good conductors, and therefore are often damaged in the
operation.

Glass, wax, silk, wool, hair, feathers, and even wood, perfectly dry
are non-conductors: that is, they resist instead of facilitating the
passage of this subtle fluid.

When this fluid has an opportunity of passing through two conductors,
one good, and sufficient, as of metal, the other not so good, it
passes in the best, and will follow it in any direction.

The distance at which a body charged with this fluid will discharge
itself suddenly, striking through the air into another body that is
not charged, or not so highly charged, is different according to
the quantity of the fluid, the dimensions and form of the bodies
themselves, and the state of the air between them.--This distance,
whatever it happens to be between any two bodies, is called their
_striking distance_, as, till they come within that distance of each
other, no stroke will be made.

The clouds have often more of this fluid in proportion than the
earth; in which case, as soon as they come near enough (that is,
within the striking distance) or meet with a conductor, the fluid
quits them and strikes into the earth. A cloud fully charged with
this fluid, if so high as to be beyond the striking distance from the
earth, passes quietly without making noise or giving light; unless it
meets with other clouds that have less.

Tall trees, and lofty buildings, as the towers and spires of
churches, become sometimes conductors between the clouds and the
earth; but not being good ones, that is, not conveying the fluid
freely, they are often damaged.

Buildings that have their roofs covered with lead, or other metal,
and spouts of metal continued from the roof into the ground to carry
off the water, are never hurt by lightning, as, whenever it falls on
such a building, it passes in the metals and not in the walls.

When other buildings happen to be within the striking distance from
such clouds, the fluid passes in the walls whether of wood, brick or
stone, quitting the walls only when it can find better conductors
near them, as metal rods, bolts, and hinges of windows or doors,
gilding on wainscot, or frames of pictures, the silvering on the
backs of looking-glasses, the wires for bells, and the bodies of
animals, as containing watery fluids. And in passing through the
house it follows the direction of these conductors, taking as many
in its way as can assist it in its passage, whether in a strait, or
crooked line leaping from one to the other, if not far distant from
each other, only rending the wall in the spaces where these partial
good conductors are too distant from each other.

An iron rod being placed on the outside of a building, from the
highest part continued down into the moist earth, in any direction
strait or crooked, following the form of the roof or other parts of
the building, will receive the lightning at its upper end, attracting
it so as to prevent its striking any other part; and, affording it a
good conveyance into the earth, will prevent its damaging any part of
the building.

A small quantity of metal is found able to conduct a great quantity
of this fluid. A wire no bigger than a goose-quill has been known
to conduct (with safety to the building as far as the wire was
continued) a quantity of lightning that did prodigious damage both
above and below it; and probably larger rods are not necessary,
though it is common in America, to make them of half an inch, some of
three quarters, or an inch diameter.

The rod may be fastened to the wall, chimney, &c. with staples of
iron.--The lightning will not leave the rod (a good conductor) to
pass into the wall (a bad conductor) through those staples.--It would
rather, if any were in the wall, pass out of it into the rod to get
more readily by that conductor into the earth.

If the building be very large and extensive, two or more rods may be
placed at different parts, for greater security.

Small ragged parts of clouds, suspended in the air between the
great body of clouds and the earth (like leaf gold in electrical
experiments) often serve as partial conductors for the lightning,
which proceeds from one of them to another, and by their help comes
within the striking distance to the earth or a building. It therefore
strikes through those conductors a building that would otherwise be
out of the striking distance.

Long sharp points communicating with the earth, and presented to
such parts of clouds, drawing silently from them the fluid they are
charged with, they are then attracted to the cloud, and may leave the
distance so great as to be beyond the reach of striking.

It is therefore that we elevate the upper end of the rod six or eight
feet above the highest part of the building, tapering it gradually to
a fine sharp point, which is gilt to prevent its rusting.

Thus the pointed rod either prevents a stroke from the cloud, or,
if a stroke is made, conducts it to the earth with safety to the
building.

The lower end of the rod should enter the earth so deep as to come
at the moist part, perhaps two or three feet; and if bent when under
the surface so as to go in a horizontal line six or eight feet from
the wall, and then bent again downwards three or four feet, it will
prevent damage to any of the stones of the foundation.

A person apprehensive of danger from lightning, happening during the
time of thunder to be in a house not so secured, will do well to
avoid sitting near the chimney, near a looking glass, or any gilt
pictures or wainscot; the safest place is in the middle of the room
(so it be not under a metal lustre suspended by a chain) sitting in
one chair and laying the feet up in another. It is still safer to
bring two or three mattrasses or beds into the middle of the room,
and, folding them up double, place the chair upon them; for they not
being so good conductors as the walls, the lightning will not chuse
an interrupted course through the air of the room and the bedding,
when it can go through a continued better conductor, the wall. But
where it can be had, a hammock or swinging bed, suspended by silk
cords equally distant from the walls on every side, and from the
cieling and floor above and below, affords the safest situation a
person can have in any room whatever; and what indeed may be deemed
quite free from danger of any stroke by lightning.

  B. FRANKLIN.

  _Paris, Sept. 1767._




FROM J. W.[81] ESQ. PROFESSOR OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY AT CAMBRIDGE, IN
NEW ENGLAND, JAN. 6, 1768.

  _St. Bride's Steeple.--Utility of Electrical Conductors to
  Steeples.--Singular kind of Glass tube._


"**** I have read in the Philosophical Transactions the account of the
effects of lightning on St. Bride's steeple. It is amazing to me,
that after the full demonstration you had given, of the identity of
lightning and of electricity, and the power of metalline conductors,
they should ever think of repairing that steeple without such
conductors. How astonishing is the force of prejudice even in an age
of so much knowledge and free enquiry!"


ANSWER TO THE ABOVE.

**** It is perhaps not so extraordinary that unlearned men, such as
commonly compose our church vestries, should not yet be acquainted
with, and sensible of the benefits of metal conductors in averting
the stroke of lightning, and preserving our houses from its violent
effects, or that they should be still prejudiced against the use
of such conductors, when we see how long even philosophers, men
of extensive science and great ingenuity, can hold out against
the evidence of new knowledge, that does not square with their
preconceptions; and how long men can retain a practice that is
conformable to their prejudices, and expect a benefit from such
practice, though constant experience shows its inutility. A late
piece of the Abbé Nollet, printed last year in the memoirs of the
French Academy of Sciences, affords strong instances of this: for
though the very relations he gives of the effects of lightning in
several churches and other buildings show clearly, that it was
conducted from one part to another by wires, gildings, and other
pieces of metal that were _within_, or connected with the building,
yet in the same paper he objects to the providing metalline
conductors _without_ the building, as useless or dangerous.[82] He
cautions people not to ring the church bells during a thunder-storm,
lest the lightning, in its way to the earth, should be conducted down
to them by the bell ropes,[83] which are but bad conductors; and yet
is against fixing metal rods on the outside of the steeple, which
are known to be much better conductors, and which it would certainly
chuse to pass in, rather than in dry hemp. And though for a thousand
years past bells have been solemnly consecrated by the Romish
church[84], in expectation that the sound of such blessed bells would
drive away those storms, and secure our buildings from the stroke
of lightning; and during so long a period, it has not been found by
experience, that places within the reach of such blessed sound, are
safer than others where it is never heard; but that on the contrary,
the lightning seems to strike steeples of choice, and that at the
very time the bells are ringing[85]; yet still they continue to bless
the new bells, and jangle the old ones whenever it thunders.--One
would think it was now time to try some other trick;--and ours is
recommended (whatever this able philosopher may have been told to the
contrary) by more than twelve years experience, wherein, among the
great number of houses furnished with iron rods in North America, not
one so guarded has been materially hurt with lightning, and several
have been evidently preserved by their means; while a number of
houses, churches, barns, ships, &c. in different places, unprovided
with rods, have been struck and greatly damaged, demolished or burnt.
Probably the vestries of our English churches are not generally well
acquainted with these facts; otherwise, since as good protestants
they have no faith in the blessing of bells, they would be less
excusable in not providing this other security for their respective
churches, and for the good people that may happen to be assembled
in them during a tempest, especially as those buildings, from their
greater height, are more exposed to the stroke of lightning than our
common dwellings.

I have nothing new in the philosophical way to communicate to you,
except what follows. When I was last year in Germany, I met with a
singular kind of glass, being a tube about eight inches long, half an
inch in diameter, with a hollow ball of near an inch diameter at one
end, and one of an inch and half at the other, hermetically sealed,
and half filled with water.--If one end is held in the hand, and
the other a little elevated above the level, a constant succession
of large bubbles proceeds from the end in the hand to the other
end, making an appearance that puzzled me much, till I found that
the space not filled with water was also free from air, and either
filled with a subtle invisible vapour continually rising from the
water, and extremely rarefiable by the least heat at one end, and
condensable again by the least coolness at the other; or it is the
very fluid of fire itself, which parting from the hand pervades the
glass, and by its expansive force depresses the water till it can
pass between it and the glass, and escape to the other end, where it
gets through the glass again into the air. I am rather inclined to
the first opinion, but doubtful between the two. An ingenious artist
here, Mr. Nairne, mathematical instrument-maker, has made a number
of them from mine, and improved them, for his are much more sensible
than those I brought from Germany.--I bored a very small hole through
the wainscot in the seat of my window, through which a little cold
air constantly entered, while the air in the room was kept warmer
by fires daily made in it, being winter time. I placed one of his
glasses, with the elevated end against this hole; and the bubbles
from the other end, which was in a warmer situation, were continually
passing day and night, to the no small surprise of even philosophical
spectators. Each bubble discharged is larger than that from which
it proceeds, and yet that is not diminished; and by adding itself
to the bubble at the other end, that bubble is not increased, which
seems very paradoxical.--When the balls at each end are made large,
and the connecting tube very small and bent at right angles, so that
the balls, instead of being at the ends, are brought on the side of
the tube, and the tube is held so as that the balls are above it,
the water will be depressed in that which is held in the hand, and
rise in the other as a jet or fountain; when it is all in the other,
it begins to boil, as it were, by the vapour passing up through it;
and the instant it begins to boil, a sudden coldness is felt in the
ball held; a curious experiment, this, first observed and shown me by
Mr. Nairne. There is something in it similar to the old observation,
I think mentioned by Aristotle, that the bottom of a boiling pot is
not warm; and perhaps it may help to explain that fact;--if indeed it
be a fact.--When the water stands at an equal height in both these
balls, and all at rest; if you wet one of the balls by means of a
feather dipt in spirit, though that spirit is of the same temperament
as to heat and cold with the water in the glasses, yet the cold
occasioned by the evaporation of the spirit from the wetted ball will
so condense the vapour over the water contained in that ball, as that
the water of the other ball will be pressed up into it, followed by a
succession of bubbles, till the spirit is all dried away. Perhaps the
observations on these little instruments may suggest and be applied
to some beneficial uses. It has been thought, that water reduced to
vapour by heat was rarefied only fourteen thousand times, and on
this principle our engines for raising water by fire are said to be
constructed: but if the vapour so much rarefied from water is capable
of being itself still farther rarefied to a boundless degree by the
application of heat to the vessels or parts of vessels containing
the vapour (as at first it is applied to those containing the water)
perhaps a much greater power may be obtained, with little additional
expence. Possibly too, the power of easily moving water from one
end to the other of a moveable beam (suspended in the middle like a
scale-beam) by a small degree of heat, may be applied advantageously
to some other mechanical purposes.****

  I am, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTES:

[81] John Winthrop. _Editor._

[82] Notre curiosité pourroit peut-être s'applandir des recherches
qu'elle nous a fait faire sur la nature du tonnerre, & sur la
mécanisme de ses principaux effets, mais ce n'est point ce qu'il y a
de plus important; il vaudroit bien mieux que nous puissions tronver
quelque moyen de nous en garantir: on y a pensé; on s'est même
flatté d'avoir fait cette grande découverte; mais malheureusement
douze années d'épreuves & un peu de réflexion, nous apprennent
qu'il ne faut pas compter sur les promesses qu'on nous a faites. Je
l'ai dit, il y a long temps, and avec regret, toutes ces pointes de
fer qu'on dresse en l'air, soit comme _électroscopes_, soit comme
préservatifs,----sont plus propre à nous attirer le feu du tonnerre
qu'à nous en préserver;----& je persiste â dire que le projet
d'épuiser une nuée orageuse du feu dont elle est chargée, n'est pas
celui d'un physicien,----. _Memoire sur les Effets du Tonnerre._

[83] Les cloches, en vertu de leur bénédiction, doivent écarter les
orages & nous preserver des coups de foudre; mais l'église permet
à la prudence humaine le choix des momens où il convient d'user de
ce préservatif. Je ne sais si le son, considéré physiquement, est
capable ou non de faire crever une nuée, & de causer l'épanchement
de son feu vers les objets terrestres, mais il est certain & prouvé
par l'expérience, que la tonnerre peut tomber sur un clocher, soit
que l'on y sonne ou que l'on n'y sonne point; & si cela arrive dans
le premier cas, les sonneurs sont en grand danger, parcequ'ils
tiennent des cordes par lesquelles la commotion de la foudre peut se
communiquer jusq'à eux: il est donc plus sage de laisser les cloches
en repos quand l'orage est arrivé au-dessus de l'église. Ibid.

[84] Suivant le rituel de Paris, lorsqu'on benit des cloches, on
recite les oraisons suivantes:

_Benedic, Domine ... quotiescumque sonuerit, procul recedat virtus
insidiantium, umbra phantasmatis, incursio turbinum, percussio
fulminum, læsio tonitruum, calamitas tempestatum, omnisque spiritus
procellarum, &c._

_Deus, qui per beatum Moïsen, &c. ... procul pellentur insidiæ
inimici, fragor grandinum, procella turbinum, impetus tempestatum,
temperentur infesta tonitrua. &c._

_Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, &c. ... ut ante sonitum ejus effugentur
ignita jacula inimici, percussio fulminum, impetus lapidum, læsio
tempestatum, &c._

[85] En 1718. M. Deslandes fit savoir à l'Academie Royale des
sciences, que la nuit du 14 ou 15 d'Avril de la mème année, le
tonnerre étoit tombé sur vingtquatre églises, dequis Landernau
jusqu'à Saint-Pol-de-Léon en Bretagne; que ces églises étoient
précisément celles où l'on sonnoit, & que la foudre avoit épargné
celles ou l'on ne sonnoit pas: que dans celle de Gouisnon, qui fut
entièrement ruinée, le tonnerre tua deux personnes de quatre qui
sonnoient, &c. _Hist. du l'Ac. R. des Sci. 1719._




  _Experiments, Observations, and Facts, tending to support the
  Opinion of the Utility of long pointed Rods, for securing Buildings
  from Damage by Strokes of Lightning._

Read at the Committee appointed to consider the erecting Conductors
to secure the Magazines at Purfleet, Aug. 27, 1772.


EXPERIMENT I.

The prime conductor of an electric machine, A. B. (_See Plate_
IV.) being supported about 10 inches and a half above the table by
a wax-stand, and under it erected a _pointed wire_ 7 inches and a
half high, and one-fifth of an inch thick, and tapering to a sharp
point, and communicating with the table; when the _point_ (being
uppermost) is _covered_ by the end of a finger, the conductor may be
full charged, and the electrometer c[86], will rise to the height
indicating a full charge: but the moment the point is _uncovered_,
the ball of the electrometer drops, showing the prime conductor
to be instantly discharged and nearly emptied of its electricity.
Turn the wire its _blunt_ end upwards (which represents an unpointed
bar) and no such effect follows, the electrometer remaining at its
usual height when the prime conductor is charged.

[Illustration: (of these experiments)

  _Plate IV._        _Vol. I. page 388._

_Published as the Act directs, April 1, 1806, by Longman, Hurst, Rees
& Orme, Paternoster Row._]


OBSERVATION.

_What_ quantity of lightning, a high pointed rod well communicating
with the earth may be expected to discharge from the clouds silently
in a short time, is yet unknown; but I have reason from a particular
fact to think it may at some times be very great. In Philadelphia I
had such a rod fixed to the top of my chimney, and extending about
nine feet above it. From the foot of this rod, a wire (the thickness
of a goose-quill) came through a covered glass tube in the roof, and
down through the well of the stair-case; the lower end connected
with the iron spear of a pump. On the stair-case opposite to my
chamber-door, the wire was divided; the ends separated about six
inches, a little bell on each end; [and] between the bells a little
brass ball suspended by a silk thread, to play between and strike
the bells when clouds passed with electricity in them. After having
frequently drawn sparks and charged bottles from the bell of the
upper wire, I was one night waked by loud cracks on the stair-case.
Starting up and opening the door, I perceived that the brass ball,
instead of vibrating as usual between the bells, was repelled and
kept at a distance from both; while the fire passed sometimes in very
large quick cracks from bell to bell; and sometimes in a continued
dense white stream, seemingly as large as my finger, whereby the
whole stair-case was enlightened as with sunshine, so that one
might see to pick up a pin[87]. And from the apparent quantity
thus discharged, I cannot but conceive that a _number_[88] of such
conductors must considerably lessen that of any approaching cloud,
before it comes so near as to deliver its contents in a general
stroke:--An effect not to be expected from bars _unpointed_; if the
above experiment with the blunt end of the wire is deemed pertinent
to the case.


EXPERIMENT II.

The pointed wire under the prime conductor continuing of the same
height, _pinch_ it between the thumb and finger near the top, so as
_just to conceal_ the point; then turning the globe, the electrometer
will rise and mark the full charge. Slip the fingers down so as to
discover about half an inch of the wire, then another half inch, and
then another; at every one of these motions _discovering more and
more_ of the pointed wire; you will see the electrometer fall quick
and proportionably, stopping when you stop. If you slip down the
_whole distance_ at once, the ball falls instantly down to the stem.


OBSERVATION.

From this experiment it seems that a greater effect in drawing off
the lightning from the clouds may be expected from _long_ pointed
rods, than from _short_ ones; I mean from such as show the greatest
length, _above the building_ they are fixed on.


EXPERIMENT III.

Instead of pinching the point between the thumb and finger, as in
the last experiment, keep the thumb and finger each at _near an inch
distance_ from it, but at the _same height_, the point between them.
In this situation, though the point is fairly exposed to the prime
conductor, it has little or no effect; the electrometer rises to
the height of a full charge.--But the moment the fingers are _taken
away_, the ball falls quick to the stem.


OBSERVATION.

To explain this, it is supposed, that one reason of the sudden effect
produced by a long naked pointed wire is, that (by the repulsive
power of the positive charge in the prime conductor) the natural
quantity of electricity contained in the pointed wire is driven down
into the earth, and the point of the wire made strongly _negative_;
whence it attracts the electricity of the prime conductor more
strongly than bodies in their natural state would do; the _small
quantity of common matter_ in the point, not being able by its
attractive force to retain its _natural quantity of the electric
fluid_, against the force of that repulsion.--But the finger and
thumb being substantial and blunt bodies, though as near the prime
conductor, hold up better their _own_ natural quantity against the
force of that repulsion; and so, continuing nearly in the natural
state, they jointly operate on the electric fluid in the point,
opposing its descent, and _aiding the point_ to retain it; contrary
to the repelling power of the prime conductor, which would drive it
down.--And this may also serve to explain the different powers of the
point in the preceding experiment, on the slipping down the finger
and thumb to different distances.

Hence is collected, that a pointed rod erected _between two tall
chimnies_, and very little higher (an instance of which I have seen)
cannot have so good an effect, as if it had been erected on one of
the chimneys, its whole length above it.


EXPERIMENT IV.

If, _instead_ of a long pointed wire, a _large solid body_ (to
represent a building without a point) be brought under and as near
the prime conductor, when charged; the ball of the electrometer will
_fall_ a little; and on taking away the large body, will _rise again_.


OBSERVATION.

Its _rising again_ shows that the prime conductor lost little or
none of its electric charge, as it had done through the point: the
_falling_ of the ball while the large body was under the conductor
therefore shows, that a quantity of its atmosphere was drawn from the
end where the electrometer is placed to the part immediately over the
large body, and there accumulated _ready_ to strike into it with its
whole undiminished force, as soon as within the striking distance;
and, were the prime conductor moveable like a _cloud_, it would
approach the body by attraction till within that distance. The swift
motion of clouds, as driven by the winds, probably prevents this
happening so often as otherwise it might do: for, though parts of
the cloud may stoop towards a building as they pass, in consequence
of such attraction, yet they are carried forward beyond the striking
distance before they could by their descending come within it.


EXPERIMENT V.

Attach a small light _lock of cotton_ to the underside of the
prime conductor, so that it may hang down towards the pointed wire
mentioned in the first experiment. _Cover_ the point with your
finger, and the globe being turned, the cotton will extend itself,
stretching down towards the finger, as at _a_; but on _uncovering_
the point, it instantly flies up to the prime conductor, as at _b_,
and continues there as long as the point is uncovered. The moment
you cover it again, the cotton flies down again, extending itself
towards the finger; and the same happens in degree, if (instead of
the finger) you use, uncovered, the _blunt_ end of the wire uppermost.


OBSERVATION.

To explain this, it is supposed that the cotton, by its connection
with the prime conductor, receives from it a quantity of its
electricity; which occasions its being attracted by the _finger_
that remains still in nearly its natural state. But when a _point_
is opposed to the cotton, its electricity is thereby taken from it,
faster than it can at a distance be supplied with a fresh quantity
from the conductor. Therefore being reduced _nearer_ to the natural
state, it is attracted _up_ to the electrified prime conductor;
_rather than down_, as before, to the finger.

Supposing farther that the prime conductor represents a cloud
charged with the electric fluid; the cotton, a ragged fragment of
cloud (of which the underside of great thunder-clouds are seen to
have many) the finger, a chimney or highest part of a building.--We
then may conceive that when such a cloud passes over a _building_,
some one of its ragged under-hanging fragments may be drawn down
by the chimney or other high part of the edifice; creating thereby
a _more easy communication_ between it and the great cloud.--But a
_long pointed rod_ being presented to this fragment, may occasion
its receding, like the cotton, up to the great cloud; and thereby
_increase_, instead _of lessening_ the distance, so as often to make
it greater than the striking distance. Turning the _blunt end of a
wire_ uppermost (which represents the unpointed bar) it appears that
the same good effect is not from that to be expected. A long pointed
rod it is therefore imagined, may _prevent_ some strokes; as well as
_conduct_ others that fall upon it, when a great body of cloud comes
on so heavily that the above repelling operation on fragments cannot
take place.


EXPERIMENT VI.

Opposite the side of the prime conductor place _separately_, isolated
by wax stems, Mr. Canton's two boxes with pith balls suspended by
fine linen threads. On each box, lay a wire six inches long and
one-fifth of an inch thick, tapering to a sharp point; but so laid,
as that four inches of the _pointed_ end of _one_ wire, and an equal
length of the _blunt_ end of the _other_, may project beyond the ends
of the boxes; and both at eighteen inches distance from the prime
conductor. Then charging the prime conductor by a turn or two of the
globe, the balls of each pair will separate; those of the box, whence
the point projects most, _considerably_; the others _less_. Touch the
prime conductor, and those of the box with the _blunt_ point will
_collapse_, and join. Those connected with the _point_ will at the
same time approach each other, _till_ within about an inch, and there
_remain_.


OBSERVATION.

This seems a proof, that though the small sharpened part of the wire
must have had a _less natural_ quantity in it before the operation,
than the thick blunt part; yet a greater quantity was _driven down
from it_ to the balls. Thence it is again inferred, that the pointed
rod is rendered _more negative_: and farther, that if a _stroke must
fall_ from the cloud over a building, furnished with such a rod,
it is more likely to be drawn to that pointed rod, than to a blunt
one; as being more strongly negative, and of course its attraction
stronger. And it seems more eligible, that the lightning should fall
on the point of the conductor (provided to convey it into the earth)
than on any other part of the building, _thence_ to proceed to such
conductor. Which end is also more likely to be obtained by the length
and loftiness of the rod; as protecting more extensively the building
under it.

It has been _objected_, that erecting pointed rods upon _edifices_,
is to _invite_ and draw the lightning into _them_; and therefore
dangerous. Were such rods to be erected on buildings, _without
continuing the communication_ quite down into the moist earth, this
objection might then have weight; but when such compleat conductors
are made, the lightning is invited not into the building, but into
the _earth_, the situation it aims at, and which it always seizes
every help to obtain, even from broken partial metalline conductors.

It has also been suggested, that from such electric experiments
_nothing certain can be concluded as to the great operations of
nature_; since it is often seen, that experiments, which have
succeeded in small, in large have failed. It is true that in
mechanics this has sometimes happened. But when it is considered
that we owe our first knowledge of the nature and operations of
lightning, to observations on such small experiments; and that on
carefully comparing the most accurate accounts of former facts, and
the exactest relations of those that have occurred since, the effects
have surprizingly agreed with the theory; it is humbly conceived that
in natural philosophy, in this branch of it at least, the suggestion
has not so much weight; and that the farther new experiments now
adduced in recommendation of _long_ sharp-pointed rods, may have some
claim to credit and consideration.

It has been urged too, that though points may have considerable
effects on a _small_ prime conductor at _small distances_; yet on
_great_ clouds and at _great distances_, nothing is to be expected
from them. To this it is answered, that in those _small_ experiments
it is evident the points act at a greater than the _striking_
distance; and in the large way, their service is _only expected_
where there is _such_ nearness of the cloud, as to _endanger a
stroke_; and there, it cannot be doubted the points must have some
effect. And if the quantity discharged by a single pointed rod may
be so considerable as I have shown it; the quantity discharged by a
number will be proportionably greater.

But this part of the theory does not depend alone on _small_
experiments. Since the practice of erecting pointed rods in America
(now near twenty years) five of them have been struck by lightning,
viz. Mr. Raven's and Mr. Maine's in South Carolina; Mr. Tucker's in
Virginia; Mr. West's and Mr. Moulder's in Philadelphia. Possibly
there may have been more that have not come to my knowledge. But in
every one of these, the lightning did _not_ fall upon the _body of
the house_, but precisely on the several _points_ of the rods; and,
though the conductors were sometimes _not sufficiently large and
complete_, was conveyed into the earth, without any material damage
to the buildings. Facts then _in great_, as far as we have them
authenticated, justify the opinion that is drawn from the experiments
_in small_ as above related.

It has also been objected, that unless we knew the quantity that
might _possibly_ be discharged at one stroke from the clouds,
we cannot be sure we have provided _sufficient_ conductors; and
therefore cannot depend on their conveying away _all_ that may fall
on their points. Indeed we have nothing to form a judgment by in
this but past facts; and we know of no instance where a _compleat_
conductor to the moist earth _has_ been insufficient, if half an
inch diameter. It is probable that many strokes of lightning have
been conveyed through the common leaden pipes affixed to houses to
carry down the water from the roof to the ground: and there is no
account of such pipes being melted and destroyed, as must sometimes
have happened if they had been insufficient. We can then only judge
of the dimensions proper for a conductor of lightning, as we do of
those proper for a _conductor of rain_, by past observation. And as
we think a pipe of three inches bore sufficient to carry off the
rain that falls on a square of 20 feet, because we never saw such a
pipe glutted by any shower; so we may judge a conductor of an inch
diameter, more than sufficient for any stroke of lightning that will
fall on its point. It is true that if another deluge should happen
wherein the windows of heaven are to be opened, such pipes may be
unequal to the falling quantity; and if God for our sins should
think fit to rain fire upon us, as upon some cities of old, it is
not expected that our conductors of whatever size, should secure our
houses against a miracle. Probably as water drawn up into the air
and there forming clouds, is disposed to fall again in _rain_ by
its natural gravity, as soon as a number of particles sufficient to
make a drop can get together; so when the clouds are (by whatever
means) over or under-charged [with the _electric fluid_] to a degree
sufficient to attract them towards the earth, the equilibrium is
restored, before the difference becomes great beyond that degree.
Mr. Lane's _electrometer_, for limiting precisely the quantity of
a shock that is to be administered in a medical view, may serve to
make this more easily intelligible. The discharging knob does by a
screw approach the conductor to the distance intended, but there
remains fixed. Whatever power there may be in the glass globe to
collect the fulminating fluid, and whatever capacity of receiving and
accumulating it there may be in the bottle or glass jar; yet neither
the accumulation or the discharge ever exceeds the destined quantity.
Thus, were the _clouds_ always at a certain fixed distance from the
earth, all discharges would be made when the quantity accumulated
was equal to the distance: But there is a circumstance which by
occasionally lessening the distance, lessens the discharge; to wit,
the moveableness of the clouds, and their being drawn nearer to the
earth by attraction when electrified; so that discharges are thereby
rendered more frequent and of course less violent. Hence whatever the
quantity may be in nature, and whatever the power in the clouds of
collecting it; yet an accumulation and force beyond what mankind has
hitherto been acquainted with is scarce to be expected[89].

  B. F.

  _Aug. 27, 1772._

FOOTNOTES:

[86] Mr. Henley's.

[87] Mr. de Romas saw still greater quantities of lightning brought
down by the wire of his kite. He had "explosions from it, the noise
of which greatly resembled that of thunder, and were heard (from
without) into the heart of the city, notwithstanding the various
noises there. The fire seen at the instant of the explosion had the
shape of a spindle eight inches long and five lines in diameter.
Yet from the time of the explosion to the end of the experiment, no
lightning was seen above, nor any thunder heard. At another time the
streams of fire issuing from it were observed to be an inch thick and
ten feet long."--_See Dr. Priestley's History of Electricity_, pages
134-6, _first edition_.

[88] Twelve were proposed on and near the magazines at Purfleet.

[89] It may be fit to mention here, that the immediate occasion of
the dispute concerning the preference between pointed and blunt
conductors of lightning, arose as follows:--A powder-mill having
blown up at Brescia, in consequence of its being struck with
lightning, the English board of ordnance applied to their painter,
Mr. Wilson, then of some note as an electrician, for a method to
prevent the like accident to their magazines at Purfleet. Mr. Wilson
having advised a blunt conductor, and it being understood that Dr.
Franklin's opinion, formed upon the spot, was for a pointed one; the
matter was referred in 1772, to the Royal Society, and by them as
usual, to a committee, who, after consultation, prescribed a method
conformable to Dr. Franklin's theory. But a harmless stroke of
lightning, having under particular circumstances, fallen upon one of
the buildings and its apparatus in May 1777; the subject came again
into violent agitation, and was again referred to the society, and
by the society again referred to a new committee, which committee
confirmed the decision of the first committee.    B. V.[90]

[90] Wherever this signature occurs, the note is taken from a volume
of Dr. Franklin's writings, entitled Political, Miscellaneous, and
Philosophical Pieces, printed for Johnson, 1779. The editor of
that volume, though a young man at the time, had already evinced
extraordinary talents, and was the friend and correspondent of our
author. As he has chosen to withhold his name, we conceive ourselves
not entitled to disclose it: but we shall take the freedom of an
acquaintance to use the notes occasionally, deeming them in many
instances valuable historical records. _Editor._




TO PROFESSOR LANDRIANI, OF ITALY.

  _On the Utility of Electrical Conductors._


  _Philadelphia, Oct. 14, 1787._

  SIR,

I have received the excellent work, _Upon the Utility of electrical
Conductors_, which you had the goodness to send me. I read it with
great pleasure, and beg you to accept my sincere thanks for it.

Upon my return to this country, I found the number of conductors much
increased, many proofs of their efficacy in preserving buildings from
lightning having demonstrated their utility. Among other instances,
my own house was one day attacked by lightning, which occasioned the
neighbours to run in to give assistance, in case of its being on
fire. But no damage was done, and my family was only found a good
deal frightened with the violence of the explosion.

Last year, my house being enlarged, the conductor was obliged to be
taken down. I found, upon examination, that the pointed termination
of copper, which was originally nine inches long, and about one third
of an inch in diameter in its thickest part, had been almost entirely
melted; and that its connection with the rod of iron below was very
slight. Thus, in the course of time, this invention has proved of use
to the author of it, and has added this personal advantage to the
pleasure he before received, from having been useful to others.

Mr. Rittenhouse, our astronomer, has informed me, that having
observed with his excellent telescope, many conductors that are
within the field of his view, he has remarked in various instances,
that the points were melted in like manner. There is no example of
a house, provided with a perfect conductor, which has suffered any
considerable damage; and even those which are without them have
suffered little, since conductors have come common in this city.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO JOHN PRINGLE, M. D. AND F. R. S.

  _On the Effects of Electricity in paralytic Cases._


  _Craven-street, Dec. 21, 1757._

  SIR,

In compliance with your request, I send you the following account
of what I can at present recollect relating to the effects of
electricity in paralytic cases, which have fallen under my
observation.

Some years since, when the news-papers made mention of great cures
performed in Italy and Germany, by means of electricity, a number of
paralytics were brought to me from different parts of Pensylvania,
and the neighbouring provinces, to be electrised, which I did for
them at their request. My method was, to place the patient first in a
chair, on an electric stool, and draw a number of large strong sparks
from all parts of the affected limb or side. Then I fully charged
two six-gallon glass jars, each of which had about three square feet
of surface coated; and I sent the united shock of these through
the affected limb or limbs, repeating the stroke commonly three
times each day. The first thing observed, was an immediate greater
sensible warmth in the lame limbs that had received the stroke than
in the others; and the next morning the patients usually related,
that they had in the night felt a pricking sensation in the flesh of
the paralytic limbs; and would sometimes show a number of small red
spots, which they supposed were occasioned by those prickings. The
limbs, too, were found more capable of voluntary motion, and seemed
to receive strength. A man, for instance, who could not the first day
lift the lame hand from off his knee, would the next day raise it
four or five inches, the third day higher; and on the fifth day was
able, but with a feeble languid motion, to take off his hat. These
appearances gave great spirits to the patients, and made them hope
a perfect cure; but I do not remember that I ever saw any amendment
after the fifth day; which the patients perceiving, and finding
the shocks pretty severe, they became discouraged, went home, and
in a short time relapsed; so that I never knew any advantage from
electricity in palsies that was permanent. And how far the apparent
temporary advantage might arise from the exercise in the patients
journey, and coming daily to my house, or from the spirits given by
the hope of success, enabling them to exert more strength in moving
their limbs, I will not pretend to say.

Perhaps some permanent advantage might have been obtained, if the
electric shocks had been accompanied with proper medicine and
regimen, under the direction a skilful physician. It may be, too,
that a few great strokes, as given in my method, may not be so proper
as many small ones; since by the account from Scotland of a case, in
which two hundred shocks from a phial were given daily, it seems,
that a perfect cure has been made. As to any uncommon strength
supposed to be in the machine used in that case, I imagine it could
have no share in the effect produced; since the strength of the shock
from charged glass, is in proportion to the quantity of surface of
the glass coated; so that my shocks from those large jars, must have
been much greater than any that could be received from a phial held
in the hand.

  I am, with great respect, Sir,

  Your most obedient Servant,

  B. FRANKLIN.




  _Electrical Experiments on Amber._


  _Saturday, July 3, 1762._

To try, at the request of a friend, whether amber finely powdered
might be melted and run together again by means of the electric
fluid, I took a piece of small glass tube, about two inches and a
half long, the bore about one-twelfth of an inch diameter, the glass
itself about the same thickness; I introduced into this tube some
powder of amber, and with two pieces of wire nearly fitting the
bore, one inserted at one end, the other at the other, I rammed the
powder hard between them in the middle of the tube, where it stuck
fast, and was in length about half an inch. Then leaving the wires in
the tube, I made them part of the electric circuit, and discharged
through them three rows of my case of bottles. The event was, that
the glass was broke into very small pieces and those dispersed with
violence in all directions. As I did not expect this, I had not, as
in other experiments, laid thick paper over the glass to save my
eyes, so several of the pieces struck my face smartly, and one of
them cut my lip a little so as to make it bleed. I could find no
part of the amber; but the table where the tube lay was stained very
black in spots, such as might be made by a thick smoke forced on it
by a blast, and the air was filled with a strong smell, somewhat
like that from burnt gunpowder. Whence I imagined, that the amber
was burnt, and had exploded as gunpowder would have done in the same
circumstances.

That I might better see the effect on the amber, I made the next
experiment in a tube formed of a card rolled up and bound strongly
with packthread. Its bore was about one-eighth of an inch diameter.
I rammed powder of amber into this as I had done in the other, and
as the quantity of amber was greater, I increased the quantity of
electric fluid, by discharging through it at once five rows of my
bottles. On opening the tube, I found that some of the powder had
exploded, an impression was made on the tube, though it was not hurt,
and most of the powder remaining was turned black, which I suppose
might be by the smoke forced through it from the burned part: some of
it was hard; but as it powdered again when pressed by the fingers, I
suppose that hardness not to arise from melting any parts in it, but
merely from my ramming the powder when I charged the tube.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO THOMAS RONAYNE, ESQ. AT CORKE[91].

  _On the Electricity of the Fogs in Ireland._


  _London, April 20, 1766._

  SIR,

I have received your very obliging and very ingenious letter by
Captain Kearney. Your observations upon the electricity of fogs and
the air in Ireland, and upon different circumstances of storms,
appear to me very curious, and I thank you for them. There is not,
in my opinion, any part of the earth whatever which is, or can be,
naturally in a state of negative electricity: and though different
circumstances may occasion an inequality in the distribution of
the fluid, the equilibrium is immediately restored by means of its
extreme subtilty, and of the excellent conductors with which the
humid earth is amply provided. I am of opinion, however, that when
a cloud, well charged positively, passes near the earth, it repels
and forces down into the earth that natural portion of electricity,
which exists near its surface, and in buildings, trees, &c. so as
actually to reduce them to a negative state before it strikes them.
I am of opinion too, that the negative state in which you have
frequently found the balls, which are suspended from your apparatus,
is not always occasioned by clouds in a negative state; but more
commonly by clouds positively electrified, which have passed over
them, and which in their passage have repelled and driven off a part
of the electrical matter, which naturally existed in the apparatus;
so that what remained after the passing of the clouds, diffusing
itself uniformly through the apparatus, the whole became reduced to a
negative state.

If you have read my experiments made in continuation of those of Mr.
Canton, you will readily understand this; but you may easily make
a few experiments, which will clearly demonstrate it. Let a common
glass be warmed before the fire that it may continue very dry for
some time; set it upon a table, and place upon it the small box made
use of by Mr. Canton, so that the balls may hang a little beyond
the edge of the table. Rub another glass, which has previously been
warmed in a similar manner, with a piece of black silk or a silk
handkerchief, in order to electrify it. Hold then the glass above
the little box, at about the distance of three or four inches from
that part, which is most distant from the balls; and you will see
the balls separate from each other; being positively electrified
by the natural portion of electricity, which was in the box, and
which is driven to the further part of it by the repulsive power of
the atmosphere in the excited glass. Touch the box near the little
balls (the excited glass continuing in the same state) and the balls
will again unite; the quantity of electricity which had been driven
to this part being drawn off by your finger. Withdraw then both
your finger and the glass at the same instant, and the quantity of
electricity which remained in the box, uniformly diffusing itself,
the balls will again be separated; being now in a negative state.
While things are in this situation, begin once more to excite your
glass, and hold it above the box, but not too near, and you will
find, that when brought within a certain distance, the balls will
at first approach each other, being then in a natural state. In
proportion as the glass is brought nearer, they, will again separate,
being positive. When the glass is moved beyond them, and at some
little farther distance, they will unite again, being in a natural
state. When it is entirely removed, they will separate again,
being then made negative. The excited glass in this experiment may
represent a cloud positively charged, which you see is capable of
producing in this manner all the different changes in the apparatus,
without the least necessity for supposing any negative cloud.

I am nevertheless fully convinced, that these are negative clouds;
because they sometimes absorb, through the medium of the apparatus,
the positive electricity of a large jar, the hundredth part of
which the apparatus itself would have not been able to receive or
contain at once. In fact, it is not difficult to conceive, that a
large cloud, highly charged positively, may reduce smaller clouds to
a negative state, when it passes above or near them, by forcing a
part of their natural portion of the fluid either to their inferior
surfaces, whence it may strike into the earth, or to the opposite
side, whence it may strike into the adjacent clouds; so that when
the large cloud has passed off to a distance, the small clouds
shall remain in a negative state, exactly like the apparatus; the
former (like the latter) being frequently insulated bodies, having
communication neither with the earth nor with other clouds. Upon the
same principle it may easily be conceived, in what manner a large
negative cloud may render others positive.

The experiment which you mention, of filing your glass, is analogous
to one which I made in 1751, or 1752. I had supposed in my preceding
letters, that the pores of glass were smaller in the interior parts
than near the surface, and that on this account they prevented the
passage of the electrical fluid. To prove whether this was actually
the case or not, I ground one of my phials in a part where it was
extremely thin, grinding it considerably beyond the middle, and very
near to the opposite superficies, as I found, upon breaking it after
the experiment. It was charged nevertheless after being ground,
equally well as before, which convinced me, that my hypothesis on
this subject was erroneous. It is difficult to conceive where the
immense superfluous quantity of electricity on the charged side of a
glass is deposited.

I send you my paper concerning meteors, which was lately published
here in the Philosophical Transactions, immediately after a paper by
Mr. Hamilton on the same subject.

  I am, Sir, &c.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[91] This letter is translated from the French edition of Dr.
Franklin's works, as are also all that follow, to the Appendix, the
one to Miss Stephenson excepted. _Editor._




  _Mode of ascertaining, whether the Power, giving a Shock to those
  who touch either the Surinam Eel, or the Torpedo, be electrical._


1. Touch the fish with a stick of dry sealing-wax, or a glass rod,
and observe if the shock be communicated by means of those bodies.

Touch the same fish with an iron, or other metalline rod.

If the shock be communicated by the latter body, and not by the
others, it is probably not the mechanical effect, as has been
supposed, of some muscular action in the fish, but of a subtile
fluid, in this respect analogous at least to the electric fluid.

2. Observe farther, whether the shock can be conveyed without the
metal being actually in contact with the fish, and if it can,
whether, in the space between, any light appear, and a slight noise
or crackling be heard.

If so, these also are properties common to the electric fluid.

3. Lastly, touch the fish with the wire of a small Leyden bottle, and
if the shock can be received across, observe whether the wire will
attract and repel light bodies, and you feel a shock, while holding
the bottle in one hand, and touching the wire with the other.

If so, the fluid, capable of producing such effects seems to have all
the known properties of the electric fluid.


ADDITION, _12th August, 1772,_

  _In Consequence of the Experiments and Discoveries made in France
  by Mr. Walsh, and communicated by him to Dr. Franklin._

Let several persons, standing on the floor, hold hands, and let one
of them touch the fish, so as to receive a shock. If the shock be
felt by all, place the fish flat on a plate of metal, and let one of
the persons holding hands touch this plate, while the person farthest
from the plate touches the upper part of the fish with a metal rod:
then observe, if the force of the shock be the same as to all the
persons forming the circle, or is stronger than before.

Repeat this experiment with this difference: let two or three of the
persons forming the circle, instead of holding by the hand, hold each
an uncharged electrical bottle, so that the little balls at the end
of the wires may touch, and observe, after the shock, if these wires
will attract and repel light bodies, and if a ball of cork, suspended
by a long silk string between the wires, a little distance from the
bottles, will be alternately attracted and repelled by them.




TO M. DUBOURG.

  _On the Analogy between Magnetism and Electricity._


  _London, March 10, 1773._

  SIR,

As to the magnetism, which seems produced by electricity, my real
opinion is, that these two powers of nature have no affinity with
each other, and that the apparent production of magnetism is purely
accidental. The matter may be explained thus:

1st, The earth is a great magnet.

2dly, There is a subtile fluid, called the magnetic fluid, which
exists in all ferruginous bodies, equally attracted by all their
parts, and equally diffused through their whole substance; at least
where the equilibrium is not disturbed by a power superior to the
attraction of the iron.

3dly, This natural quantity of the magnetic fluid, which is contained
in a given piece of iron, may be put in motion so as to be more
rarefied in one part and more condensed in another; but it cannot
be withdrawn by any force that we are yet made acquainted with, so
as to leave the whole in a negative state, at least relatively to
its natural quantity; neither can it be introduced so as to put the
iron into a positive state, or render it _plus_. In this respect,
therefore magnetism differs from electricity.

4thly, A piece of soft iron allows the magnetic fluid which it
contains to be put in motion by a moderate force, so that being
placed in a line with the magnetic pole of the earth, it immediately
acquires the properties of a magnet; its magnetic fluid being drawn
or forced from one extremity to the other; and this effect continues
as long as it remains in the same position, one of its extremities
becoming positively magnetised, and the other negatively. This
temporary magnetism ceases as soon as the iron is turned east and
west, the fluid immediately diffusing itself equally through the
whole iron, as in its natural state.

5thly, The magnetic fluid in hard iron, or steel, is put in motion
with more difficulty, requiring a force greater than the earth to
excite it; and when once it has been forced from one extremity of the
steel to the other, it is not easy for it to return; and thus a bar
of steel is converted into a permanent magnet.

6thly, A great heat, by expanding the substance of this steel, and
increasing the distance between its particles, affords a passage
to the electric fluid, which is thus again restored to its proper
equilibrium; the bar appearing no longer to possess magnetic virtue.

7thly, A bar of steel which is not magnetic, being placed in the same
position, relatively to the pole of the earth, which the magnetic
needle assumes, and in this position being heated and suddenly
cooled, becomes a permanent magnet. The reason is, that while the bar
was hot, the magnetic fluid which it naturally contained was easily
forced from one extremity to the other by the magnetic virtue of the
earth; and that the hardness and condensation, produced by the sudden
cooling of the bar, retained it in this state without permitting it
to resume its original situation.

8thly, The violent vibrations of the particles of a steel bar, when
forcibly struck in the same position, separate the particles in such
a manner during their vibration, that they permit a portion of the
magnetic fluid to pass, influenced by the natural magnetism of the
earth; and it is afterwards so forcibly retained by the re-approach
of the particles when the vibration ceases, that the bar becomes a
permanent magnet.

9thly, An electric shock passing through a needle in a like position,
and dilating it for an instant, renders it, for the same reason, a
permanent magnet; that is, not by imparting magnetism to it, but by
allowing its proper magnetic fluid to put itself in motion.

10thly, Thus, there is not in reality more magnetism in a given
piece of steel after it is become magnetic, than existed in it
before. The natural quantity is only displaced or repelled. Hence it
follows, that a strong apparatus of magnets may charge millions of
bars of steel, without communicating to them any part of its proper
magnetism; only putting in motion the magnetism which already existed
in these bars.

I am chiefly indebted to that excellent philosopher of Petersburgh,
Mr. Æpinus, for this hypothesis, which appears to me equally
ingenious and solid. I say, _chiefly_, because, as it is many years
since I read his book, which I have left in America, it may happen,
that I may have added to or altered it in some respect; and if I have
misrepresented any thing, the error ought to be charged to my account.

If this hypothesis appears admissible, it will serve as an answer to
the greater part of your questions. I have only one remark to add,
which is, that however great the force is of magnetism employed, you
can only convert a given portion of steel into a magnet of a force
proportioned to its capacity of retaining its magnetic fluid in the
new position in which it is placed, without letting it return. Now
this power is different in different kinds of steel, but limited in
all kinds whatever.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MESSRS. DUBOURG AND D'ALIBARD[92].

  _Concerning the Mode of rendering Meat tender by Electricity._


  MY DEAR FRIENDS,

My answer to your questions concerning the mode of rendering meat
tender by electricity, can only be founded upon conjecture; for I
have not experiments enough to warrant the facts. All that I can
say at present is, that I think electricity might be employed for
this purpose, and I shall state what follows as the observations or
reasons, which make me presume so.

It has been observed, that lightning, by rarefying and reducing
into vapour the moisture contained in solid wood, in an oak, for
instance, has forcibly separated its fibres, and broken it into small
splinters; that by penetrating intimately the hardest metals, as
iron, it has separated the parts in an instant, so as to convert a
perfect solid into a state of fluidity: it is not then improbable,
that the same subtile matter, passing through the bodies of animals
with rapidity, should possess sufficient force to produce an effect
nearly similar.

The flesh of animals, fresh killed in the usual manner, is firm,
hard, and not in a very eatable state, because the particles adhere
too forcibly to each other. At a certain period, the cohesion is
weakened and in its progress towards putrefaction, which tends to
produce a total separation, the flesh becomes what we call tender, or
is in that state most proper to be used as our food.

It has frequently been remarked, that animals killed by lightning
putrify immediately. This cannot be invariably the case, since a
quantity of lightning sufficient to kill, may not be sufficient to
tear and divide the fibres and particles of flesh, and reduce them to
that tender state, which is the prelude to putrefaction. Hence it is,
that some animals killed in this manner will keep longer than others.
But the putrefaction sometimes proceeds with surprising celerity.
A respectable person assured me, that he once knew a remarkable
instance of this: A whole flock of sheep in Scotland, being closely
assembled under a tree, were killed by a flash of lightning; and
it being rather late in the evening, the proprietor, desirous of
saving something, sent persons early the next morning to flay them;
but the putrefaction was such, and the stench so abominable, that
they had not the courage to execute their orders, and the bodies
were accordingly buried in their skins. It is not unreasonable to
presume, that between the period of their death and that of their
putrefaction, a time intervened in which the flesh might be only
tender, and only sufficiently so to be served at table. Add to this,
that persons, who have eaten of fowls killed by our feeble imitation
of lightning (electricity) and dressed immediately, have asserted,
that the flesh was remarkably tender.

The little utility of this practice has perhaps prevented its being
much adopted. For though it sometimes happens, that a company
unexpectedly arriving at a country-house, or an unusual conflux of
travellers to an inn, may render it necessary, to kill a number
of animals for immediate use; yet as travellers have commonly a
good appetite, little attention has been paid to the trifling
inconvenience of having their meat a little tough. As this kind of
death is nevertheless more sudden, and consequently less severe, than
any other, if this should operate as a motive with compassionate
persons to employ it for animals sacrificed for their use, they may
conduct the process thus:

Having prepared a battery of six large glass jars (each from 20 to
24 pints) as for the Leyden experiment, and having established a
communication, as usual, from the interior surface of each with the
prime conductor, and having given them a full charge (which with a
good machine may be executed in a few minutes, and may be estimated
by an electrometer) a chain which communicates with the exterior of
the jars must be wrapped round the thighs of the fowl; after which
the operator, holding it by the wings, turned back and made to touch
behind, must raise it so high that the head may receive the first
shock from the prime conductor. The animal dies instantly. Let the
head be immediately cut off to make it bleed, when it may be plucked
and dressed immediately. This quantity of electricity is supposed
sufficient for a turkey of ten pounds weight, and perhaps for a
lamb. Experience alone will inform us of the requisite proportions
for animals of different forms and ages. Probably not less will be
required to render a small bird, which is very old, tender, than for
a larger one, which is young. It is easy to furnish the requisite
quantity of electricity, by employing a greater or less number of
jars. As six jars, however, discharged at once, are capable of giving
a very violent shock, the operator must be very circumspect, lest he
should happen to make the experiment on his own flesh, instead of
that of the fowl.

  B. FRANKLIN.

FOOTNOTE:

[92] This letter has no date, but the one to which it is an answer is
dated May 1, 1773. _Editor._




TO M. DUBOURG.

  _In Answer to some Queries concerning the Choice of Glass for the
  Leyden Experiment._


  _London, June 1, 1773._

  SIR,

I wish, with you, that some chemist (who should, if possible, be at
the same time an electrician) would, in pursuance of the excellent
hints contained in your letter, undertake to work upon glass with
the view you have recommended. By means of a perfect knowledge of
this substance, with respect to its electrical qualities, we might
proceed with more certainty, as well in making our own experiments,
as in repeating those, which have been made by others in different
countries, which I believe have frequently been attended with
different success on account of differences in the glass employed,
thence occasioning frequent misunderstandings and contrariety of
opinions.

There is another circumstance much to be desired with respect to
glass, and that is, that it should not be subject to break when
highly charged in the Leyden experiment. I have known eight jars
broken out of twenty, and at another time, twelve out of thirty-five.
A similar loss would greatly discourage electricians desirous of
accumulating a great power for certain experiments.--We have never
been able hitherto to account for the cause of such misfortunes. The
first idea which occurs is, that the positive electricity, being
accumulated on one side of the glass, rushes violently through it, in
order to supply the deficiency on the other side and to restore the
equilibrium. This however I cannot conceive to be the true reason,
when I consider, that a great number of jars being united, so as to
be charged and discharged at the same time, the breaking of a single
jar will discharge the whole; for, if the accident proceeded from the
weakness of the glass, it is not probable, that eight of them should
be precisely of the same degree of weakness, as to break every one
at the same instant, it being more likely, that the weakest should
break first, and, by breaking, secure the rest; and again, when it is
necessary to produce a certain effect, by means of the whole charge
passing through a determined circle (as, for instance, to melt a
small wire) if the charge, instead of passing in this circle, rushed
through the sides of the jars, the intended effect would not be
produced; which, however, is contrary to fact. For these reasons, I
suspect, that there is, in the substance of the glass, either some
little globules of air, or some portions of unvitrified sand or salt,
into which a quantity of the electric fluid may be forced during the
charge, and there retained till the general discharge: and that the
force being suddenly withdrawn, the elasticity of the fluid acts upon
the glass in which it is inclosed, not being able to escape hastily
without breaking the glass. I offer this only as a conjecture, which
I leave to others to examine.

The globe which I had that could not be excited, though it was from
the same glass-house which furnished the other excellent globes
in my possession, was not of the same frit. The glass which was
usually manufactured there, was rather of the green kind, and chiefly
intended for drinking-glasses and bottles; but the proprietors being
desirous of attempting a trial of white glass, the globe in question
was of this frit. The glass not being of a perfect white, the
proprietors were dissatisfied with it, and abandoned their project.
I suspected that too great a quantity of salt was admitted into the
composition; but I am no judge of these matters.

  B. FRANKLIN.




TO MISS STEPHENSON.

  _Concerning the Leyden Bottle._


  _London, March 22, 1762._

I must retract the charge of idleness in your studies, when I find
you have gone through the doubly difficult task of reading so big a
book, on an abstruse subject, and in a foreign language.

In answer to your question concerning the Leyden phial.--The hand
that holds the bottle receives and conducts away the electric fluid
that is driven out of the outside by the repulsive power of that
which is forced into the inside of the bottle. As long as that power
remains in the same situation, it must prevent the return of what it
had expelled; though the hand would readily supply the quantity if it
could be received.

  Your affectionate friend,

  B. FRANKLIN.




APPENDIX.




No. 1[93].

  _The early_ LETTERS _of Dr. Franklin on Electricity having been
  translated into French, and printed at Paris; the Abbé Mazeas, in a
  Letter to Dr. Stephen Hales, dated St. Germain, May 20, 1752, gives
  the following Account (printed in the Philosophical Transactions)
  of the Experiment made at Marly, in Pursuance of that proposed by
  Mr. Franklin, Pages 227, 228._


  SIR,

The Philadelphian experiments, that Mr. Collinson, a member of
the Royal Society, was so kind as to communicate to the public,
having been universally admired in France, the king desired to see
them performed. Wherefore the Duke D'Ayen offered his majesty his
country-house at St. Germain, where M. de Lor, master of experimental
philosophy, should put those of Philadelphia in execution. His
majesty saw them with great satisfaction, and greatly applauded
Messieurs Franklin and Collinson. These applauses of his majesty
having excited in Messieurs de Buffon, D'Alibard, and de Lor, a
desire of verifying the conjectures of Mr. Franklin, upon the
analogy of thunder and electricity, they prepared themselves for
making the experiment.

M. D'Alibard chose for this purpose, a garden situated at Marly,
where he placed upon an electrical body a pointed bar of iron, of
forty feet high. On the 10th of May, twenty minutes past two in
the afternoon, a stormy cloud having passed over the place where
the bar stood, those that were appointed to observe it, drew near,
and attracted from it sparks of fire, perceiving the same kind of
commotions as in the common electrical experiments.

M. de Lor, sensible of the good success of this experiment, resolved
to repeat it at his house in the Estrapade, at Paris. He raised a
bar of iron ninety-nine feet high, placed upon a cake of resin, two
feet square, and three inches thick. On the 18th of May, between four
and five in the afternoon, a stormy cloud having passed over the
bar, where it remained half an hour, he drew sparks from the bar,
like those from the gun barrel, when, in the electrical experiments,
the globe is only rubbed by the cushion, and they produced the same
noise, the same fire, and the same crackling. They drew the strongest
sparks at the distance of nine lines, while the rain, mingled with
a little hail, fell from the cloud, without either thunder or
lightning; this cloud being, according to all appearance, only the
consequence of a storm, which happened elsewhere.

  I am, with a profound respect,

  Your most humble and obedient servant,

  G. MAZEAS.

FOOTNOTE:

[93] See the paragraph between brackets, page 267.




  _A more particular Account of the Circumstances and Success of
  this extraordinary Experiment was laid before the Royal Academy
  of Sciences at Paris, three Days afterwards, in a Memorial by M.
  D'Alibard, viz._

  EXTRAIT D'UN MEMOIRE

  DE M. D'ALIBARD,

  _Lû à l'Académie Royale des Sciences, le 13 Mai, 1752._


"En suivant la route que M. Franklin nous a tracée, j'ai obtenu une
satisfaction complette. Voici les préparatifs, le procédé & le succès.

"1º. J'ai fait faire à Marly-la-ville, située à six lieues de Paris
au milieu d'une belle plaine dont le sol est fort élevé, une verge de
fer ronde, d'environ un pouce de diametre, longue de 40 pieds, & fort
pointue par son extrémité supérieure; pour lui ménager une pointe
plus fine, je l'ai fait armer d'acier trempé & ensuite brunir, au
défaut de dorure, pour la préserver de la rouille; outre cela, cette
verge de fer est courbée vers son extrémité inférieure en deux coudes
à angles aigus quoiqu'arrondis; le premier coude est éloigné de deux
pieds du bout inférieur, & le second est en sens contraire à trois
pieds du premier.

"2º. J'ai fait planter dans un jardin trois grosses perches de 28
à 29 pieds, disposées en triangle, & éloignées les unes des autres
d'environ huit pieds; deux de ces perches sont contre un mur, &
la troisieme est au-dedans du jardin. Pour les affermir toutes
ensemble, l'on à cloué sur chacune des entretoises à vingt pieds de
hauteur; & comme le grand vent agitoit encore cette espéce d'édifice,
l'on a attaché au haut de chaque perche de longs cordages, qui tenant
lieu d'aubans, répondent par le bas à de bons piquets fortement
enfoncés en terre à plus de 20 pieds des perches.

"3º. J'ai fait construire entres les deux perches voisines du mur, &
adosser contre ce mur une petite guerite de bois capable de contenir
un homme & une table.

"4º. J'ai fait placer au milieu de la guérite une petite table
d'environ un demi-pied de hauteur; & sur cette table j'ai fait
dresser & affermir un tabouret electrique. Ce tabouret n'est autre
chose qu'une petite planche quarrée, portée sur trois bouteilles à
vin; il n'est fait de cette matiere que pour suppléer au defaut d'un
gâteau de résine qui me manquoit.

"5º. Tout étant ainsi préparé, j'ai fait elever perpendiculairement
la verge de fer au milieu des trois perches, & je l'ai affermie en
l'attachant à chacune des perches avec de forts cordons de soie par
deux endroits seulement. Les premiers liens sont au haut des perches,
environ trois pouces au-dessous de leurs extrémités supérieures; les
seconds vers la moitié de leur hauteur. Le bout inférieur de la verge
de fer est solidement appuyé sur le milieu du tabouret electrique, où
j'ai fait creuser un trou propre à le recevoir.

"6º. Comme il étoit important de garantir de la pluie te tabouret
& les cordons de soie, parce qu'ils laisseroient passer la matiére
électrique s'ils etoient mouillés, j'ai pris les précautions
necessaires pour en empêcher. C'est dans cette vue que j'ai mis mon
tabouret sous la guérite, & que j'avois fait courber ma verge de fer
à angles aigus; afin que l'eau qui pourroit couler le long de cette
verge, ne pût arriver jusques sur le tabouret. C'est aussi dans le
même dessein que j'ai fait clouer sur le haut & au milieu de mes
perches, à trois pouces au-dessus des cordons de soie, des especes de
boîtes formées de trois petites planches d'environ 15 pouces de long,
qui couvrent par-dessus & par les côtes une pareille longueur des
cordons de soie, sans leur toucher.

"Il s'agissoit de faire, dans le tems de l'orage, deux observations
sur cette verge de fer ainsi disposée; l'une étoit de remarquer à sa
pointe une aigrette lumineuse, semblable à celle que l'on apperçoit
à la pointe d'une aiguille, quand on l'oppose assez près d'un corps
actuellement électrisé; l'autre étoit de tirer de la verge de fer des
étincelles, comme on en tire du canon de fusil dans les expériences
électriques; & afin de se garantir des piqûres de ces étincelles,
j'avois attaché le tenon d'un fil d'archal au cordon d'une longue
fiole pour lui servir de manche....

"Le Mercredi 10 Mai 1752, entre deux & trois heures après midi,
le nommé Coiffier, ancien dragon, que j'avois chargé de faire les
observations en mon absence, ayant entendu un coup de tonnerre
assez fort, vole aussitôt à la machine, prend la fiole avec le fil
d'archal, présente le tenon du fil à la verge, en voit sortir une
petite étincelle brillante, & en entend le pétillement; il tire une
seconde étincelle plus fort que la premiere & avec plus de bruit! il
appelle ses voisins, & envoie chercher M. le Prieur. Celui-ci accourt
de toutes ses forces; les paroissiens voyant la précipitation de
leur curé, s'imaginent que le pauvre Coiffier a été tué du tonnerre;
l'allarme se répand dans le village: la grêle qui survient n'empêche
point le troupeau du suivre son pasteur. Cet honnête ecclésiastique
arrive près de la machine, & voyant qu'il n'y avoit point de danger,
met lui-même la main â l'oeuvre & tire de fortes étincelles. La
nuée d'orage & de grêle ne fut pas plus d'un quart-d'heure à passer
au zénith de notre machine, & l'on n'entendit que ce seul coup
de tonnerre. Sitôt que le nuage fut passé, & qu'on ne tira plus
d'étincelles de la verge de fer, M. le Prieur de Marly fit partir le
sieur Coiffier lui-même, pour m'apporter la lettre suivante, qu'il
m'ecrivit à la hâte."


_Je vous annonce, Monsieur, ce que veus attendez: l'expérience est
complette. Aujourd'hui à deux heures 20 minutes après midi, le
tonnerre a grondé directement sur Marly; le coup a été assez fort.
L'envie de vous obliger, & la curiosité m'ont tiré de mon fauteüil,
où j'êtois occupé à lire: je suis allé chez Coiffier, qui déja
m'avoit dépêché un enfant que j'ai rencontré en chemin, pour me prier
de veenir; j'ai doublé le pas à travers un torrent de grêle. Arrivé
à l'endroit où est placée la tringle coudée, j'ai présenté le fil
d'archal, en evançant successivement vers la tringle, à un pouce &
demi, ou environ; il est sorti de la tringle une petite colonne de
fer bleuâtre sentant le soufre, qui venoit frapper avec une extrême
vivacité le tenon du fil d'archal, & occasionnoit un bruit semblable
à celui qu'on feroit en frappant sur la tringle avec une clef. J'ai
répeté l'expérience au moins six fois dans l'espace d'environ quatre
minutes, en présence de plusieurs personnes, & chaque expérience
que j'ai faite a duré l'espace d'un pater & d'un_ ave. _J'ai voulu
continuer; l'action du feu s'est ralentie peu à peu; j'ai approché
plus près, & n'ai plus tiré que quelques étincelles, & enfin rien
n'ai paru._

_Le coup de tonnerre qui a occasionné cet événement, n'a été suivi
d'aucun autre; tout s'est terminé par une abondance de grêle. J'étois
si occupé dans le moment de l'expérience de ce que voyois, qu'ayant
été frappé au bras un peu au-dessus du coude, je ne puis dire si
c'est en touchant au fil d'archal ou à la tringle: je ne me suis pas
plaint du mal que m'avoit fait le coup dans le moment que je l'ai
reçu; mais comme la douleur continuoit, de retour chez moi, j'ai
découvert mon bras en présence de Coiffier, & nous avons apperçu une
meurtrissure tournante autour du brass, semblable à celle que feroit
un coup de fil d'archal, si j'en avois été frappé à nud. En revenant
de chez Coiffier, j'ai recontré M. le Vicaire, M. de Milly, et le
Maître d'école, à qui j'ai rapporté ce qui venoit d'arriver; ils se
sont plaints tous les trois qu'ils sentoient une odeur de soufre qui
les frappait davantage à mesure qu'ils s'approichient de moi: j'ai
porté chez moi la même odeur, & mes domestiques s'en sont apperçus
sans que je leur aye rien dit._

_Voilà, Monsieur, un récit fait à la hâte, mais naif & vrai que
j'atteste, & vous pouvez assurer que je suis prêt à rendre témoignage
de cet événement dans toutes les occasions. Coiffier a été le premier
qui a fait l'expérience & l'a répétée, plusieurs fois; ce n'est
qu'à l'occasion de ce qu'il a vu qu'il m'a envoyé prier de venir.
S'il étoit besoin d'autres témoins que de lui & de moi, vous les
trouveriez. Coiffier presse pour partir._

_Je suis avec une respectueuse considération, Monsieur, votre, &c.
signé_ RAULET, _Prieur de Marly. 10 Mai, 1752._


"On voit, par le détail de cette lettre, que le fait est assez bien
constaté pour ne laisser aucun doute à ce sujet. Le porteur m'a
assuré de vive voix qu'il avoit tiré pendant près d'un quart-d'heure
avant que M. le Prieur arrivât, en présence de cinq ou six
personnes, des étincelles plus fortes & plus bruyantes que celles
dont il est parlé dans la lettre. Ces premieres personnes arrivant
successivement, n'osient approcher qu'à 10 ou 12 pas de la machine; &
à cette distance, malgré le plein soleil, ils voyoient les étincelles
& entendoient le bruit....

"Il résulte de toutes les expériences & observations que j'ai
rapportées dans ce mémoire, & surtout de la dernière expérience faite
à Marly-la-ville, que la matiere du tonnerre est incontestablement la
même que celle de l'électricité. L'idée qu'en a eu M. Franklin cesse
d'être une conjecture: la voilà devenue une réalité, & j'ose croire
que plus on approfondira tout ce qu'il a publié sur l'électricité,
plus on reconnoîtra combien la physique lui est redevable pour cette
partie."




  _Letter of Mr. W. Watson, F. R. S. to the Royal Society, concerning
  the electrical Experiments in England upon Thunder-Clouds._

  Read Dec. 1752. Trans. Vol. XLVII.


  GENTLEMEN,

After the communications, which we have received from several of our
correspondents in different parts of the continent, acquainting us
with the success of their experiments last summer, in endeavouring to
extract the electricity from the atmosphere during a thunder-storm,
in consequence of Mr. Franklin's hypothesis, it may be thought
extraordinary, that no accounts have been yet laid before you, of our
success here from the same experiments. That no want of attention,
therefore, may be attributed to those here, who have been hitherto
conversant in these enquiries, I thought proper to apprise you, that,
though several members of the Royal Society, as well as myself, did,
upon the first advices from France, prepare and set up the necessary
apparatus for this purpose, we were defeated in our expectations,
from the uncommon coolness and dampness of the air here, during the
whole summer. We had only at London one thunder-storm; viz. on July
20; and then the thunder was accompanied with rain; so that, by
wetting the apparatus, the electricity was dissipated too soon to be
perceived upon touching those parts of the apparatus, which served
to conduct it. This, I say, in general prevented our verifying Mr.
Franklin's hypothesis: but our worthy brother, Mr. Canton, was more
fortunate. I take the liberty, therefore, of laying before you an
extract of a letter, which I received from that gentleman, dated from
Spital-square, July 21, 1752.

"I had yesterday, about five in the afternoon, an opportunity of
trying Mr. Franklin's experiment of extracting the electrical fire
from the clouds; and succeeded, by means of a tin tube, between three
and four feet in length, fixed to the top of a glass one, of about
eighteen inches. To the upper end of the tin tube, which was not
so high as a stack of chimnies on the same house, I fastened three
needles with some wire; and to the lower end was soldered a tin cover
to keep the rain from the glass tube, which was set upright in a
block of wood. I attended this apparatus as soon after the thunder
began as possible, but did not find it in the least electrified,
till between the third and fourth clap; when, applying my knuckle
to the edge of the cover, I felt and heard an electrical spark; and
approaching it a second time, I received the spark at the distance of
about half an inch, and saw it distinctly. This I repeated four or
five times in the space of a minute, but the sparks grew weaker and
weaker; and in less than two minutes the tin tube did not appear to
be electrified at all. The rain continued during the thunder, but was
considerably abated at the time of making the experiment." Thus far
Mr. Canton.

Mr. Wilson likewise of the Society, to whom we are much obliged for
the trouble he has taken in these pursuits, had an opportunity of
verifying Mr. Franklin's hypothesis. He informed me, by a letter from
near Chelmsford, in Essex, dated August 12, 1752, that, on that day
about noon, he perceived several electrical snaps, during, or rather
at the end of a thunder-storm, from no other apparatus than an iron
curtain rod, one end of which he put into the neck of a glass phial,
and held this phial in his hand. To the other end of the iron he
fastened three needles with some silk. This phial, supporting the
rod, he held in one hand, and drew snaps from the rod with a finger
of his other. This experiment was not made upon any eminence, but in
the garden of a gentleman, at whose house he then was.

Dr. Bevis observed, at Mr. Cave's, at St. John's Gate, nearly the
same phenomena as Mr. Canton, of which an account has been already
laid before the public.

Trifling as the effects here mentioned are, when compared with those
which we have received from Paris and Berlin, they are the only ones,
that the last summer here has produced; and as they were made by
persons worthy of credit, they tend to establish the authenticity of
those transmitted from our correspondents.

I flatter myself, that this short account of these matters will not
be disagreeable to you; and am,

  With the most profound respect,

  Your most obedient, humble servant,

  W. WATSON.




No. 2.

  _Remarks on the Abbé Nollet's Letters to Benjamin Franklin, Esq. of
  Philadelphia, on Electricity: by Mr. David Colden, of New York._


  _Coldenham, in New York, Dec. 4, 1753._

  SIR,

In considering the Abbé Nollet's Letters to Mr. Franklin, I am
obliged to pass by all the experiments which are made with, or in,
bottles hermetically sealed, or exhausted of air; because, not being
able to repeat the experiments, I could not second any thing which
occurs to me thereon, by experimental proof. Wherefore, the first
point wherein I can dare to give my opinion, is in the Abbé's 4th
letter, p. 66, where he undertakes to prove, that the electric matter
passes from one surface to another through the entire thickness
of the glass: he takes Mr. Franklin's experiment of the magical
picture, and writes thus of it. "When you electrise a pane of glass
coated on both sides with metal, it is evident that whatever is
placed on the side opposite to that which receives the electricity
from the conductor, receives also an evident electrical virtue."
Which Mr. Franklin says, is that equal quantity of electric matter,
driven out of this side, by what is received from the conductor on
the other side; and which will continue to give an electrical virtue
to any thing in contact with it, till it is entirely discharged of
its electrical fire. To which the Abbé thus objects; "Tell me (says
he), I pray you, how much time is necessary for this pretended
discharge? I can assure you, that after having maintained the
electrisation for hours, this surface, which ought, as it seems to
me, to be entirely discharged of its electrical matter, considering
either the vast number of sparks that were drawn from it, or the time
that this matter had been exposed to the action of the expulsive
cause; this surface, I say, appeared rather better electrised
thereby, and more proper to produce all the effects of an actual
electric body." _P._ 68.

The Abbé does not tell us what those effects were, all the effects
I could never observe, and those that are to be observed can easily
be accounted for, by supposing that side to be entirely destitute
of electric matter. The most sensible effect of a body charged with
electricity is, that when you present your finger to it, a spark will
issue from it to your finger: now when a phial, prepared for the
Leyden experiment, is hung to the gun-barrel or prime-conductor, and
you turn the globe in order to charge it; as soon as the electric
matter is excited, you can observe a spark to issue from the external
surface of the phial to your finger, which, Mr. Franklin says, is
the natural electric matter of the glass driven out by that received
by the inner surface from the conductor. If it be only drawn out by
sparks, a vast number of them may be drawn; but if you take hold of
the external surface with your hand, the phial will soon receive all
the electric matter it is capable of, and the outside will then be
entirely destitute of its electric matter, and no spark can be drawn
from it by the finger: here then is a want of that effect which all
bodies, charged with electricity, have. Some of the effects of an
electric body, which I suppose the Abbé has observed in the exterior
surface of a charged phial, are that all light bodies are attracted
by it. This is an effect which I have constantly observed, but do not
think that it proceeds from an attractive quality in the exterior
surface of the phial, but in those light bodies themselves, which
seem to be attracted by the phial. It is a constant observation,
that when one body has a greater charge of electric matter in it
than another (that is in proportion to the quantity they will hold)
this body will attract that which has less: now, I suppose, and it
is a part of Mr. Franklin's system, that all those light bodies
which appear to be attracted, have more electric matter in them than
the external surface of the phial has, wherefore they endeavour to
attract the phial to them, which is too heavy to be moved by the
small degree of force they exert, and yet being greater than their
own weight, moves them to the phial. The following experiment will
help the imagination in conceiving this. Suspend a cork ball, or a
feather, by a silk thread, and electrise it; then bring this ball
nigh to any fixed body, and it will appear to be attracted by that
body, for it will fly to it: now, by the consent of electricians, the
attractive cause is in the ball itself, and not in the fixed body to
which it flies: this is a similar case with the apparent attraction
of light bodies, to the external surface of a charged phial.

The Abbé says, _p._ 69, "that he can electrise a hundred men,
standing on wax, if they hold hands, and if one of them touch one
of these surfaces (the exterior) with the end of his finger:" this
I know he can, while the phial is charging, but after the phial is
charged I am as certain he cannot: that is, hang a phial, prepared
for the Leyden experiment, to the conductor, and let a man, standing
on the floor, touch the coating with his finger, while the globe is
turned, till the electric matter spews out of the hook of the phial,
or some part of the conductor, which I take to be the certainest sign
that the phial has received all the electric matter it can: after
this appears, let the man, who before stood on the floor, step on a
cake of wax, where he may stand for hours, and the globe all that
time turned; and yet have no appearance of being electrised. After
the electric matter was spewed out as above from the hook of the
phial prepared for the Leyden experiment, I hung another phial, in
like manner prepared, to a hook fixed in the coating of the first,
and held this other phial in my hand; now if there was any electric
matter transmitted through the glass of the first phial, the second
one would certainly receive and collect it; but having kept the
phials in this situation for a considerable time, during which the
globe was continually turned, I could not perceive that the second
phial was in the least charged, for when I touched the hook with
my finger, as in the Leyden experiment, I did not feel the least
commotion, nor perceive any spark to issue from the hook.

I likewise made the following experiment: having charged two phials
(prepared for the Leyden experiment) through their hooks; two persons
took each one of these phials in their hand; one held his phial by
the coating, the other by the hook, which he could do by removing
the communication from the bottom before he took hold of the hook.
These persons placed themselves one on each side of me, while I stood
on a cake of wax, and took hold of the hook of that phial which was
held by its coating (upon which a spark issued, but the phial was not
discharged, as I stood on wax) keeping hold of the hook, I touched
the coating of the phial that was held by its hook with my other
hand, upon which there was a large spark to be seen between my finger
and the coating, and both phials were instantly discharged. If the
Abbé's opinion be right, that the exterior surface, communicating
with the coating, is charged, as well as the interior, communicating
with the hook; how can I, who stand on wax, discharge both these
phials, when it is well known I could not discharge one of them
singly? Nay, suppose I have drawn the electric matter from both of
them, what becomes of it? For I appear to have no additional quantity
in me when the experiment is over, and I have not stirred off the
wax: wherefore this experiment fully convinces me, that the exterior
surface is not charged; and not only so, but that it wants as much
electric matter as the inner has of excess: for by this supposition,
which is a part of Mr. Franklin's system, the above experiment is
easily accounted for, as follows:

When I stand on wax, my body is not capable of receiving all the
electric matter from the hook of one phial, which it is ready to
give; neither can it give as much to the coating of the other phial
as it is ready to take, when one is only applied to me: but when both
are applied, the coating takes from me what the hook gives: thus I
receive the fire from the first phial at B, the exterior surface of
which is supplied from the hand at A: I give the fire to the second
phial at C, whose interior surface is discharged by the hand at D.
This discharge at D may be made evident by receiving that fire into
the hook of a third phial, which is done thus: In place of taking
the hook of the second phial in your hand, run the wire of a third
phial, prepared as for the Leyden experiment, through it, and hold
this third phial in your hand, the second one hanging to it, by
the ends of the hooks run through each other: when the experiment
is performed, this third phial receives the fire at D, and will be
charged.

[Illustration: (of the experiment above)]

When this experiment is considered, I think, it must fully prove
that the exterior surface of a charged phial wants electric matter,
while the inner surface has an excess of it. One thing more worthy
of notice in this experiment is, that I feel no commotion or shock in
my arms, though so great a quantity of electric matter passes them
instantaneously: I only feel a pricking in the ends of my fingers.
This makes me think the Abbé has mistook, when he says, that there
is no difference between the shock felt in performing the Leyden
experiment, and the pricking felt on drawing simple sparks, except
that of greater to less. In the last experiment, as much electric
matter went through my arms, as would have given me a very sensible
shock, had there been an immediate communication, by my arms, from
the hook to the coating of the same phial; because when it was taken
into a third phial, and that phial discharged singly through my arms,
it gave me a sensible shock. If these experiments prove that the
electric matter does not pass through the entire thickness of the
glass, it is a necessary consequence that it must always come out
where it entered.

The next thing I meet with is in the Abbé's fifth letter, _p._
88, where he differs from Mr. Franklin, who thinks that the whole
power of giving a shock is in the glass itself, and not in the
non-electrics in contact with it. The experiments which Mr. Franklin
gave to prove this opinion, in his _Observations on the Leyden
Bottle_, p. 179, convinced me that he was in the right; and what the
Abbé has asserted, in contradiction thereto, has not made me think
otherwise. The Abbé, perceiving, as I suppose, that the experiments,
as Mr. Franklin had performed them, must prove his assertion, alters
them without giving any reason for it, and makes them in a manner
that proves nothing. Why will he have the phial, into which the,
water is to be decanted from a charged phial, held in a man's hand?
If the power of giving a shock is in the water contained in the
phial, it should remain there though decanted into another phial,
since no non-electric body touched it to take that power off. The
phial being placed on wax is no objection, for it cannot take the
power from the water, if it had any, but it is a necessary means to
try the fact; whereas, that phial's being charged when held in a
man's hand, only proves that water will conduct the electric matter.
The Abbé owns, _p._ 94, that he had heard this remarked, but says,
Why is not a conductor of electricity an electric subject? This is
not the question; Mr. Franklin never said that water was not an
electric subject; he said, that the power of giving a shock was in
the glass, and not in the water; and this, his experiments fully
prove; so fully, that it may appear impertinent to offer any more:
yet as I do not know that the following has been taken notice of by
any body before, my inserting of it in this place may be excused.
It is this: Hang a phial, prepared for the Leyden experiment, to
the conductor, by its hook, and charge it, which done, remove the
communication from the bottom of the phial. Now the conductor shews
evident signs of being electrised; for if a thread be tied round it,
and its ends left about two inches long, they will extend themselves
out like a pair of horns; but if you touch the conductor, a spark
will issue from it, and the threads will fall, nor does the conductor
shew the least sign of being electrised after this is done. I think
that by this touch, I have taken out all the charge of electric
matter that was in the conductor, the hook of the phial, and water
or filings of iron contained in it; which is no more than we see all
non-electric bodies will receive: yet the glass of the phial retains
its power of giving a shock, as any one will find that pleases to
try. This experiment fully evidences, that the water in the phial
contains no more electric matter than it would do in an open bason,
and has not any of that great quantity which produces the shock, and
is only retained by the glass. If after the spark is drawn from the
conductor, you touch the coating of the phial (which all this while
is supposed to hang in the air, free from any non-electric body)
the threads on the conductor will instantly start up, and shew that
the conductor is electrised. It receives this electrisation from
the inner surface of the phial, which, when the outer surface can
receive what it wants from the hand applied to it, will give as much
as the bodies in contact with it can receive, or if they be large
enough, all that it has of excess. It is diverting to see how the
threads will rise and fall by touching the coating and conductor of
the phial alternately. May it not be that the difference between
the charged side of the glass, and the outer or emptied side, being
lessened by touching the hook or the conductor; the outer side can
receive from the hand which touched it, and by its receiving, the
inner side cannot retain so much; and for that reason so much as it
cannot contain electrises the water, or filings and conductor: for
it seems to be a rule, that the one side must be emptied in the same
proportion that the other is filled: though this from experiment
appears evident, yet it is still a mystery not to be accounted for.

I am in many places of the Abbé's book surprised to find that
experiments have succeeded so differently at Paris, from what they
did with Mr. Franklin, and as I have always observed them to do. The
Abbé, in making experiments to find the difference between the two
surfaces of a charged glass, will not have the phial placed on wax:
for, says he, don't you know that being placed on a body originally
electric, it quickly loses its virtue? I cannot imagine what should
have made the Abbé think so; it certainly is contradictory to the
notions commonly received of electrics _per se_; and by experiment I
find it entirely otherwise: for having several times left a charged
phial, for that purpose, standing on wax for hours, I found it to
retain as much of its charge as another that stood at the same time
on a table. I left one standing on wax from ten o'clock at night
till eight the next morning, when I found it to retain a sufficient
quantity of its charge, to give me a sensible commotion in my arms,
though the room in which the phial stood had been swept in that time,
which must have raised much dust to facilitate the discharge of the
phial.

I find that a cork-ball suspended between two bottles, the one fully
and the other but little charged, will not play between them, but is
driven into a situation that makes a triangle with the hooks of the
phials: though the Abbé has asserted the contrary of this, p. 101,
in order to account for the playing of a cork-ball between the wire
thrust into the phial, and one that rises up from its coating. The
phial which is least charged must have more electric matter given to
it, in proportion to its bulk, than the cork-ball receives from the
hook of the full phial.

The Abbé says, p. 103, "That a piece of metal leaf hung to a silk
thread and electrised, will be repelled by the bottom of a charged
phial held by its hook in the air:" this I find constantly otherwise,
it is with me always first attracted and then repelled: it is
necessary in charging the leaf to be careful, that it does not fly
off to some non-electric body, and so discharge itself when you think
it is charged; it is difficult to keep it from flying to your own
wrist, or to some part of your body.

The Abbé, p. 108, says, "that it is not impossible, as Mr. Franklin
says it is, to charge a phial while there is a communication formed
between its coating and its hook." I have always found it impossible
to charge such a phial so as to give a shock: indeed, if it hang on
the conductor without a communication from it, you may draw a spark
from it as you may from any body that hangs there, but this is very
different from being charged in such a manner as to give a shock. The
Abbé, in order to account for the little quantity of electric matter
that is to be found in the phial, says, "that it rather follows the
metal than the glass, and that it is spewed out into the air from
the coating of the phial." I wonder how it comes not to do so too,
when it sifts through the glass, and charges the exterior surface,
according to the Abbé's system!

The Abbé's objections against Mr. Franklin's two last experiments, I
think, have little weight in them: he seems, indeed, much at a loss
what to say, wherefore he taxes Mr. Franklin with having concealed a
material part of the experiment; a thing too mean for any gentleman
to be charged with, who has not shown as great a partiality in
relating experiments, as the Abbé has done.




PREFACE.


The writings of no man among the Christian Brotherhood have been so
universally popular as those of Benjamin Franklin, save the extended
writings of Alexander Campbell. Franklin’s volumes of Sermons, Debates
and Tracts, together with his miscellaneous writings, have for many
years been in general demand, and have met with ready sale.

No excuse is offered for this volume, save that of public demand. The
public demanded the volume, and it is, therefore, submitted.

None but the most choice selections, gathered from numerous valuable
writings, have been allowed space in this volume. The book is what
it purports to be, a collection of Gems that sparkle in the light of
Heaven’s Truth as diamonds in the sky.

The reader, by referring to the Index, can easily turn and get the
views of the Author on very many momentous subjects.

The volume will prove, as we trust, a monument to the memory of a great
and good man, and a treasure to every Christian household.

The volume is sent forth with the prayer that the truth it contains may
sanctify and make glad many, many hearts.

                                           J. A. H.




THE SHORTNESS OF HUMAN LIFE.


Nation after nation rises, enters and occupies a place among the
nations of the earth, falls, and is only known in the faithful records
of history. Generation after generation comes forth, enters upon the
great theatre of life, throngs the world for a little while, falls
in death and passes into eternity. Upon an average, about once in
thirty-three years, the whole of the inhabitants of the earth, or
as many as are upon it at any one time, over one billion souls, are
carried beyond the reach of all missionary effort—beyond the reach of
all repentance—all gospel invitations, and so many as are not saved,
beyond all possibility of salvation. During the same short period,
the preachers, missionaries, writers and professors of religion of
one generation are all born where no mistakes can be corrected, and
no amendment for wrongs done, or time trifled away, can ever be made.
Taking off from this time, eighteen years for childhood, only leaves
about fifteen years for the vast work of personal preparation, for
a state of boundless duration in the pure and holy society of just
men made perfect, the angels of God, Jesus the mediator of the New
Covenant, and God, the Judge of all. It also leaves about the same
length of time for the good and virtuous, those with the love of God in
their hearts, and lovers of mankind to make an effort to save our race.
In this view of the subject—and no other can be justly taken—it will
readily be perceived that what we do _must be done quickly_. Those who
do anything for mankind, must engage in the work immediately and with
energy. All who intend laying up a good foundation against the time
to come—laying up treasure in heaven to which they can go, and upon
which they can rely when their temporal supports shall all fail, must
commence the work immediately, persevere in it, and abound during the
short space afforded them. There must be no delay, for there is simply
time enough to do what must be done immediately, if done at all. Those
who have never prepared to meet God, have still greater reason to enter
at once upon the examination of the subject. With them, everything
to secure their eternal happiness, so far as their own action is
concerned, is yet to be done.

How short the time, in view of the amount to be done; and how carefully
every moment should be employed by every person who has not been
reconciled to God. What vast multitudes, throng our streets, lanes and
highways, who have never seriously thought upon, much less taken the
elementary steps, to come to God, and who will remain in their present
condition, unless arrested in their thoughtless career, by those who
have already tested the good word of God, and felt the power of the
world to come. What an everlasting reason we find here for a most
energetic, persevering, and godly effort to rescue them and bring them
to God.




THE GRAND WORK BEFORE US.


The people God has raised up in the nineteenth century and founded upon
the apostles and prophets, Jesus the Christ, the chief corner-stone,
have not been raised up in vain. Only a small part of their work is
in history yet. What has been done is only a drop to the bucket of
the stupendous work to be accomplished. It is only a foretaste, an
earnest of what is yet to come. It is only the incipient movement,
the inauguration of the work, the entering wedge. The great body of
the work lies in the future. Let no man become disheartened if a few
faint-hearted do turn back and hanker after the flesh-pots of Egypt.
In all great movements some of these have been found. They were in the
camps of Moses and among the first followers of Jesus. They have been
the timid, faithless time-servers, afraid of the people and lovers of
the world. But these are only spots in the feast, mere blemishes, and
no more to the great body than the spots in the sun compared with that
wonderful body. These poor little souls that desire to be _like the
clergy_, or to be actual _clergymen themselves_; that want titles, and
the people to call them _Dr._, _Rev._; that get on the white cravat,
the priestly coat buttoned up to the chin; that drop on their knees and
make a _public private_ prayer, as they enter the “sacred desk,” and
that teach the disciples to drop the head and offer a _secret private
public prayer before an assembly_, are not the men whom God sends. They
are the men who think the _largest offer in money is the loudest call
from God_, and the call which they obey most implicitly. They can be
bought and sold like sheep and oxen. God never calls such men as these.
They are a burlesque on the religion of Jesus Christ; the plainness,
simplicity and humility of our Lord. The idea has never entered into
their heads to be _servants_ of Jesus Christ. Their idea is to be
_masters_. They are not thinking of obeying, unless to obey the men
with the largest purses; but their idea is to be obeyed. They are not
thinking of adoring, but of being adored. The third epistle of Peter is
the one in which they find their likeness, and they are following the
directions in that epistle. Some of these may be reformed, and others
will go to their own place. They are not the men that _run the world_;
the world _runs them_.

But there is another class, that do not worship at the same altar
with these, nor are they of the same stripe. They do not draw their
divinity from clerical titles or clerical attire, nor from _public
private prayers_, from imitating Jewish rabbis, or sectarian rabbis,
from imitating ancient or modern Pharisees or Sadducees, but from the
living oracles of the living God. They are not under the thumbs of
rich men, nor under the influence of high salaries; nor ancient nor
modern priests. They cannot be bought and sold. They are the Lord’s
_free men_. They have cut loose from the bondage of the world of
sin, of sectarianism and the clergy. They belong to Christ. They get
their gospel from him. They are his servants. They adore and worship
him. They are men of faith and of prayer, too, but when they pray in
_secret_, it is _in secret_, where none but Him who sees in secret
sees them. They know their Bible and they are devoted to it. There
is a grand army of these, we believe, as time as the needle to the
pole. We cannot say that there are seven thousand in the field, public
preachers, but we are astonished wherever we go to find such numbers of
them, and to find their firmness and determination in the faith; and
to learn, too, of the sacrifices they are making and the additional
sacrifices they are determined and willing to make. They are many of
them living almost as economically as we did thirty years ago, in our
incipient work of opening the way.

When the British general found General Marion living _on roots_, and
his men _fighting without pay_, he admitted that the prospect of
overcoming such men was gloomy. So, when our opposers see the glorious
army of which we speak, of faithful young men struggling with only a
half support, and, in some instances, not that, and behold the love
for the gospel, the Lord Jesus and their fellow-men that impels them
on; and when they witness their determination, zeal and energy; that
they cannot be discouraged, disheartened and turned back, they give
up all idea of ever conquering them or withstanding them. Let not one
word we are saying be construed into an excuse for any Christian who
has the ability not sustaining these precious men whom God has raised
and put into the field. Nor need any one wait for a “plan,” nor an
“organization,” or “system.” Plans, organizations and systems give no
money. Men and women must give the money, if it is given at all. No man
who has the means, and refuses to do his part, according to the ability
God has given, to aid in this glorious work, need flatter himself that
he will be a partaker in the final reward. According as a man sows
shall he also reap. We know that there are hard-hearted and sordid men
in the church, that do nothing of consequence, and men of this sort
that will never be any better. They have but one idea ingrained and
imprinted on their entire being, and that is to hang on with a grasp
like death itself to the goods of this world. But the good and the
true, the men of faith, and love, and zeal; the men who have their eye
on a kingdom not of this world, and who are devoted to saving men and
women from ruin, will not stop for these, nor brood over them, but turn
away from them as they do from other abandoned characters who are past
feeling, and go on with their glorious work. God will be with them,
and, though poor in this world, they will be rich in faith, and the
Lord will hold them up.

But what has this great army of young preachers to do? Where is their
work? There is work enough for them to do. The only fear we have is,
that when they look and see the vastness of the work, they will think,
like one of old, “There be more against us than for us.” We have a
vast amount of worldliness and carnality to drive out of the Church;
conformity to the world; love of pleasure more than love of God; the
love of Christ to restore; the gospel and the true worship. Where the
cause has gone back, it must be recovered; where the gospel has been
lost and superseded by something else, it must be restored, and where
the worship has been corrupted, it must be purified, and the right way
of the Lord established. Men who do not love the gospel, the worship
and the things of God, will slough off when everything is driven out
that did not come from God; when the only things they loved are taken
away. In a few instances entire congregations may be carried away with
worldly policies and appliances; but the whole number thus lost will
amount to but little, compared with the grand throng that will stand
together for the faith once delivered to the saints, and that will
go on. What remains for good men to do is, to go on; stand fast; be
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; put on the whole
armor of God and fight the good fight of faith, and stand to the Bible
and nothing else, and thus make the Bible a grand power in the earth.
We have started with our Bible, and let us go on with it and carry it
through the world. We have a book that nobody denies, except out and
out skeptics, and one of supreme authority. Let us assert and maintain
its authority, and carry it through the world. All the other books that
in any way rival it, or are in anywise in the way of it, must be set
aside and rendered a _dead letter_. There is not one particle of divine
authority in anything that did not come out of the Bible. We must push
all other books aside.

All the names not applied to the people and Church of God in the
Scriptures must be repudiated and discarded, and we must determine to
speak of the people and Church of God in the language of Scripture.
This we can do; to this, no child of God can reasonably object. There
will be no difficulty in this, when we shall have no other kind of
people or Church but the people and Church of God. While we have other
kinds of people and churches, we shall need other names for them. But
we shall have no trouble about this, for they will select and give
themselves other names, such as they think fitting and appropriate.
All we have to do in the matter is to call them by the names they
give themselves. If they will not permit the Lord to name them, but
will call themselves by some name not given to the Lord’s people in
the Bible, it is their own doing, not ours. There is no reason why
the Lord’s people should follow their example, and not accept the
designations found in Scripture, and use them exclusively. If we are
the Lord’s people, we can be spoken of in the language of Scripture; if
we are not, then we might have some other name.




THE WORK OF CREATION.


After Moses states the wonderful fact that “In the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth,” without stating when it was, only
that it was “in the beginning,” he proceeds to give a brief account
of the state of things after this _first fact_, and before the work
of the six days. He says: “The earth was without form, and void, and
darkness was upon the face of the deep.” This state of things was
preceded by the creation of the heaven and the earth. The next thing in
the successive acts was to operate on material created, brought into
existence; to form or fashion it. What was the first thing? “The Spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters.” This was not bringing into
existence, but operating on that which was in existence. “And God said,
Let there be light: and there was light. And God saw the light, that it
was good: and God divided the light from the darkness. And God called
the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And the evening and
the morning were the first day.” Here we have the work of the first
day. What was done on that day was not the same, no matter how we
describe it, as the first act. It was forming, shaping, operating on
material previously brought into existence.

Moses proceeds, “And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of
the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. And God made
the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament
from the waters which were above the firmament: and it was so. And he
called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the morning were the
second day.” Here we have the work of the second day, like that of
the first day, forming, fashioning and bringing order out of chaos.
This “firmament,” that God made, and “called Heaven,” is not the same
as mentioned in the first verse, but is included in the words: “The
heavens and the earth.” This is the work of arrangement, ordering, etc.

Then follow the gathering together the waters into one place, and the
bringing to view the dry land, the naming of the dry land, Earth, and
the gathering together of the waters of the seas; the ordering of the
grass, the herb, the fruit-tree upon the earth. This was the work of
the third day. Then comes the ordering the heavenly bodies, the great
lights for day and night, the dividing the light from the darkness,
etc., the work of the fourth day. All this is fashioning, forming,
arranging, ordering, and not creating from nothing. Then follows the
ordering of the waters, to bring forth the fishes, the fowl, and all
the inhabitants of the seas on the fifth day. This is followed by the
ordering the earth to bring forth the cattle, the creeping thing, and
all the lower orders of the inhabitants of the earth, and concludes the
work of the sixth day by the creation of man, or _forming_ him in the
image of God.

We have both the words “made,” and “created,” used and applied to
this work of the six days, where it is manifestly used in the sense
of shaping, forming, fashioning, ordering, arranging, and not in the
sense of the word “created” in the first sentence in the Bible, where
it manifestly means _creating from nothing or bringing into existence_.
This wonderful act of the Infinite One, of bringing into existence the
heaven and the earth—this stupendous universe—may have been performed
an indefinite period of time before the commencement of the work of
the six days described by Moses. In this view there is no danger. It
makes the work of the Creator none the less wonderful, glorious and
overwhelming. It matters not how long before the work of the six days
it was that “God created the heaven and the earth,” or brought the
universe into existence. Nor need we be startled at this. The work of
the six days, as described by Moses, is wonderful beyond all human
imagination. We can comprehend but little of it. We may well exclaim,
as Paul did, in view of a different matter: “O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind
of the Lord? or who hath been his counselor? For of him, and through
him, are all things; to whom be glory forever. Amen.”




LOTTERIES.


The entire lottery scheme is gambling. The desire and intention in
lotteries is to get money by a base method, or, in other words,
dishonestly. The desire and intention is to get money without rendering
an equivalent, or to get something for nothing. The man or company that
conducts a lottery knows the precise per cent. that is made in selling
out the tickets. If everything is conducted fairly; that is, what they
call _fairly_; that is, to conduct according to their proposed rule,
some few would draw prizes of much value and some larger number will
draw small prizes, while the great body of them will draw nothing. They
simply give their money to make up the prizes that others draw, and
make a fine purse to run the establishment. Think of the following:

1. We do not profess to know, but probably if the _green ones_ that buy
lottery tickets would pay $100,000 for tickets, all the prizes they
would all draw would not amount to more than $66,000, thus leaving
$34,000 in the concern. This is swindle No. 1, to the tune of $34,000!

2. There can be but very few who can draw prizes of any considerable
value, for there are but few of that kind in the concern. The
purchasers of lottery tickets would be astonished to know how few could
possibly draw a prize to the amount of $1,000, if enough would draw
tickets to pay in $100,000.

3. They would be still more astonished to know how few can draw even
small prizes, and most of all astonished to know how few can draw
anything.

4. The concern proceeds on a principle of dishonesty on both sides—the
principle of getting something for nothing. The man that studies how
to do this, and tries to accomplish it, studies dishonesty and how
to practice it. In its very nature it is corrupting, and must end in
degrading a man. Young men ought to shun it as they would a viper.




NO PREACHERS ON DANCING, ETC.


No man goes through the country delivering able and finely-prepared
discourses advocating _dancing_, going to theatres, playing innocent
games for amusement, etc., etc. These things, like the weeds in the
garden, need no advocates, but come themselves, and that, too, in
opposition to all moral feeling, restraints and entreaties. They are
not cultivated fruit, but the spontaneous growth that must be removed
before we can have the precious fruits of the Spirit. They are the
fruits of the flesh, of the carnal mind. The man who builds up
churches, maintains the spiritual devotions, order, purity, discipline,
elevates and ennobles humanity, must work; war against the flesh and
all the works of the flesh; cultivate, be faithful and watchful. He has
something to do more than to inquire, what harm is it?

The Romish Church has reached the climax in the _easy_ system.
She makes her members chiefly of infants before they can make any
successful resistance, and then never excludes except for heresy. In
this way she has grown up to the enormous number of about _two hundred
million_, or one-sixth of the inhabitants of the world. Dancing,
drunkenness, or any other works of the flesh except _heresy_ forfeit no
membership in that carnal body. We do not want to go _back_ toward that
body.

There are more than _seven thousand_ or _seven times seven thousand_,
remaining, who have not consented to any departure, who are to-day as
determined for the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth,
as A. Campbell was in the best days of the _Christian Baptist_, and
the man who talks to them about any new departure under the name of
_progression_, or any other name, is not only idling away his time and
talent, but letting _himself down_ in their estimation from the faith
to sectarianism. They estimate a man, not by his learning, his talent
or money, but by his love to the Lord Jesus the Christ. They judge of
this love by his integrity to the Lord, as seen in a strict adherence
to the gospel, the teaching of the Lord and his apostles; his example;
his appointed worship; all he said and did; his devotion to the Lord in
all respects; a settled and determined adherence to him in all things.

Men may turn away from him, and some will, as some did under the eyes
of the apostles. Whole churches will turn away and go to nothing, and
the names of some men will stand ingloriously connected with these
ruins. The first churches the Lord established have long since been
buried in ruins, but the men who spread the desolation will not be
overlooked in the eternal judgment. They will there receive their last
notoriety. The Lord has not raised the building now standing on the
rock, in vain, but to stand the pillar and support of the truth. The
main body understand that they have entered into covenant with God, and
that they are bound by all the honor that is in them to maintain every
inch of ground they have gained. There is, we believe, salt enough in
this body to preserve it. It has the power and Spirit of God in it; and
God will hold it up and perpetuate it when men who have it not will
be forgotten. By the grace of God it will stand till the Lord comes.
Let us labor to “present it to him a glorious church, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing.”




HARDENING PHARAOH’S HEART.


There are two senses in which things are ascribed to God. 1. When
he _does things_ directly, as in the work of creation. 2. When he
_permits_ things to be done. In this latter sense God _raised up_ and
hardened Pharaoh. It is simply in the sense of _permission_—permitted
him to _rise up_ and _be hardened_. The hardening is also ascribed
to Pharaoh. He _hardened himself_. This was the direct act. He did
it. When the holy writer is looking at the providence of God, in
permitting him to rise up into power, and assigning a reason for it,
the explanation is made, that it was done to make known his power in
all the earth. This is the sense in which God raises up kings and other
rulers, that are bad, and uses them as vessels fitted for destruction.
He permits them to rule and rule badly, do wickedly; oppress the
people, as vessels of dishonor and wrath, making them examples to all
the earth, in their overthrow and utter ruin, to teach other rulers and
the people that they are all in the hands of the Lord.

The judgments of God have two different results on men, either, on the
one hand, to subdue the heart and lead to repentance, or to harden the
heart and lead to greater deeds of cruelty and oppression. When the
holy writer speaks of it, in view of the case where men are hardened
and become worse by it, he says, God hardened them. In the other case,
where they are subdued and led to repentance by it, he says, God makes
them “vessels of mercy,” leads them to repentance and saves them. The
dealings of God are precisely alike in both cases, but the result is
different. In one case it is a savor of life, in the other of death.
The difference is not in the divine treatment, but in the patients.
The one becomes a vessel of wrath, and the other a vessel of mercy.
God is said to save the one and harden the other, because we have the
two results from the same treatment. In that sense it is from God and
ascribed to him, in both the hardening and saving. See the following:

“At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation and concerning a
kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; if that
nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil I thought to them.” See Jer. xviii. 7, 8. This
assures us, that where a nation or a kingdom repent, the Lord turns
away the threatened calamity. The Lord then states the case for a
nation that shall turn away from the Lord:

“At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it
obey not my voice, then will I repent of the good, wherewith I said
I would benefit them.” See Jer. xviii. 9, 10. This sets forth the
foundation of making vessels of honor and of wrath. God can make either
the one, or the other. The ground of his doing this is their doing good
and doing evil.

When God sent a judgment on Pharaoh, to subdue him and lead him to
repentance, he promised to repent and let the children of Israel go;
but then hardened his heart, broke his promise and refused to let them
go. This was repeated ten times on him, and every time he broke his
promise and he became still more hardened, and God permitted him thus
to go on till his overthrow, thus making the power of God known in all
the earth, and making the hardened monarch of Egypt an example to all
the nations to follow. No doubt God hardens men now in the same sense
as he did Pharaoh, subdues and leads others to repentance as he did the
Ninevites, who repented at the preaching of Jonah.




OUR CENSUS.


In an age when people compare themselves with their neighbors, look
at the comparative size of their hymn books, the size, splendor and
elegance of the temples in which they meet, the amount of money they
raise, their church organs, festivals, choirs, popular preachers and
numerical strength, the census is looked to with great concern; but
where people are greatly devoted to the Lord, diligently striving to
please him and be accepted of him in the great day, they are led to
think of the piety of the people, their purity, their culture; their
faith, and hope and love; their efforts to save men and build up the
kingdom of God, and not to be troubled seriously about how they shall
appear in the _census_. We are vastly more concerned about maintaining
the purity of the gospel, the faithfulness of the preaching, the
discipline and order of the church, the pure worship as prescribed in
the law of God, than we are about the _census_. We are more concerned
about how we appear before the Lord than we are how we appear before
man.

We are perfectly contented and satisfied with the things of God as set
forth in Scripture. We are contented and satisfied with the very words
and forms of speech in which God speaks to man. We love the lowliness,
simplicity and humility of Jesus. It is the manifestation of infinite
wisdom and goodness. The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.
“The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.” He takes
the wise in their own craftiness.




TRUE MISSIONARIES.


The early members in our great movement in this country were _nearly
all preachers_. They read the Scriptures to and talked with their
neighbors, explained matters to them, and, in many instances, when the
preacher came they were already convinced and ready for baptism; or, if
they had been baptized ready for uniting on the Bible. This accounts
for our having such large success by preaching a few discourses. Much
of the preaching was done before the preacher came, by private members
and in private circles. These were _missionary people_ in the true
sense. They were in the work all the time. They did not need games of
amusement for pastime. They had no time to spare. They were all busy,
and all alive and at work. The love and spirit of God were in them, and
the divine influence was shed all round. They did not have a little
missionary spasm, pray a week for the spread of the gospel, give a few
dollars and do no more for three months or a year, but they prayed for
the spread of the gospel all the time; kept at the work of spreading
it all the time. They had no trouble about _plans_, but kept at the
_work_, and spread the gospel. It can be spread in the same way again,
and is being thus spread largely now wherever it is spread at all. If
we honestly desire to spread the gospel of the grace of God, to turn
sinners to the Lord, free them from the manacles of sin and death, and
save them, let us go to work and do it. There is nothing to hinder us,
if we have the faith and love and zeal, from carrying it forward to
any extent. The people are weary of sectarianism, and ready to hear
something intelligible on the way of salvation.




NO DEPARTURE FROM THE JERUSALEM CHURCH.


If we are to depart from the Jerusalem Church because it was in its
infancy, and not reproduce the primitive church, we should like to
know how far we are to depart from it, and in what. If the faith and
practice, the precept and example of the primitive church may not be
adopted now and followed; if in all things we should not now have the
same faith and practice, precept and example they had, we should be
pleased for some expounder of the new doctrine to explain to us in what
the departure shall consist, and what rule we are to adopt now. If we
let go of the rule that governed the first church, what rule shall we
adopt? If we cut loose from the divine, shall we adopt a human rule? If
so, what human rule? Some one of these already made? or shall we have
the presumption and folly to think we can make a better one than these
human rules already in use?

We are not ready to cut loose from the Jerusalem Church, its rule of
faith and practice, its precept and example. We have more confidence
in the old ground than ever, and have no idea of departing from the
Jerusalem Church, its faith and practice, precepts and example. The
men that will not stand on apostolic ground, the faith and practice of
the first church, will not stand on anything long. We want something
reliable, permanent, sure and steadfast—a kingdom that cannot be
moved. In the old Bible, the old gospel and the old church, we find it.
Here is something to lean upon living and dying, for this world and
the world to come. If we leave this, all is uncertainty, darkness and
night. Let us “hear what the Spirit says to the churches,” and not he
of those who “depart from the faith,” giving heed to seducing spirits,
and not listen to “unstable souls,” or those “ever learning and never
able to the knowledge of the truth.”




BORN OF WATER AND THE SPIRIT.


There is but _one birth_ mentioned or alluded to in the conversation
with Nicodemus.

There is but _one kingdom_ mentioned or alluded to in the conversation.

The conversation is about _one birth_ and entering into _one kingdom_.
The whole is in the phrase, “You must be born again,” or the previous
phrase, “Except a man be born again he can not see the kingdom of God.”
This figurative expression “born again,” is precisely the same, or
includes the same as conversion. A man born again is a man converted.
In being born again precisely the same _agencies_ are employed, and
the same thing is accomplished as when a man is converted. This is
literally a man turned from darkness to light, from the world to God.
This is not done by the agency of water without the agency of the
Spirit. There is no such thing as a birth of water without the Spirit.
A man is “born again,” not by water without the Spirit, nor by the
Spirit without the water, but “born of water and of the Spirit,” no
matter how many fine theories are spoiled. Nothing leads to more
useless theories and speculations than attempts to build a theory on a
figurative expression. The literal must always explain the figurative.
The clear and unfigurative language of the commission has precisely the
same in it as the phrase, “born of water and of the Spirit.” “He who
believes and is immersed shall be saved.” Believes, in this passage, is
literal. Born of the Spirit, or, which is the same, “begotten of the
Spirit,” is figurative. The meaning is the same as, “I have begotten
you by the gospel,” or made you believers by the gospel. Begotten of
God is _made a believer of God_. Begotten of the Spirit is _made a
believer by the Spirit_. It is in some instances ascribed to God in
view of his being the Author of it. It is ascribed to Christ in view of
it being through his mediation. It is ascribed to the Spirit in view
of his inspiring the apostles or speaking in them, and thus making
believers, and those thus made believers are said to be begotten of
the Spirit, and, when immersed, said to be “born of water and of the
Spirit.” This is precisely all there is in it.

There is nothing about the resurrection in it, the first resurrection
or any other resurrection, unless it be a resurrection to a new life.
Nor is anything in the resurrection ever called “a birth of the
Spirit.” We are perfectly aware that the dead will be quickened by the
Spirit, and that the Spirit of Christ will quicken their mortal bodies;
that Christ was the “first-born from the dead,” the “first-born among
many brethren,” and that the dead will be raised at the sound of the
trumpet, but there is not one word about all this or an allusion to
it in the conversation with Nicodemus. Nor is there one word about or
allusion to the everlasting kingdom in that conversation. We must not
make something out of that conversation that is not in it.

Nicodemus was standing on his birth-right, “born in thy house,” as
expressed Gen. xvii. 13, for membership. The Lord sweeps this away in
one sentence: “Except a man be born again he can not see the kingdom of
God.” His being born in the house or family of Abraham availed nothing.
“Flesh and blood can not inherit the kingdom of God.” No matter in
whose family he was born nor whose blood coursed in his veins, a man
must be born again, born from above, born of water and of the Spirit,
or he cannot enjoy the kingdom of God. As the Spirit is the agent
through whom the gospel is preached, and the gospel the instrument
by which the Spirit makes believers, the agent is mentioned for the
effect, which is belief—made believers by the Spirit and baptized into
Christ, into one body. It is of God, of Christ, of the Spirit, of the
apostles and by the word.

There is no such thing as the new birth without the Spirit, nor any
such thing as entering into the kingdom of God or the body of Christ.
The faith, the work of the Spirit in preaching the gospel, through
the apostles, and baptism, or, figuratively, “born of water,” must be
present. The man who believes the gospel with all his heart and is
immersed into Christ is “born of water and of the Spirit” in the sense
intended by the Savior.




A HIGHER MORALITY REQUIRED.


We need a higher morality, a more pure and unadulterated piety and
greater simplicity of benevolence. We do not want money extracted
from the pockets of the people by the Church offering them sensual
gratification, amusements and entertainments, to say nothing of the
ball, the lottery and other gambling. Let us in the name of the Lord
and of religion, in a manly way, come directly to the people for means
to _support religion_ and ask them to _give from love to Christ_,
and no matter if we do not obtain one-fourth the amount it will do
ten times as much good. The Lord needs no money made by lotteries,
gambling, fairs, festivals, or any such appeals to the lust of the
flesh, the human appetite, the love of fine companies, etc. He needs
no money only that _given to him through love and devotion to his
cause_. Those who appeal to entertainments, amusements, fine companies
of men and women, the dance, lotteries, festivals, fairs, etc., etc.,
thus publish to the world their impression that there is more potency
in these worldly and secular appliances than there is in the grace
of God and the love of Christ, and we doubt not they find it to be
so, in _raising money in their assemblies_. They have tried it and
demonstrated it to be so. We care not if it be so; we care not if
it has been demonstrated that the people will give more money for a
monkey show than for the kingdom of God; we will not resort to the
monkey show; nor do we care if they will give more money for revelling
than for the holy cause for which Jesus died; we will not resort to the
revelling. There are other matters aside from the question, how much
money can we raise, that must be kept in view.

We must maintain our piety, devotion to the Lord, purity, and must
not be conformed to this world, but transformed by the renewing of
our mind. We have never consented to this modern element that will
appeal to anything and everything that will _raise money_. It is not
Godliness, nor the love of God, but sensual; it is devilish. Come
directly to the children of God in the name of the Lord and appeal to
them for his sake to give, to give freely and of a willing mind; that
“it is more blessed to give than to receive,” and appreciate what is
given in his name.




POIMEEN—SHEPHERD—EVANGELIST—OVERSEER.


We will not go back to the Old Testament to find any office or officer
in the kingdom of Christ. What currency, then, has the word “pastor”
in the New Testament? The word is in the New Testament, in some
translations, in _one place_. That is its entire currency in the new
and everlasting covenant. But then the word “Easter” is found in _one
place_ in the common version. Is that authority for _Easter_? If it is
in the New Testament in one place, rightfully, it is authority as
much as if it were in fifty places. But how does it happen to be
there in _one place_? If the translators had, in that _one place_,
given us _passover_, as they have done in every other instance to
represent the same original, we should have had no Easter in the New
Testament. In the same way, if the translators had given us the word
_shepherds_, Eph. iv. 11, as they have done in every other case to
represent the same original word, we should have had no _pastor_ in
the New Testament. On this one variation from the rule, to translate
_poimeen_, shepherd, hangs the “pastorate,” so called, the _office_ for
the pastor, and we might add, all the “installations,” etc. Probably it
is Dr. Watts that exclaims, with other matters before him: “Great God!
on what a brittle thread hangs eternal things!” On what a slender prop
hangs the _pastorate_! Still, on this platform the pastors stand.

In _one place_ and only _one_, in some translations, the original
word for shepherd, and so translated in every other place in the New
Testament, is translated _pastors_. When the common version appeared,
King James issued a proclamation commanding the _translation_ to be
read as the _word of God_. If we obey this command we must read the
Latin word _pastor_ as the word of God, though the same translators
give us _shepherd_ as the English representative of the original word
_poimeen_ in every other occurrence of it in the New Testament. In this
way we get divine authority in the word of God, and human authority
from King James, not only for the unscriptural pastorate in the Church
of England, but the equally unscriptural _pastorate_ now trying to grow
up among us, first under one plausible pretext and then under another.

Why translate _poimeen_, shepherd, in every other place, and cover up
the word shepherd with the Latin word pastor in one place? Whatever
idea the Lord and the apostles intended to convey in this matter,
they deemed the _one word_ sufficient. What reason can any man give
for representing the original word _poimeen_ by the word shepherd in
every instance but one, and there using the Latin word _pastor_? Rome
loves Latin. It is not the _vulgar tongue_. What reason is there for
departing from the otherwise invariable rule and giving us _pastor_,
Eph. iv. 11? Why not give us “Chief-Pastor,” or “Arch-Pastor,” and not
“Chief-Shepherd?” Why not style the Lord “the Pastor of the sheep,”
and not “Shepherd of the sheep?” _Pastor_ would not read well as the
correlative of _sheep_. We hear sermons on the offices of our Lord, as
King, Priest, Prophet. Why not have a sermon on his office as _Pastor_?
Then we might have a sermon on the office of the church as a _flock_,
or the office of the members as _sheep_. Could we not say _flock’s_
office, _sheep’s_ office? The Lord has no such office as _shepherd_,
or, in Latin, _pastor_. There is no such office as _pastorate_, nor
officer as _pastor_. There is not one word in the New Covenant about
the qualifications of a pastor, the election of one, the calling
of one, or the installation of one. As the correlative of the word
_flock_, when the church is figuratively called _flock_, the Lord who
cares for the flock and has the oversight of it is figuratively called
_Shepherd_, or, when the followers of the Lord are figuratively called
_sheep_, the Lord is figuratively called “the Shepherd of the sheep.”
When the Lord is called “the Chief-Shepherd,” or “Arch-Shepherd,”
the church is in view as the flock of which he is Shepherd, and the
_overseers_ in the church are _under_ shepherds, but there is no
_shepherd’s_ office, nor _flock’s_ office. The bishops or overseers
are as certainly _bishops_ or _overseers_, when figuratively called
_shepherds_, as if literally called _overseers_. No other office or
work is meant.

Coming now to the practical matter, we desire Bible things and Bible
names for them. We desire to preserve the church and everything in
it as the Lord gave it. We desire, in the matter in hand, to prevent
the creation of any _new office_ in the church. There is nothing
new or unscriptural in the idea of an overseer who devotes himself
wholly to the word and teaching. There may be other overseers who do
not give themselves wholly to the word and teaching. Then there is
nothing unscriptural in an evangelist remaining with a church one,
two or more years, to set in order things that are wanting, assist in
qualifying the church to take care of itself, and preach the gospel
to the community. In this capacity he is not a church officer at all,
but doing the work of an evangelist. He is not with the church to
“perform divine service” for it, to lord it over it, or as a ruler, nor
_permanently_, but assisting the church in her infancy and enabling her
to take care of herself.

Every preacher connected with any church is laboring in one of these
two senses: as an overseer who labors in the word and teaching, or as
an evangelist. In the former capacity he may be there permanently. In
the latter capacity he is not there permanently, but setting in order
the things wanting, with a view to qualifying themselves to every
good word and work; to instruct and edify one another in love, but
intending to go on to another place as soon as he has finished his
work where he is. But the overseer who labors in the word and teaching
is not to assume any airs of authority, or any _great chair_ with his
_subordinates_ on more humble seats by his side. We abominate all these
great chairs, pulpits and preferences for public men. If they are good
men they do not want them, and if they are bad men they certainly
should not be honored with them. Really great and good men are plain
men—want no great chair nor great titles. They need no priestly robes,
clerical coats nor titles. They make a record that tells the story for
them. _They do the work._ Let us do the work, seek the simplicity of
Jesus and the humility of children. While we sing, “Nearer, my God, to
thee,” let us strive to live nearer to God and do our utmost to excel
in understanding and practicing precisely what the Lord has laid before
us in the Scriptures.




CALL NO MAN REVEREND.


We will call no man _Reverend_. We make this a matter of conscience.
There is no more reason or gospel for addressing a preacher differently
from other men than there is for a preacher to be attired differently.
If a man is not preacher enough to be known as a _preacher_, without
the white necktie or the priestly coat, let him pass without being
known. We like to treat a preacher, or even a Roman priest, with common
civility, but we do all that when we treat him as any other gentleman.
We want no preacher’s garb nor titles, and will recognize none of them.
Many have those who have never been “born again;” who are not in the
kingdom of God—not Christians.




PREACHER DID NOT SUIT.


We must say a few things in the way of _generals_ before we come to
_particulars_. We visited a church some years since, and there was
quite a general impression among the members that their preacher did
not suit them—that he was not “the right man in the right place,” etc.
Many fine things were said, as to the kind of a man they needed, etc.,
and the idea prevailed that they had better turn their preacher off and
get another. We suggested to them in a circle one day that possibly
they had not at all discovered the real malady; that possibly the main
difficulty was not at all in reference to the kind of a preacher they
needed, but to the kind of a church they needed; that possibly the
change they needed could be effected by _turning off the church_ and
getting _another_ and a _better one_.




THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS.


We need a vast amount of instruction in regard to both the Old
Testament and the New, not only in the sunday-school, but in the
church, the family, and to individuals. We need some thorough work in
this matter. Much of what is now passing for _teaching_ both the Old
Testament and New is in no proper sense teaching either the Old or New
Testament. The general idea is, that the Old Testament embraces all the
sacred writings or the books of the Bible, beginning with Genesis and
ending with Malachi, and that the New Testament embraces all the sacred
writings or books of the Bible, beginning with Matthew and ending with
Revelation. Such is the sense in which these terms are now used. When
it is said, the Old Testament is abolished, the idea generally received
is that all the sacred writings, or the books of the Bible, from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of Malachi, are set aside, of no use,
and not to be studied. This is a very superficial view, and one that in
no sense comprehends the matter.

The word “testament” means _covenant_, and the Old Testament is simply
in the Bible sense the Old Covenant. This was made with the seed of
Abraham, or fleshly Israel, and includes what Paul calls “the law.”
This is what he calls “our _pedagogue_ to bring us to Christ.” It is
not “school-master” as the common version has it, but _pedagogue_.
His office was different from that of school-teacher. It was to take
charge of the children from the time they started from their homes
till they reached the school-room and put under the teacher. This
was the office of the law of Moses, to take charge of the seed of
Abraham, Israel according to the flesh, and bring them to Christ the
School-teacher. Paul does not say, as some quote him, “The law _is_
our school-master to bring us to Christ,” but being a Jew, and speaking
as such, he says, “The law _was_ our pedagogue to bring us to Christ,”
the School-teacher. This law, containing a full development of all
that was in the covenant with the seed of Abraham, or fleshly Israel,
is what was abolished, had waxed old, and was ready to vanish away in
Paul’s day. This most certainly did not include the history in the five
books of Moses, or any other history in the Old Book, commonly called
the “Old Testament,” the book of Job, the Psalms, Proverbs, or the
Prophecies. None of these are abolished, but are all of as much value
to those under Christ, and as legitimate books for study, as they ever
were to any people in any age of the world. They are not included in the
law, or the covenant, or in what was abolished, but have a relation to
the gospel, to those in the kingdom of Christ, and are of immense value.

By making ourselves well acquainted with the sacred writings, the
dealings of God with man, and the portions of revelation given in
various manners and at sundry times, we can see as we can in nature now
that we have revelation through which to read it, that there was one
Divine Mind before the beginning of time that looked down through the
ages, and by the agency of men that did not understand him, carried
out his wise and gracious counsels according to his eternal purpose.
Going back to the early sacred writings found in the Old Book we look
down through these writings to Christ, the kingdom of God, the gospel,
as one looking through a telescope at objects in the distance; but,
standing at the other end of revelation, we look up through the New
Book containing the revelations given at later periods to the persons
and events of the Old Book, as one who turns the telescope the other
end foremost, and bring Moses and the prophets down near to us.

Christ is the soul of the Bible, _the theme_ of the revelation from God
to man. Turn the portions of revelation given at early periods, next
to the eye and look down through the Bible, and through the ages to
Christ, and then turn the last part of revelation to the eye, and look
up through it to Christ, and we thus find that it all centers in Him
“who is Head over all things to the church.”

It is not right in the church, family, or anywhere, to teach the Old
Scriptures _exclusively_, or the New, but _teach both_, in their
relation to each other. The New can not be thoroughly and successfully
studied without the Old, nor the Old without the New.

The popular custom of memorizing and repeating verses in view of prizes
to the most successful, or the study and answer of such questions, as
who was the first man, who was the oldest man, who was the meekest
man, etc., gives us no understanding of the Scriptures. Much of this
is a mere exercise of the memory, and there is nothing in it to make
a pious impression, or give any comprehension of the mind of God. It
appears at times wonderful how many things can be taught, and correctly
enough too, _about_ the Bible, and at the same time keep out of view
entirely the _divine purpose_, the very _import_ and _intention_ of the
wonderful book professedly taught. The eternal purpose of God, running
through the Bible from side to side, as it does through the works of
nature, should be taught and kept in view, not to find any definite
number that will certainly be saved or lost, but to find the Lord’s
Anointed, his gospel and kingdom; a revelation of the mystery, an
unfolding of the secret hid in God from before the beginning of time,
but now made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according
to the commandment of the everlasting God made known to all nations for
the obedience of faith.




WILL YOU ALSO GO AWAY.


No matter how many go the wrong way, nor how popular they are, nor how
much money they have, the Lord is able to bring them to judgment, and
he will most certainly do it. When the people went away from the temple
and abandoned him, and only a few disciples remained with him, and he
inquired of them: “Will you also go away?” the prospect looked dim, but
the Lord did not change his course. When he expired on the cross the
enemies exulted and triumphed; but their triumph did not last long. “He
was quickened by the Spirit.” God raised him up. “He was justified by
the Spirit.” The armies in heaven were with him. The upper world was in
motion. God vindicated him, as he did all who will listen to him. When
they burned Tyndale at the stake they thought they had put him down;
but, while the names of his persecutors have, with few exceptions, gone
into oblivion, the name of Tyndale is held in esteem by all good men.
The name of Luther will live to the end of time, while the time-servers
who opposed him are rapidly sinking into forgetfulness. The man
that leads the people to God, to the Lord Jesus, by the gospel, and
maintains the will of God, will abide forever; while the man that tries
to catch the giddy throng with a little show of some human devices,
and who may attract their attention for a time, will pass away and be
forgotten forever.

We are for _progress_ in the true sense in every department, but not
for the _progress backward_. We are for the _progress_ in the church
that goes forward and converts sinners, and builds up churches; that
infuses piety, devotion to God and to the right way of the Lord; but
not for the progress that is _nearly all money_, and _almost no work_.
We are for the progress that goes _forward_ and not _backward_.




THE GROUND OF UNION.


“In what are Christians to be united?”

They are to be united _on Christ_—on _being Christians_. This embraces
the entire revelation from God to man, all the truth uttered, the
commandments given and the promises made by our heavenly Father. The
truth must all be believed, the commandments obeyed, and the promises
must be hoped for. This includes the entire faith, obedience and hope
of the gospel. _In this_ we must be united.

II. “What are the essentials of Christianity which can not be
compromised?”

_Christianity itself_, as a whole and in all its parts, is essential.
All that is in it is essential, and all that is not in it is not
essential. We are for christianity itself, not in part, but the whole
of it, as it came from the infallible Spirit of all wisdom and all
revelation. It is all essential. Nothing may be added to it or taken
from it. The “doctrines and commandments of men,” the doctrines of
“expediency,” of “deductions” and “inferences,” from _principles_,
are not essential; but these are not christianity, nor any part of
it. Nothing in christianity can be compromised except at our peril.
The wisdom of God gives us no non-essentials. If the wisdom of man
pronounces anything given by the wisdom of God, or, which is the same,
any part of christianity, non-essential, such wisdom of man must be set
aside as presumptuous.

What an idea for men to sit on the _grave_ question of _essentials_
and _non-essentials_, in the divine institution given by our Lord and
confirmed by the most indubitable signs and wonders! What part of that
which has been given by the wisdom of God is essential, and what part
is not essential? It is all essential, or the wisdom of God would not
have given it, and the authority of God would not have required it. The
very circumstance that the infinite wisdom devised it and the infinite
authority required it makes the whole of christianity binding. There is
not a non-essential in it.

III. “How far is diversity to be tolerated?”

We are all required to “speak the same thing,” to “teach no other
doctrine,” to “preach the word,” to preach no “other gospel,” to teach
the things that become “sound doctrine,” and if we “speak not according
to his word it is because there is no light in us.” In one word, we are
not to have “all sorts of doctrine from all sorts of teachers,” but to
“earnestly contend for the faith once for all delivered to the saints.”

IV. “How shall we reconcile the right of private judgment with the
right of the Church to maintain the faith in its purity, and still
preserve the unity of the faith which the word of God enjoins?”

The way we have done it for fifty years past. We have had the light of
private judgment, and, at the same time, maintained the faith in its
purity and preserved the unity of the faith as enjoined in Scripture.
Demonstration is better than theory. We have brought the people from
all parties, united them in the one faith, made them one in the unity
of the Spirit, with the exception of a few erratic spirits, but we
have not had more of these than they had in the time of the apostles.
They and their mission were predicted in Scripture, and they have come
and fulfilled the predictions of the Lord and the apostles without
intending or knowing it, and thus furnished an additional evidence that
the Scriptures are divinely inspired.




IN SEASON AND OUT OF SEASON.


There are times when general apathy prevails; when it appears
impossible to rouse the people to anything like an appreciation of
the things of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ; when
the hearts of the people appear to be closed against all that can be
said or done to save them. They frequently hear at such times, act as
orderly as ever, and show as much respect to the gospel; but they do
not have the heart and soul in it, and can not be _moved to action_.
Their emotional nature appears to be utterly inaccessible. There are
again times when the hearts of the people are open. They not only hear
the truth, pay a decent respect to it and admire its beauties, but,
with joy, they receive it into good and honest hearts, believe it to be
the salvation of their souls. It melts them down, fills their hearts
to overflowing and moves them to obedience. This much we know to be
_fact_. We have tried to see the cause of this fact, but do not claim
that we can see the cause, nor do we see any particular importance in
seeing the cause, but we ought to turn the _fact to account_. How can
this be done?

Paul has a period, or state of things, that he styles “in season,” and
another that he styles “out of season.” There is a time to sow and a
time to reap, a time to dress the vineyard and a time to gather the
fruit. These periods, when the hearts of the people are open, are the
harvest times—the time for gathering in the ripe grain ready for the
harvest—for turning sinners to the Lord. No matter about the cause
of it; there is the _opportunity_; and we should be ready and go into
the harvest and gather precious souls into the fold of Christ. A door
is now open and let no man waste his time about the _cause of this
opening_, but while the way is open go up and possess the land. Never
mind explaining _how_ the Lord opened the heart of Lydia, that she
attended to the words spoken by Paul, nor _how_ the Lord now is opening
the hearts of the people; it is enough for the man of God to find that
the hearts of the people _are open_, and that they will attend to the
word of the Lord when it is spoken. Go on and speak to them the word of
the Lord—the words of everlasting life—turn them to God and save them.




EATING THE LORD’S FLESH AND DRINKING HIS BLOOD.


John vi. 48, we find the words of the Lord, “I am the bread of life.”
The Lord adds the remark to the Jews, “Your fathers did eat manna in
the wilderness, and are dead.” It had no power to perpetuate life
only for a short time; but he continues, verse 50, “This is the bread
which comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die.”
It will be noticed that _his flesh_ did not come down from heaven,
and that bread which came down from heaven is that of which if a man
shall eat he shall not die. Then he follows with the remark, “I am the
living bread which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread”
(which came down from heaven) “he shall live forever; and the bread
that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world.” Here he uses the _flesh_, as that which they saw and dealt with
in crucifying him metonymically, or a part for the whole. The Jews,
however, understood him to mean his flesh literally, and so does the
Romish church, and the Jews inquired, “How can this man give us his
flesh to eat?” The Lord did not explain the matter to them, but added,
verse 56, “Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, you have no life in you.”

They were looking at it in the literal sense, and did not see how they
could eat his flesh, or how the eating of it could give life. The
doctrine of transubstantiation had not yet been born, and the idea of
the bread and wine being changed, in the ceremony of consecration,
into the _real flesh_ and _blood_, so that they could eat the flesh
and drink his blood in the communion, had not yet entered into the
minds of men. Nor did our Lord mean any such thing, but _he himself_,
who came down from heaven, is that bread of life which if a man shall
eat he shall never die. But the _eating_ is not literal, any more than
the _bread_ is literal or the flesh. We partake of that bread, or of
him who came down from heaven by hearing of him, believing on him, and
being united with him. In becoming his disciples, learning of him and
following him in all things, we eat or partake of that bread, or of him
who is the way, and the truth and the life.

He proceeds, “He who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life; and I will raise him up at the last day.” See verse 54. He who
believes on him, receives him, follows him, loves him and obeys him,
in the sense he intended, eats his flesh and drinks his blood; but not
in the communion any more than in the other parts of his teaching, or
other appointments. In coming to Christ, and becoming his disciples, we
are made partakers of him, of “the divine nature,” and our salvation
is in him. “My flesh is food indeed,” says he, “and my blood is drink
indeed. He who eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
in him.” Following him a little further on, verse 57, he says, “As the
living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats
_me_, even he shall live by me. This is the bread that came down from
heaven; not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead; he who eats
this bread shall live forever.” See verse 58. The eating is partaking
of Christ, the bread that came down from heaven; this is done by faith,
in receiving, following and obeying him; doing his commandments, that
we may enter by the gates into the city, and have a right to the tree
of life.




CHURCH ORGANIZATION.


Men may talk of the power of those large combinations, governed by a
few leading spirits or _one_ leading spirit as the case may be, where
_office_ and not _character_ or _ability_ gives power; but while such
an arrangement may create in its adherents a desire for office, to
give them influence and authority, they will neglect the purity and
excellence of good _character_ and _ability_, which are the only things
which should give any one respect and influence among the people of
God. But, in the absence of such character and ability as will give a
man influence and power among the followers of Jesus Christ, some may
become enraged because we do not form some kind of an organization that
will give the desired power by virtue of an _office_. Such a power as
this we hope never to see established in the church of God. If men wish
power and influence let them act in such a manner as will be worthy of,
and command them; and then they will know how to _use_, and not _abuse_
them.

Our present organization, little as some men seem to think of it, has
maintained a general state of union, and has made a concentrated effort
for the conversion of the world, unequalled by any body of people about
us. While other religious bodies have been divided and distracted by
the frivolous worldly questions of our times, we, as a people, stand
firm and unshaken, under the guidance of Him who gave us both a natural
and a religious being.

Some one will inquire, what do you plead for? or what do you vindicate?
It will be said; it is of no use to be exciting fearful apprehensions,
and at the same time setting forth nothing tangible. We will,
therefore, make an effort to set out something definite and tangible.

1st. We do not want any general combination, in the form of an
Association, Conference, Synod or Council, to govern the churches.

2d. We do not want any such body of men to decide who shall be our
ministers, or how they shall be supported.

3d. We do not want any such body of men to decide who shall be our
publishers.

4th. Every congregation properly organized, has the right to govern
its own members, either in itself, or by calling to its assistance
neighboring churches and evangelists.

5th. All letters of commendation, or sentences of condemnation, depend
wholly for their authority and influence with those to whom they may
be presented, upon the intelligence and moral worth of the body whence
they emanated. Hence a minister “whose praise is in all the churches,”
and who may be “chosen of the churches,” to perform any certain
mission, must have more weight and influence among the people where he
goes, than he who is destitute of such commendation.

6th. We want voluntary organizations for missionary purposes, the
distribution of bibles, tracts, books, etc., etc., all of which we have
a right to form in any way which we may conceive most conducive to the
interests of the Redeemer’s cause.




THE CHRISTIAN MINISTRY.


The Church of Christ was not made for the preachers, but the preachers
of Christ were made for the world and the church. The Church of
Christ does not belong to the preachers of Christ—it is not _their_
property—but they belong to the church—are _its_ property. The
church is not the servant of the preachers, but preachers of Christ
are servants of the churches. The Church of Christ is not called and
sent by preachers, but preachers are called and sent by the church.
Preachers in the kingdom of Christ are no more dignitaries, kings,
and priests, than any other members. They are the Lord’s instruments,
put forth through the church to do his work, and mighty instruments
too, while the Lord is with them, but the poorest, most useless and
miserable creatures on this earth when forsaken of God. Or, in other
words, when they are doing _the Lord’s work_, with an eye single to his
glory, there are no such instruments for good among men; but when they
become selfish, engage simply in their _own work_, or that which they
can turn to their own personal aggrandizement, their usefulness ceases,
and they are dead weights upon the cause. Our Lord’s own life is the
model of all perfection in human character, both public and private.
No community need look for any permanent good from any preacher who
does not imitate the character of his Lord and Master. He may be much
of a gentleman, very fine, pleasant and interesting to worldly-minded
persons, and not do any thing or say any thing that would remind
any one of the Savior of the world. But to come under the name of a
preacher of Christ, a disciple of Christ, and not be like him, not make
men think of him, love him, and desire to come to him, is a deception
upon the church and the world.




PROGRESSING BACKWARD.


If some of the movements now on foot are to be tolerated, there
is no reason for our existence as a body. If we want organs,
gorgeous temples, Catharine wheels, clerical orders, superior
courts, organizations and numerous societies, aside from the local
congregations of the Lord, the Pope can supply any demand for any or
all of these. If there are “means of grace,” he is rich in means. He
can furnish them an outlet for their overwhelming benevolence in the
innumerable channels he has opened. If the great problem is how to
reach the pockets of the people and build expensive temples, put up
tall spires and chimes of bells, he has solved it. He has swarms of
men, and women, too, doing his bidding and under fine pay, living on
the fat of the land. He has a _system_, a _plan_, an _organization_, a
grand one; the broadest one ever made by man. Here is the opening for
men who long for something of that sort. There is no use in mincing
the matter, nor in half-way measures. Why not at one bound go right
up to the grand culmination of all this kind of progress? There is no
use in trudging along behind the Pope, when a man can go to him and be
received into his embrace at once.

What a farce for men to be talking of _progress, going on to
perfection, keeping up with the age_, etc., etc., when they are giving
up and retrograding from the grandest progress possible to men—the
progress up to the ground consecrated by the feet of the apostles and
first Christians. Talk of progress when going back to the feeble and
exploded schemes of sectarians and patronizing their shallow devices!
Progress, indeed, to turn away from the holy gospel, the power of
God to salvation, and scheme to catch people and draw them in by the
blandishments of fine houses, theatrical, musical shows and clerical
pretentions! No, brethren, all this is empty and powerless for good,
and yielding up to the influences of hardness of heart, and aiding
on that overwhelming avalanche of unbelief now coming upon us. We
must stand by our Lord and the simplicity of the gospel, its faith
and practice, worship and discipline. We can defend and maintain the
gracious system of mercy and grace given by our Lord, in its own native
purity, but we can maintain nothing else. There must be no wedge of
gold in the camp, no Achan. We must offer no strange fires on God’s
altar. The Lord directs our minds and hearts and keep us in the love of
Christ. We long to see those who trouble us cease to give pain to the
hearts of the friends of the Lord; to learn to be happy themselves and
make others happy.




NO DIVISION CAN COME.


No _general division_ can come. The main ground we occupy precludes
the idea of any _general division_. A vain man, or a bad man, may
occasionally scatter a flock, tear up a church and ruin it. But, then,
such a man will soon find his level and come to nothing, or become
surrounded by influences strong enough to control him. There is no
machinery of which he can get hold to produce a general division, nor
is there any place where an entering-wedge can be introduced to rive us
asunder.

No man can depart from the doctrine sufficiently to produce a division,
without losing his influence, so that he will have no power to do
anything more than lead off an insignificant faction, such as will
die out in a short time. Take any one of the elements now annoying
us, and tell us how a general division can grow out of it. You will
see that it can not be done. Take, for instance, the question about
evangelizing and the different methods insisted on, and inquire how we
can divide on it. One man is for this plan or that, and goes for it.
Another man is not for this plan or that, and goes against it. The one
for it, works for it, and the other does not. After a little space the
difference will wear out, and they will fall into the same channel and
work together. Different schemes will be tried, found inefficient and
useless, and be abandoned. After the brethren have time to mature the
matter they will come round to the right ground and go on in harmony.
Unscriptural things will be discarded, impracticable things will prove
failures, and shallow things will be treated with contempt. Men that
are unlovely, of bad spirit, spiteful and revengeful, will soon develop
themselves to the satisfaction of all. True men—men of faith and love
and zeal—will go on and work where the Lord shall open the way for
them; not for man, nor to please man, but for the Lord, and to please
the Lord, and the work will go on. Men that will not work, that have
no work in them, but want large pay, will seek fat places, and get
them, if they can, and if they can not, croak about our lack of system,
disorder, want of organization and the like, pine away and vanish out
of sight.

But may we not have a general division about the organ? Not at all.
We have none among us that will exclude us if we will not _fellowship
the organ_. This is all the difficulty there is. Some of us will not
_worship with the organ_ nor _fellowship it_. Will not that divide us?
Not at all. Those who would rather have their organ in their worship,
than those who will not, and can not worship with it, _will have it_,
and let those who can not worship with it, _stay away_. Those who can
not worship with it will seek some place where they can worship without
it, and worship as they know to be according to Scripture. They know
this to be safe.




SOME THINGS CAN NOT BE SETTLED.


We once acted on a committee with several others, heard testimony and
arguments for a week, and had the parties bound in writing to abide
the decision of the committee. When the decision was made the parties
acquiesced in it, shook hands over it, and we prayed over them and were
all happy. But in a short time, we do not remember whether a week or a
month, the whole matter was thrown aside and the parties stood as they
did before. Our prayerful and patient work all went for nothing.

When brethren become alienated they frequently do not want to settle
their difficulties, but to get an advantage over an opposing party. No
court of appeal nor anything we can say will reconcile them. If we,
in any part of the affair, agree with them, they _there_ agree with
us; but if we in any part of it differ from them they _there_ differ
from us. There the matter ends. Still, we will try and give a little
attention to the matters in hand.

There are cases where nothing can be done. In other words, there are
cases that can not be settled. Church members become like the man’s
rails that had been in a _crooked fence_ so long that they would not
make a _straight fence_. Church-members sometimes have been _crooked_
so long that they will not become _straight_. They continue in their
alienation so long that it becomes a kind of habit with them and food
for them. They can not do well without it.

If a church is about equally divided by a difficulty and can not
settle the matter among themselves, and will not refer the matter
to a committee, it simply _can not be settled_. A case that can not
be settled must remain _unsettled_. We answer, that in _that case_
nothing can be done. Some cases of difficulty will never be settled
in this world, and will have to be referred to the last judgment for
adjudication. It would be well, though, in such a case as stated, for
the disaffected party to consider the matter well, and see to it that
they have acted wisely and in the Spirit of the Lord in the whole
matter. On the other hand, the church party should review the whole
ground carefully, and see to it that _all they can do_ to open the
way for the disaffected party to become reconciled and brought into
the unity of the Spirit and the bond of peace _be done_. Let no stone
remain unturned, no effort untried and nothing remain undone that might
bring peace.




OUTWARD APPEARANCE.


We have made a standing arrangement for paper this year, of which the
present pamphlet is a sample, and we shall do our utmost to have the
whole volume printed in a neat and legible manner. As to _fine_ paper,
covers, etc., they are like fine clothes only necessary to encase the
bodies and souls which will not pass without them. You have, no doubt,
seen the preacher wrapped in the finest broadcloth, and a golden
chain for a watch-guard, who, after a labored effort for an hour
would only prove that he was a human frame, finely clad, but _no
preacher_. In clothing our thoughts in pamphlets, as in clothing our
persons, the proper rule should be, to have the apparel just such as
not to be noticed at all, and then the thoughts in the pamphlet or
the man himself may be seen. Let the attire be neat enough not to be
observed for its shabbiness, and plain enough not to be noticed for its
fineness, that the person in the attire may be seen. It is true, it
is desirable to have a paper printed plain and neat, but all this and
fine paper into the bargain will never make it go, if there be not some
life, spirit and power in the articles themselves.

Some men seem astonished that their publications do not circulate,
seeing that they contain such a display of the most elegant literary
taste, not seeming to be aware of the fact, that not one common reader
out of fifty ever perceives the mighty effort at all. Yet there can be
no objection to fine style. The difficulty in that class to which we
refer, is not that they write in fine style, but that there is _nothing
but the style_—neither soul, body, nor spirit.




LITTLE MATTERS.


It may seem strange that a human body, weighing one hundred and fifty
pounds, would be disturbed by a little thorn in it, not an eighth of an
inch long! But, strange as it may appear, _it is a fact_. And you can
not accustom the body to it by piercing the thorn in deeper and deeper,
till the body will become easy and comfortable; but you can in that way
produce irritation, then inflammation, then mortification, and then
death. Death has been produced in this way many times. He is no friend
to the body who continues to push the thorn in deeper and deeper, nor
is he who would excuse him in so doing, or encourage him in it. There
is but one remedy, and that is to _remove the thorn_. Even if you have
to make the wound much larger than it is, the thorn _must be removed_,
or the end will be death.

There are cases in which a thorn might be pierced into the flesh an
inch, and produce no pain or irritation; but they are cases where there
is no _life_ in the flesh. A thorn pierced into a _dead body_ will
produce no pain or irritation. A dead body has no power to resist it,
and will make no effort. This is the reason precisely that a thorn
produces no irritation or pain when pierced into certain bodies. They
are _dead bodies_. It is no indication that the body is not alive and
in healthy condition, to find it resisting foreign matter, and making
an effort to remove obstructions; but when it can not do this, the body
must die. It can not live and the obstruction remain, at least, only
for a short time. But who will permit even a _little thorn_ to remain
in his flesh? We care not how little it may be; it is foreign, it is
irritating, and, unless removed, will produce death.

It was a little thing for Eve to partake of the forbidden fruit. Thomas
Paine inquired, “What harm was there in eating an apple?” This is the
watchword with all the unlawful things that people desire to do. “What
harm is it?” When we worship according to Scripture we never inquire,
“What harm is it?” It is not in doubt, and calls out no such inquiry.
It is not under any suspicion. To worship according to Scripture
is manifestly right. Why should we lag in anything in doubt, under
suspicion, and repulsive to any portion of the body, when we have a
divinely-prescribed worship held in no doubt?

It was a little thing for Achan to take a Babylonish garment, some
silver, and a wedge of gold, and secrete them in his tent; but when he
came to confess, it was not a little matter.

He said: “I have sinned against the Lord God of Israel.” On account
of this _little matter_, three thousand men were defeated, and Israel
disgraced. “Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the Lord shall
trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones.” Here
is a fine sample of little matters, and of troubling the people of God
with little matters. See Joshua vii. 19-26.

It was a little matter for Uzza to “put forth his hand to hold the
ark;” but he fell dead on account of it. See 1 Chron. xiii. 9. He
appeared to have been friendly to the ark, sincere, etc., but his
touching the ark brought death. What harm was there in touching the
ark? It did not injure it. It may be that he saved it from falling. But
he violated the law of God. He incurred the anger of God.

What became of them who offered strange fire on God’s altar? See Lev.
x.: “And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his
censer, and put fire therein, and put incense thereon, and offered
strange fire before the Lord, which he commanded them not. And there
went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before
the Lord.” That was a little matter; only slightly tampering with the
worship; simply introducing a new element, which the Lord commanded
them not, or did not command them. It is a fearful thing to tamper with
the worship.

In one word: “If _every transgression_ and disobedience received a
just recompense of reward,” in God’s dealings with men in former ages,
how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? If God allowed
no departures in the typical worship, why should we assume that he
will permit it in the worship typified? If everything had to be done
according to the patterns given to Moses in the typical dispensation,
how can any man infer that we may depart from the substance? We had
better take heed now. We may not add any thing, nor take any away from
what the Lord gave. We may not preach any other gospel, or even pervert
the gospel of Christ.

It was a little matter to charge that Jesus had “an unclean spirit,”
but those who did it sinned against the Holy Spirit, and are in danger
of “eternal damnation.”

It was a little matter for Ananias and Sapphira to lie about the price
of their possessions, but it was soon followed by a judgment from the
Lord.

It was a little matter for the Corinthians to get up a feast when they
met to worship, but on account of it many were sickly, weakly, and some
had died.

Some of the little matters now among us will be found sufficient to
stop the ark of God, and cause more than three thousand to be defeated.
If Moses were to address some of our men, he would say to them, as
he did to Aaron, “What hath this people done to thee that thou hast
brought so great a sin upon them?” or as Joshua said to Achan: “Why
hast thou troubled us? The Lord shall trouble thee this day.” Let us
hear and live.




ONE IDEA ISM.


We are asked to define what we mean by one-idea ism, and explain to
us how the universe is made up of atoms. With this request we will
cheerfully comply. It is to be carried away with one idea. The idea may
be a good one, or it may not; but one-ideaism, is giving an idea undue
importance. A man addicted to one-ideaism, can no more cover it than a
leopard can change his spots. If he attempts to pray, he will commence
with something else as a stepping stone, regularly paving the way and
unmistakably making his way to his favorite idea. When it is put
forth and he is delivered of it he is relieved for the time being,
especially, if he finds that it annoys some one. If you call on him for
an exhortation, a sermon, or if he writes, he may wind round and round,
trace back and forward, but it will, in spite of himself, in all his
efforts to conceal it, be manifest to all, that he takes no interest in
all he is saying, only as it subserves his purpose, in paving the way
to the one idea, the center around which the whole man revolves, and
to which his entire existence is subservient. If that one idea is not
dragged in, the man is not relieved, his burden is still upon his soul,
and he is in travail waiting to be relieved.

You will see this class of men at meetings, and conventions, both
political and religious, without the most distant idea of promoting
the objects of the meeting, convention, etc., as the case may be, but
with no higher aim than introducing their idea to notice, making the
meeting an engine, and men, met under other obligations, and with the
ostensible object of the meeting before them, instruments to carry
the _pet idea_ on the high road to fame. Sometimes this class of men,
because other men have other objects in view, are actually engaged in
some good and great work, have not time, will not be annoyed nor turned
aside to hear them nor dispute with them; or, if they do, give them but
a passing notice—think all the world afraid of them. But they need
have no fears on this score. An idea that has not force enough to burst
its way forth in the world in defiance of all fogies and conservatives,
would die a natural death, if the parent of it could get some one to
bring it forth.




MINISTERING ANGELS.


We have much in the present day on the spiritual care which the divine
Father exercises over his creatures in this world. We consider it clear
that God has angels who guard, protect, and take care of that portion
of the human family which put their trust in him. That the first
Christians believed that a good man had an angel, is clear, from Acts
xii. 15. When the Apostle Peter was delivered from prison by a miracle,
and his voice was heard at the gate, where several disciples were
collected, they could not believe it was him, but said, “_It is his
angel_.”

Speaking of his disciples, the Lord said, “In heaven _their angels_ do
always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.” Mat. xviii.
10. This shows clearly that the disciples of Christ have angels.
Paul says, “But to which of the angel said he at any time, sit on my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? _Are they not
all ministering spirits_, sent forth to minister for them who shall
be heirs of salvation?” The heirs of salvation then have ministering
angels, who wait upon them continually, and at the same time behold the
face of God in heaven.

Some men seem perplexed to see the use of prayer, unless God operates
upon the hearts of christians by an abstract spirit; but if the ever
blessed Father keeps ministering angels about them as a mighty wall, and
thus guards, protects and preserves them, it would seem to involve the
same necessity for prayer, that would be involved if he should do it
any other way. Why should it not? With us, we consider ourselves under
the same obligations, should God be pleased to preserve us in one way,
that we would be, should he do it in another. Not only so, but the man
of God ought to have confidence enough in God to believe he will answer
any petition asked, according to his will, whether he has _told us or
not_.




NO SIDE STRUCTURE.


We can not recognize the _side institution_, nor the officers in it,
as neither the one nor the other is known to the oracles of God, or to
history for ages after the sacred canon was complete. What is the use
to talk of a church of which there is not a trace in the volume of God,
nor in anything written for hundreds of years after the apostles? There
is not a trace of Romanism, of a pope, cardinal or archbishop in the
Bible, except in the prophecies that foretell the apostasy, nor in any
other writing of the first three centuries. Nor is there any account of
any of the others we have mentioned for a much greater length of time.

We find “the body of Christ,” “the kingdom of God,” and “the Church
of God,” spoken of in Scripture. The Lord says, “On this rock I will
build my church.” Here is something clear and definite. We can bring
this “body” before us, this “kingdom,” or “church,” be members of it,
confine our minds and hearts to it; keep it and all its grand interest
in view, and not some _side structure, imitation or something like it_.

The apostles and first evangelists, the overseers and deacons in the
first church, were all ministers or servants in the grand work of the
“one body,” or “the kingdom,” and not of any _side structure_. All who
are really ministers or servants of Jesus now, are in this “one body,”
“kingdom” or “church,” and devoted to its interests and growth, and not
to the building up, extending or perpetuation of any _side structure_,
under the pretext that it is like the original or any other, but for
the original itself.

All these side structures, names and laws are usurpation, and the true
ministers or servants of the kingdom, can but regard them as such, and
labor to melt them all away and put all the good material there is in
them into “God’s building,” “the temple of God,” and thus make this
material useful and acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

As to clerical airs, the peculiar cut of the coat, the white necktie,
and all other such “outward signs of inward grace,” they are the
offspring of shallowness, weakness and folly, and wholly incompatible
with the plainness, meekness and humility of Jesus and of good taste
and sense.




LIGHT WITHIN.


All the perversions, innovations and corruptions of the pure and holy
religion of Jesus Christ that have found way into it and disgraced it,
have been introduced under some pretext of doing good—some plea of a
supposed benevolent nature. In some form or other they have all claimed
to have the good of the cause in view, and in some way have put up some
kind of claim to divine authority. Some of them were introduced by good
men, with good intentions, who saw not the evil that would follow,
while others, no doubt, were introduced by “designing men.” George
Fox was probably a good man, or a man of good intentions, and, when
he talked of the “light within,” and tried to sustain his position by
Scripture, he had no idea of the evil that would follow—much less did
he design it. Though he quoted Scripture, it was not as a rule of faith
and practice; not as a system of religion, nor as supreme authority,
but merely to give currency to the theory he was laboring to introduce
and support it in the minds of the people. The leading idea in the new
theory was that the _light within_ was the guide—the unerring rule;
that it was from God, and that he who followed it was following the
will of God, the influence of the Spirit. He certainly did not intend
to turn the hearts of the people away from God and lead them to follow
the imaginations of their own hearts. He clearly designed no such
wickedness as this; but what has followed? Where has the “light within”
led his followers? It has led some of them to neglect and forsake
the word of God; to regard the Bible simply as a good book, a true
history and guide to the people of its time, but not as an authority,
a rule of faith and practice for us. It has led some of them into
Spiritualism, others into Universalism, and some, more recently, into
exciting revival, mourners’ bench-meetings, in which old members have
been trying to “get religion,” as seekers do in Methodist and other
revivals. Many of them have been led into out-and-out infidelity.
This is where the “light within” has led them. Original Quakerism has
virtually run out.

Numerous other bewildered people are seeking an evidence of pardon
and acceptance with God directly from heaven. They are trying to find
this evidence in their feelings, impressions, emotions, impulses,
sensations, dreams, some sound or voice, and not in the promise of God.
This direct or immediate evidence, in their view of it, is from the
Spirit of God and perfectly reliable. The promise of God, with them, is
the _mere word_, the _bare word_, the _mere letter_ of Scripture. They
are thus completely turned aside from the testimony of the Spirit of
God, as confirmed by the most grand and awful displays of supernatural
power, to their own imaginations, their own spirits, and as completely
perverted as if they never had received any revelation from God.

There is no teaching of the Spirit of God among men only that found
upon the pages of the Bible. Those led by the teaching of the Spirit of
God spread on the pages of the Bible are led by the Spirit of God, but
those not led by that teaching are not led by the Spirit of God at all.
They may be led by their own spirits, desires, feelings, emotions,
impressions, sensations; by men, or even the adversary, “captive at
his will;” but they are not led by the Spirit nor under his influence
at all. When they turn away from the teaching of the Spirit of God
recorded in the Bible, it matters not much to what they turn, whether
they profess to be led by the “light of nature,” so called, “the light
of reason,” “the light of conscience,” the “light within,” impressions,
feelings, emotions, sensations, by men, or the adversary, they turn
away from God, from Christ and from the Holy Spirit. They are perfectly
deluded, and, if they thus continue, they must come to ruin. God will
eventually overthrow all who turn away from him, no matter to what they
turn.

Men may claim to have the Spirit, to be led by the Spirit, talk about
the Spirit, pray about the Spirit, sing about the Spirit, and at the
same time despise the things of the Spirit, the things commanded by the
Spirit, and do despite to the work of the Spirit. Such men manifestly
have not the Spirit. All their claim to having the Spirit is an empty
and idle pretense. They are not led by the Spirit at all, but are led
in opposition to all the Spirit ever taught. Those led by the Spirit
receive what the Spirit teaches, as _found in Scripture_, believe it
and delight to follow it. It is idle for those who will not do this to
be talking about the Spirit, or the influence of the Spirit.

If any man gets an immediate evidence of pardon, it is an evidence
that comes not through the Mediator, for what comes through him is not
_immediate_, but through him as a _Medium_, or Mediator. It is a direct
revelation, not through Christ at all, and it is a _new_ revelation.
Are men receiving any _new_ revelations now? The Mormons and
Spiritualists think they are. Do others think so? We do not believe
any _new_ revelations are now being made from God. On this ground we
reject all Mormon pretensions, as well as Romish pretensions and those
of Spiritualists. Since the apostles died, and those on whom they laid
their hands died, not a miracle has been done or a revelation from God
been made. Every pretense to miracle or revelation from then till now
is an empty and idle pretense—an imposition. Since John, the Apostle,
closed the book of Revelation, with the declaration that, if any man
shall add to it, the plagues of that book shall be added to him, there
is an end of all revelation till time shall be no more.

Through Christ, God made a _final_ revelation, to which nothing is to
be added, and from which nothing is to be taken. The will of God is
in that concerning man, and if we desire to know the mind of God we
must consult that revelation. The restlessness of man is wonderful. He
is not willing to be limited even to the revelation God has made, the
testimony God has given concerning his Son, and the unfailing promise
of God for assurance of acceptance with him. But this is the highest
and the only assurance we have or can have, in this world. When God
made the promise, that we might have strong consolation, he confirmed
it by an oath. We come to God by _faith_ and not by _sight_; we walk by
_faith_ and not by _sight_; enjoy God, and Christ and the Holy Spirit
by _faith_ and not by _sight_. So we enjoy the remission of sins and
acceptance with God by _faith_ and not by _sight_. “He that believeth
and is baptized _shall be saved_,” said the Lord, among the last words
he uttered before he ascended to heaven. Men who will not rely on that
promise—on the words _shall be saved_, or _shall be pardoned_—would
not believe though one would rise from the dead. It is not baptism such
need; it is _faith_. They are not fit subjects for baptism. They must
remember the condition, “He that _believeth_.” They can not come to God
without _faith_. “Without faith it is impossible to please him.”




BE FIRM IN THE RIGHT.


If it is wiser to obey God than man, if an infallible law is better
than a fallible, if a perfect law is better than an imperfect one, if
a divine law is better than a human, if the authority of God is better
than the authority of man, if the word of the Living God is better than
a human creed, if the infallible teachings of inspiration are better
than uninspired human creeds, if the teachings of the Holy Spirit of
God are a safer guide to heaven than the teachings of erring men, if
God should govern in preference to man, we are right, and our opposers
wrong, on this transcendent point, and it is our duty to God and our
fellow-creatures, that we maintain with manly zeal and fortitude that
which is so manifestly and self-evidently the will of God. We never can
falter. We have no ground to doubt or fear; but if we shrink or
hesitate, it must be manifest indifference. While we hope, then, for
the blessing of God upon us, and call upon God for his mercy, let us
remember our fealty to him, and maintain our integrity to the day of
his coming.




THE BIBLE WILL SAVE THE WORLD.


The Bible contains the true religion, or there is none. There is light
in the Bible to save the world, or the world is lost. Our only choice
is between the Bible and nothing. Judaism is abolished. Mohammedanism
has no claims in internal merit or external evidence. The fruits of all
Paganism show that it is evil, and only evil, continually. Infidelity
has nothing for the world. While it would take Christianity from us, it
has nothing to propose. It is no system—no doctrine—teaches nothing
and defends nothing. Its only province is to stand and deny. It finds
fault with everything, starts doubts, destroys confidence, fills the
world with fears, and spreads an eternal gloom over the prospects and
hopes of all nations. Reason and the light of nature have been tried
longer and more effectually than any system in the world. At least four
thousand years have the pagan nations been trying what they could do
for our race without a revelation from God. In all the experiments yet
made, with no guide but reason and the light of nature, the tendency
has been downward. Deterioration has been the universal result, without
the light of the Bible. We then, cling to the Bible, and the religion
it reveals, as the only hope of the world. If it fails, all must fail,
and all must be lost. But it is folly of the most stupid order to speak
of the Bible failing. Its Author is emphatically _the friend of man_.
Its holy lessons are all for our good. All who have been led by it, are
thankful they ever knew it. It has never deceived one or misled one. No
one has ever lamented being led by it. The more solemn and affecting
the circumstances around us, and the greater the trials in which we are
placed, the more comforting and precious are its holy consolations to
the soul. It encourages all that is good; discourages and condemns all
that is evil. It is our guide and comfort through the journey of life;
nor does it fail when we are sinking in death. No one who believed
it before, in a dying hour denies and repudiates the Bible. But many
determined infidels have recanted and repudiated their infidelity when
sinking into the eternal state. That which they talked in health, that
which dwelt upon their tongues in their mad career through life, they
themselves condemned, in the most awful and solemn moments of life,
and with their dying lips repudiated. How shameful and preposterous,
that a man should live such a life of folly and inconsistency as to
be compelled in his dying moments to condemn all his past life, with
all the sentiments he had cherished and inculcated, and warn all men
against them!




NOT RECEIVING THE REFORMATION, BUT CHRIST.


The question is not whether men will receive us, our doctrines, our
views, our church, or “the Reformation,” or “Reformation doctrines”
but whether they will receive him whom the Father hath sent, love him,
follow him, place themselves under him, obey him, and trust in him
forever. He is the center of all union, all love, and all piety. Upon
him, all who love him, have received him and desire to follow him,
being led by his voice, may unite. Having received him, been identified
with him, as a matter of course, we receive all who have been received
by him, are united with and love them, as members of the same family.
When we speak of union, the question is not about receiving men, nor
their views, but whether we can agree upon a leader, head, lawgiver
or king. Jesus is the true Light that enlightens every man that comes
into the world. He is the only divinely authorized head, lawgiver and
leader. The question we have to urge upon men, is whether they will
come under him. If they will, they should proceed, like young Saul,
to ascertain of him, what he requires of them, before they can be
received, pardoned and saved by him. When they learn this of him, and
come to him, in the way he has appointed, or by doing what he requires,
they are received by him, united with him and with all that belong to
him, and, as long as they continue to love and obey him, no adverse
power can separate them from him. He is our rock, the rock of our
salvation—the foundation which God has laid—for union in “one _new_
man,” or one new church, one “building of God,” one “house of God,” in
which dwells the “one spirit,” given by the “one Lord.”

Here upon the one rock—one foundation, which is Christ—in the one
building or temple, in Christ, where all spiritual blessings are found,
all the good, the pure and holy, may strike hands, unite, live in holy
fellowship, while they continue in this world of sorrow and affliction,
and after, be received up into glory, to dwell with their Lord and
the holy society of the redeemed forever. Brethren, look at the vast
numbers we have gathered into the one fold, and take fresh courage, and
let us enter upon the work with spirit and might for another year.




LIFTED ABOVE SECTS AND PARTIES.


The men who are meditating on union are now on trial, being put to
the test, and will be compelled to show where they stand. Those who
love union among christians more than denominationalism will sacrifice
the denomination for union, but those who love denominationalism
more than union will sacrifice union for the denomination. The union
of the people of God is from heaven; the denomination is from man.
The denomination is the party, sect, faction. The body of Christ, or
kingdom of God, is no sect, party or denomination. It is as broad
as the dominion of King Jesus. It is above all sects, parties and
denominations. The man that rises so as to grasp the kingdom of God in
his mind, ascends far above all sects, parties and denominations; up
to the throne and Him who sits on the throne; to the Supreme Majesty
of heaven and earth. He loves the King above all kings and potentates,
and loves the kingdom of God above all the kingdoms and empires of the
world, and supremely above all parties, sects or denominations. We love
no denomination, nor denominationalism, but love the people involved
in the denomination; and while we desire to see the denomination
literally abolished, wiped out, we desire to save the kingdom of God,
the union of the people of God, and the people themselves. This can be
done if the people will have it so. But if they love the sect, party or
denomination more than the Church of God, or the body of Christ, they
will keep an eye to the sect, party or denomination; to their little
side institutions of human device; every one of which originated with
_men_, and without one scrap of _divine authority_; instead of rising
to the grand and glorious institution ordained of God, with the Lord
for its head, and the law of God for the rule of its faith and practice.




MAKING THE BIBLE SUPPORT HUMAN SYSTEMS.


There can be no apology for a man who knows what the truth is, what the
doctrine of Christ is, what christianity is, who will use it merely
as a proof to sustain, prove, and impose something else upon himself
and others, for he might just as easily have received the truth, the
doctrine of Christ, christianity itself, enjoyed it, and been saved
by it, as to have trifled with it, in trying to prove something else
by it. But if a man does not know what the truth is, the doctrine
of Christ, christianity is, and adopts something else, he is simply
guessing at it, and is not to be relied upon. He has no foundation.

We are as well convinced, as we are that there is a glorious heaven
for the righteous, and a hell for the wicked, that no man now living,
who knows what the Lord’s truth is, what the gospel of Christ is, what
christianity is, and what the Bible is, and has appealed to it to
sustain something else, and now continues so to appeal to it, could, if
his life were at stake, give a good reason why he did not receive the
truth itself, the gospel, christianity, the Bible itself, rely upon it
as his only hope for life, his only guide, as the only divine system,
the only divine institution, in the place of perverting its glorious
influence and power to sustain and prop up something else. And we are
equally certain, that no man can answer to God, when the actions of all
men shall be spread out in the last judgment, for such a course. If
christianity is a system, if it is a divine institution, if it is the
religion of Jesus Christ, if it is from God, and now binding upon the
human family, as almost all the religious parties of these times admit,
and as can not be denied, the sin of departing from it is great enough;
but to have the assurance to try to make it sanction any other system,
to testify in support of any other, to try to divert its influence,
power, and authority from its own work, to sustain and prop up some
human system not mentioned in it, when it has expressly, under the
most fearful and awful penalty, forbidden any perversion, addition, or
subtraction, is a species of daring and aggression upon the institution
of heaven and government of God, such as one would suppose no believer
in the Bible would risk. Still it is done—almost daily done, in the
pulpits all over the land; and those who will not do it, who condemn
it, who receive the Bible, christianity, the gospel, the religion
of Jesus Christ, all that God has revealed to man—all that has the
name of God upon it, keep it distinct from every thing else, and will
have nothing more, are opposed everywhere, sneered at and branded as
_heretics_. Be it so. We look not to man for reward. We look not to
sectarian parties to honor God, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Bible,
christianity, or the gospel. We do not expect them, as parties, to come
to the Bible, unless to draw support for their own schemes. But we
regard not this; we know we are right; and it is not the great number
that will stand, but those who are right. “Truth is mighty above all
things, and will prevail.” Brethren, push on the war, on this great
question. The Bible will prevail in the end. Its enemies will all fail.




PIONEERS, SUPPORT, ETC.


The pioneer men in this country felled the trees, cleared away the
forests, built their houses and barns, and made a living. Many of their
sons can not make a living with the farm and all the balance fitted
to their hand. In the same way, the first preachers went out at their
own expense, turned the people to God and built up churches, and now
the preachers, with their fine salaries, houses in which to meet,
and everything prepared to hand, are not accomplishing as much, in
proportion to their number and ability. Why is this? Is it because they
_can not_? Not at all. It is because they are not as _devoted_. They
are not as _enterprising_. They are not as _industrious_. They are not
as _self-sacrificing_.

Those old preachers needed no “innocent amusements,” “innocent games,”
“healthful exercises,” “pastime,” “social dance,” “croquet,” etc.,
etc. They knew nothing of _torpid liver_, _indigestion_, _nervous
prostration_, etc., etc. Those afflictions were left for a later class.
They obtained plenty of healthful exercise in clearing off, breaking
and cultivating their new land, in their long rides on horseback, or
trips on foot, and faithfully preaching, and the Lord blessed them. The
results of their labor and sacrifices are seen all over this country.
They looked after the children of God and _cared for them_; not with
this new kind of _care for money_; not only the money of the _living_,
but arranging to get the money of the _dead_; but they cared for _men_;
watched for _their souls_, as those who shall give an account.

We do not want to say one word in this connection, nor any other, that
shall be the means of cutting off one penny of support received by any
good preacher who is faithfully doing the work of an evangelist, but
would add to the support of many such men whose support is inadequate;
and as to mercenary and avaricious men in the ministry, and we trust
there are but few of them, we have learned better than to waste our ink
on them. We are writing for the good of the cause, and we rejoice to
believe that we have the men, an extended body of them, able ministers
of the gospel, who are devoted to the work, and willing to do anything
in their power to advance the cause. These are reading, studying, and
ready to listen to anything that will advance the cause. To these men
we must look, and on them, as the agents under God, we must depend;
we must encourage their hearts, strengthen their hands and give them
support. To these men we appeal and entreat them, in view of all that
is dear to humanity; in view of the suffering Savior, and lost man; in
view of their own children and the children of others, as well as the
good of the world at large, to go into the field with a determination
to preach the gospel of the grace of God; go everywhere, in the name of
the Lord, where the people will listen to a discourse concerning Jesus
and the resurrection, and preach the unsearchable riches of Christ;
make all men see and turn them to God. Do not wait for a _call_, but
_go_; do not wait for some certain promise of support, but trust to the
promises of God; go in faith; trust in God; sow the good seed of the
kingdom, the word of God, that it may fall into good and honest hearts
and bring forth much fruit. Put in every sermon possible; preach to
every one who will hear; preach because you love God and man, and
desire to save man from ruin, and because you love to preach; because
the Lord commands it, and the God of peace will be with you, care and
provide for you.




UNIVERSALISM.


We heard of a man who had heard Universalists occasionally, and gave
them something when they were making contributions for their preachers.
A preacher, who made one of his finest efforts to prove that all will
be saved, inquired of him how he liked his argument. The man replied,
“I did not like it at all.” The preacher, disappointed, said: “You
believe our doctrine?” The man replied: “I do; but you tried to prove
it by the Bible, and all intelligent people know that the Bible is
against us from one side to the other. The way I prove it is this: _I
deny the Bible, and then prove it by reason_.” This is certainly the
more rational way. We care not who he is, nor where he comes from,
nor what his attainments may be; but the man who attempts to prove
Universalism _by the Bible_ opposes the common sense of mankind and the
clearest language ever written. The man who rejects the Bible out and
out, and is wandering in the darkness of unbelief, in the vagaries
of those who reject the wisdom of God, might, in his philosophical
speculations, try to show that all men would be saved, with at
least some show of plausibility possibly; but there is not only no
plausibility in anything that can be adduced from the Bible to show
that all men will be saved, but clear statements of the Bible can not
be true and all men be saved. It cannot be true that those “who believe
not the Son shall _not see life_,” and that all men shall be saved.
It can not be true, as stated in Scripture, that “these” (the wicked)
“shall go away into everlasting punishment,” and _all men be saved_.

The man who affirms that those _who die in their sins_ shall be wholly
and happy in heaven contradicts the clearest utterances of Scripture.
When time shall end and God shall exclaim, “He that is filthy, let him
be filthy still,” there will be no more repentance; yet some will be
_filthy_—_unsound_.

Universalism had its day in this country; has run its course and is
going by. There is not one-tenth as much of it in this country as
there was thirty years ago. There is no argument of consequence about
it any more. The only thing wanting to show what it is, will appear
anywhere when they undertake to form churches, keep up Sunday-schools,
keep up prayer-meetings, meet regularly on the first day of the week
and worship. Let them undertake to enforce the clear requirements of
Scripture on their people, and they will soon get a lesson. They will
soon explain that _all will be saved_, and they will find that they
will have no use for baptism, the Lord’s Supper, prayer-meetings, nor
any regular worship.

It will not do to read, “He who believes not _shall be saved_;” “He
who believes not the Son _shall see life_;” “The wrath of God _shall
not abide on him_;” “If you believe not that I am he, you _shall
not die in your sins_;” “Where I am _you shall come_;” “These” (the
wicked) “_shall not_ go away into everlasting punishment;” “The beast
and the false prophets _shall not_ be tormented day and night forever
and ever;” “He who shall sin against the Holy Spirit shall not be in
danger of eternal damnation,” etc., etc. The man who denies his Bible
first, and then starts out to prove that all will be saved from some
other source, is a much more sensible man than the man that undertakes
to prove it from the Bible. Whatever the Bible may mean besides, it
does not mean Universalism. The man who holds and undertakes to prove
Universalism has no use for a Bible, unless it be to show his skill in
getting round the clearest things ever written.




SUPPORT WORKERS.


The brethren know that men cannot devote their lives to the work of
evangelizing without support, and they will give the support, and do
it much more freely where they can see the work done, than where they
can _see no work done_. The preachers in the field doing the work are
receiving the main support given, and ought to receive it. The men not
in the field, and that will not go into the field, ought not to receive
the support. The brethren are not in the way of sending it to them.

We hope the preachers generally will see what is being done by those
in the work, go out and participate in the heavenly work, that they,
too, when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, may have a crown of glory
that fades not away. How can men with the love of God in them see their
fellow-creatures perishing, and not be inspired with a zeal to go forth
and gather them into the kingdom of God? Look at the tremendous cloud
of darkness over the minds of the people, and then inquire can a man
who has the light be excusable unless he uses the means the Lord has
put in his power for the enlightenment of the world. No, we can not be
excusable; the love of Christ constrains us; the value of the souls of
men urges, and the example of all the ancient worthies impels us to go
into the great harvest and help to reap it down.




RECKLESS TWADDLE.


The following purports to be taken from one of Moody’s sermons, and is
reported in the _Baptist Union_:

If I thought that baptism was God’s way of saving men, I’d give up
preaching, borrow a pail and go round the streets baptizing every one
I met, and if they wouldn’t let me do it, I’d catch them asleep and
baptize any way. He says, “Ye must be born again.”

It is a wonderful humiliation to be compelled to admit that this
undignified, irreverent and reckless language is from the lips of a man
probably at this time attracting as much attention as any man in the
world, as a preacher, or it may be more. It is mortifying in a high
degree to be convinced that the state of the public mind is such that a
man like this is caressed, lauded and admired by the multitude.

It is no small work to enlighten the people of the world. We have
gained the right of private judgment, private interpretation of the
Scriptures, the liberty of speech and of the press; and we have the
Bible, translated into our own language, in almost every house; and
we have our system of free schools and universal education. But still
there is a premium for ignorance.

Moody with his commonplace talks, and Sankey with his songs, call
out greater crowds and have more admirers than the most profound
Bible instructor in the world. What reverence has he for the Lord,
who ordained baptism and submitted to it himself, “was baptized of
John in Jordan,” after saying, “Thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness,” and over whom the heavens parted as he rose from his
baptism, and on whom the Spirit descended, and to whom the Almighty
Father said, “Thou art my Son, the beloved in whom I am well pleased?”
What appreciation has he, or what respect for our Lord’s commission,
in which he has the preaching of the gospel, the belief of it, the
repentance, the baptism and salvation all connected together, when he
talks of giving up preaching and borrowing a pail and going round the
streets baptizing every one he met? What does he know or care about
what baptism is? He may find the untaught multitudes who will gaze
at him and admire such irreverent manifestations of ignorance, want
of piety and dignity, mingled with such low slang as we find in the
language quoted above, and he may find plenty of thoughtless people who
will be pleased with such unworthy flings at things which he does not
understand, and which he perverts and misapplies. But there are many
people in this country who can not be gulled in any such style. Low
slang is not preaching Jesus nor his gospel, nor is misrepresentation
or perverting Scripture preaching Jesus.

If he has our Lord’s commission, and ever reads it, he knows or ought
to know, that the same commission has in it the preaching of the
gospel, the believing, repenting, baptism and salvation. The preaching,
believing, repentance, baptism and salvation all go together; and if
he has intelligence enough to preach at all acceptably to the Lord, he
knows that no people in this country think that baptizing is of any
value, without being preceded by the preaching of the gospel and the
faith, unless among those who profess to baptize infants. They did not
understand him to make this fling at them, or they would soon have
depleted his audience.

Moody and Sankey have the clear Scriptures before them, giving an
account of inquiring persons coming to the apostles inquiring the way
of salvation, and the plain answers giving the apostolic way, and
they ignore these instructions—keep them out of sight. They have the
answers of the apostles showing them the way, and they have refused to
even read these Scriptures, or to let the people know what the way was,
as set forth by the apostles. For this they will give an account. They
ignored it, evaded it, and avoided it. They neither enter the kingdom
themselves nor will they permit those who would enter.

Before we lay down our pen, we must refer Moody and Sankey, with some
others, to a lesson Paul once taught a man, in view of a transaction no
worse than the uttering the words quoted from Moody, at the beginning
of this article. The man with whom Paul dealt, was simply trying to
turn the deputy away from the faith. The deputy was by name, Sergius
Paulus. When he did this, Saul (who is called Paul) filled with the
Holy Spirit, set his eyes on him, and said, “O full of all subtlety and
all mischief, you child of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness,
will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? And now
behold, the hand of the Lord is upon you, and you shall be blind, not
seeing the sun for a season. And immediately there fell on him a mist
and a darkness; and he went about seeking some one to lead him by the
hand. Then the deputy, when he saw what was done, believed, being
astonished at the doctrine of the Lord”. Acts xiii. 9-12.

It is a most fearful thing to pervert the right ways of the Lord—to
try to turn any one away from the faith, or to put asunder that which
God has joined together, and which he forbids man to put asunder.

In the last commission, the only authority for all gospel preaching,
the Lord has joined together, preaching the gospel, believing the
gospel, repentance, baptism and salvation, or pardon of sins, and no
man can part these asunder, except at the peril of his soul. Is it
possible that any man can fail to see that no man can be, in the true
sense, a preacher of Jesus and ignore any part of this commission, or
any part of the way of salvation, as set forth by the apostles under
this commission?




THE KIND OF PREACHING REQUIRED.


In the same way, insipid preaching about sweet birds and sweet flowers,
plants and stars, etc., etc., appears to have streaks of light in it,
but after it is over, the darkness appears greater than before. No
gospel light is shed forth, no truth of weight and importance in the
salvation of man brought forth or enforced; no obedience is enjoined
and no hope is inspired. No Felix trembles. Nothing is said about the
preaching, unless it be that “it was splendid,” and “I do love to hear
him so much;” “It was very fine,” etc. But, put the question, What
did you learn? and silence would reign. This kind of thing may please
people who do not intend to hear the gospel, or who, in the language
of Scripture, “Turn away their ears from the truth;” but we must have
something different from this, something more tangible, intelligible
and impressive to save men. We must have something more than mere
vaporing.

We must have “first principles,” as they are now styling _the gospel_,
and have them in profusion. We must have them for the instruction of
the vast numbers who have been brought in without understanding them,
and who must understand them before they can be intelligent christians,
and we must have them for the multitudes who have never been brought to
God. Somehow, from some source, we have a few among us who are styling
the gospel “first principles,” and then insist that we must leave the
first principles. Those who are in the world must be converted, brought
to God, and to this end they must have the gospel, no matter if men
and the adversary do call it “first principles.” The right way for
those who have never begun, is to begin, and there is no right way to
begin only to begin _at the beginning_, no matter if sectarian faces do
scowl, or some worldly member of the church grumble. We must walk into
the gospel, not as if we were afraid some one would hit us in the face,
but “in full assurance of faith,” under a sense of the truth of the
gospel, and the conviction that it is good enough for anybody, and that
no excuse need be made for preaching it; the certainty that men must
hear the gospel and learn the way to God before they start at all. We
must show the people that the Bible contains a revelation from God, the
only revelation from God; that it is _complete_, _perfect_ and _final_,
so far as relates to time; that Jesus is divine; that he is all that
he is represented to be in the Bible; that he is sustained by all the
testimony necessary to convince candid people; that no man comes to the
Father but by him; that no man comes by Moses now or any other; that
the Lord Jesus is the way, the truth and the life; that the way set
forth by him is the only way to the Father.

We must not preach _about_ faith, or repentance, or baptism; but preach
_the truth_ concerning the Lord Jesus, the Christ, which, when heard,
and received into good and honest hearts, _produces_ faith that leads
to repentance, and immersion. Preaching _faith_ never made a believer,
and preaching repentance, never leads to repentance, _of itself_. In
the same way, preaching on baptism, of itself never led any man to
baptism. The great truth of all truth, that “Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of the living God,” lies at the bottom and puts all the balance in
motion. Jesus, the Anointed, full of grace and truth, is the supreme
authority. The first thing, first in order and first in importance, is
the work of bringing the Lord before men and preparing them to regard
him; to recognize his authority and become willing to follow him—be
led by him. Till this is done, it is useless to tell men what he says,
or what he commands. Men must be convinced that he has authority to
command, and that they are bound to submit to him or be rejected by him
forever.

In presenting the claims of the Lord Messiah, we must clear the way of
all rubbish, all written and unwritten traditions of men, all doctrines
and commandments of men, all rule and authority lording it over the
heritage of God; all creeds and councils of men, all religious bodies
and establishments having no divine authority; all usurpations and
encroachments on the prerogatives of the Lord Jesus; all religious
names and titles, forms and ceremonies, having no precept or example in
Scripture; all sects and sectarianism—all these must be swept away;
and the supreme and absolute authority of the Lord restored. The law of
God itself, as found on the pages of the inspired Scriptures, must be
restored to the people of God. There must be no compromise of truth
with error, the kingdom of God with any thing else, the law of God
with any other law. The law of God must be maintained as _the law_,
the supreme and absolute law, and all other religious law must be set
aside as law and repudiated. The union of the people of God must be
maintained, defended and continually advocated, as right in itself and
divinely required.

As a religious body, the work we have undertaken has not changed, but
is the same now as it was forty years ago, as manifestly right as ever.
We have undertaken to restore the gospel to the people; the ancient
order of things; the religion of Christ itself, as it came from the
Lord. We have gone up to primitive ground, apostolic ground, where the
first followers of the Lord stood, and aim to practice in all things,
as they did; have all things as they did; have all things as they
had—the faith, the practice, and the worship, without anything added
or taken away. The Lord has blessed the undertaking with most wonderful
success. From five to six hundred thousand have heard, believed and
been called together, and united on apostolic ground—made unspeakably
happy in the Lord. We have been made free, in the highest sense, from
all the trammels and fetters of men, from sins, from all error and
superstition, and are servants of the Lord.

We have now a plain work—simply the work of the Lord and no other. We
have nothing to preach but the gospel, nothing to believe but the truth
of God, nothing to do but the will of God, and nothing to hope for only
what is promised in the word of God. Our work is not new and untried,
but old, well tried, and nothing can stand before us. We have truth and
righteousness to maintain—sin and the world to oppose. We can make no
change only at our peril—no departure without losing all. We started
simply to be the people of God, and to give ourselves unreservedly
to the Lord. We can not turn away from God, from Christ, from the
gospel, from the law of God, from the Church of God and the people of
God, without utter ruin. We can not turn away from the religion of
Christ itself and not be lost. We have nothing else. Shall we, then,
hold on to our God, to our Lord Jesus the Christ, to our Bible, the
gospel and the law of God for the saints? Shall we hold on to the
entire revelation from God to man in all its parts and as a whole? Most
unequivocally the great masses among us intend, by the grace of God, to
do this.

We need not stop to count members, to see whether it will be popular or
unpopular, whether a majority are going on, or going back. Every true
man is going on, and is intending to stand with every other true man
and fight the good fight of faith. We stop not to see how many or how
few are going ahead, nor how many are turning back. We would rather
have been saved with the _few_ in the ark than lost with the _many_
who were drowned in the flood; to have been with the _few_ who crossed
Jordan than with the _many_ who fell in the wilderness, and would
rather be with the _few_ that shall find the narrow way and pass the
straight gate to the enjoyment of life, than to be with the _many_ who
tread the broad way that leads to destruction. We are now making the
record on which these great matters will turn. Let us enter the
field this year in the faith, with more determination than ever,
and push the cause at every point; stand up all along the lines of
the King’s army, every man in his place, presenting an unbroken
front to the enemy, and unitedly move forward on the opposing ranks
before us with a persistence, decision and determination that will
command respect. Encourage the true and valiant, strengthen the weak
and feeble-minded, stand by the faint-hearted and comfort them. Let
there be no sympathizers with the enemy, none scheming mutiny, none
demoralizing the forces, no deserters and no cowards. All stand firm
and true, and move on in faith, “the full assurance of faith,” with
power and courage, and the Lord of hosts will be our Lord—the King of
saints will be our King. Let all men see that we have a right cause,
and that we know _it is right_, and that we never intend to give it up,
but that we intend to fill the world with the doctrine of the cross,
make the Bible the power in this country. It is the book, the one book,
the only book, setting forth the one religion for all peoples on all
the face of the earth, and for all time. We can admit no rival to that
book, nor any other that subverts or sets it aside, but are the settled
and determined enemies to all others as _divine authority_. It is the
_supreme_ and the _absolute authority_. Rally to the book, men of God,
and stand by it. You have the book that all admit to be right. Be true
to it and show yourselves worthy of it, and the God of peace will be
with you.




WE ARE A MISSIONARY PEOPLE.


It will not do to conclude that we are not a “missionary people.” It is
useless to reason against facts. That we have risen, and, in opposition
to the established bodies of people in the different parties in this
country, successfully planted the cause in the best parts of the
country and among the most effective and intelligent people, and, in
less than two-thirds of a century, made it one of the most formidable
and powerful bodies in the land, and swelled the numbers above that of
any Protestant parties in the United States, excepting the Baptists and
Methodists, is now a _matter of fact_. This has been done and is now in
history. A people “not a missionary people,” and not an _evangelizing
people_, have never done the like of this. We are to-day going ahead
and spreading more rapidly than any people in this country that depend
on turning people to the Lord to augment their numbers. We say nothing
about a people that count their infants as members of the church, and
exclude nobody for disorder.




RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS.


The resurrection of Lazarus was like the healing of the sick, giving
sight to the blind, and other miraculous benefits, only _temporary_.
They were only restored to health in their mortal state, and liable to
be afflicted again. The resurrection of Lazarus was only his recovery
from death for the time being, and he was liable to die again. No doubt
he did die again. But Jesus rose to die no more. Death has no more
dominion over him. Those thus raised up _temporarily_, or simply raised
up to what they were before they died, were not counted where Christ
is spoken of as “the first-fruits of them that slept,” “the first-born
from the dead,” etc. They were raised to immortality and died no more.
The body was sown a mortal body, but raised immortal, or raised to die
no more.

This, we presume, is the solution of the matter, though but little
can be said, with any point, for or against it. It is, however, the
ground on which we satisfy our own mind. It is one of the matters left
a little obscure, and but one on which nothing of importance depends.
The view we take of it obviates any apparent discrepancy between the
passages above referred to. The word “begotten,” in “the first-begotten
from the dead,” should have been _born_, as the same original word is
elsewhere. A bare resurrection only raised a man to what he was before
he died, and left him as liable to death as he was before he died; but
the resurrection of Christ and those who rose after he rose was more
than this. The body was sown a mortal body, but raised immortal, or to
die no more. It was a complete and final deliverance from the grave and
from death—the final triumph over death and him who has the power of
death.




FINE CLOTHES.


A preacher pays a poor compliment to his brain when he tries to attract
public attention, as a _preacher_, with fine clothes. A dancing master
can vie with him in that line, whether the fine clothes are paid for
or not. In the same way the preacher that must have a gorgeous temple,
like Romanists and pagans, to attract the people and draw them out,
and his choir of singers and organ, to discourse music for the saints,
pays a poor compliment to his brain and his ability as a preacher,
and a poorer compliment to the worshippers who have to be thus _drawn
out_. It is virtually a surrender to the world, and an acknowledgement
on the part of the preacher, that he has no confidence in the gospel,
or his ability to preach to attract the attention of the people, draw
them out, or turn them to God when they are drawn out. The church
that resorts to such artifices to draw the people out, virtually
acknowledges that she has no influence to _draw_ the people out; that
the preacher has no influence to _draw_ them out; that _their_ gospel
and worship have no power to _draw_ them out; but they have found out
what will _draw_ them out. A fine temple of show, extravagance and
folly; a popular choir, an organ, ice cream, strawberry festivals,
musical concerts, church fairs, etc., etc. These will draw. Certainly
they will. But what becomes of the preacher, the gospel, the worship
and the church? What becomes of Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Bible, and
all that is divine?

Christ had not “where to lay his head.” What does that prove? Not
that his followers should not have where to lay their heads, or that
preachers should not; but, if following him and serving him should
reduce them to such destitution that they would not have where to lay
their heads, they should bear it patiently and not murmur, remembering
that their Lord and Master had not where to lay his head.

“Christ traveled on foot and preached.” What does that prove—that
preachers must _always_ travel on foot? Not at all. The Lord did not
always travel on foot. What then? That a preacher should travel on
foot if need be. We have traveled on foot to preach and would do it
again before we would give up preaching. We, therefore, take the cars,
steamboat, stage, private conveyance, any means most convenient.




SUBTLETIES ABOUT IMMERSION.


But, now, why this constant higgling over _immersion_? Why this
continual getting up some kind of smoke about it, mist or confusion? It
is the right thing—the precise thing the Lord commanded. Why, then,
try to get up confusion about where it was obtained? Why not condemn
faith because we did not obtain it from the right people? It is the
_right thing_, but then a man obtained it in a _sectarian church_.
Ought he not to throw it aside, and obtain faith from the right source?
Then, where did a man get the gospel? Did he get it in a sectarian
church? Must he therefore throw it aside? Where did he get his Bible?
Must he throw it away because he got it from sectarians. There is but
one safe rule in all this, and that is to hold on to that which came
from the Lord, the right things, no matter where we found them.

We have not set out merely to see how radical we can be; to see how
far we can differ from all men, but to separate the human from the
divine—that which did not come from God from that which did; and when
we find a man with the right book—the Bible—we accept it without
inquiring where he obtained it. When we find a man with the gospel of
Christ, we accept it, no matter where he obtained it. If he has the
right repentance we accept it without any regard to where he obtained
it. In the same way in regard to the immersion and everything else. Has
he the right things—the things of God?

Why start these subtleties about immersion, and confuse the public mind
in regard to it? Why not get up difficulties about the prayers, the
communion, the repentance, the faith, or something else? We are not
trying how many difficulties we can find, but trying to clear the way,
and show all men that there is a safe and practical way to union, to
oneness and happiness, both here and hereafter. We desire to emerge out
of the darkness, confusion and misunderstandings of our times, and walk
in the clear light of heaven. Whatever is right we accept, and whatever
is not right we aim to set it right. That which has gone before our
time is beyond our reach, and we leave that to the Judge of all the
earth, who will do right. We desire to open the way for the living
and those yet to come. Let us study the things that are practical and
that work for peace, and the Lord will open our way to the highest
usefulness and happiness in this life, and to all he has for the
redeemed in the life to come.




ALL THINGS COMMON.


The community of goods or common stock was a _voluntary thing_ and
not _required_, as is clear from the language of Peter to Ananias and
Sapphira. Alluding to the possession he sold and the proceeds of the
sale he said: “While it remained was it not thine own? and after it was
sold was it not in thine own power?” Acts v. 4. There was no compulsion
to do what he pretended he was doing—that is, _giving the whole_—no
law requiring it. This case appears to have ended the whole affair. We
find no more account of it, but clear allusions to liberality, to the
rich and poor, etc., showing that it was not continued. There is no
question but that some of the first Christians received the impression
that the coming of the Lord, the resurrection of the dead and the
end of the world were at hand; and the unbounded love of the gospel
inspired in their hearts for God and man led them to regard their
possessions as nothing. They did not believe they would need them, nor
did they see the state of things that would result from their course.

Not only so, but there may have been a providence in it, as their city
was soon to be destroyed and they “led away captive among all nations.”
The main thing we need is the fact that it is not required of us. It
ended at once and was not enjoined nor continued.




DELUDED.


We can not conceive how people could be more completely deluded, than
to be so turned away from the promise of God, than when the Lord says,
“He who believes and is immersed _shall be saved_,” he can not rely on
the words, “_shall be saved_,” but can rely on an uncertain class of
feelings reached in an exciting meeting without a promise of the Lord.
The apostle commands inquirers, “Repent, and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and _you
shall receive_ the gift of the Holy Spirit.” Here is a sure promise
from God: “_You shall receive_ the gift of the Holy Spirit.” These
people can not or _will not_ rely on _this promise_, but will rely on
a peculiar state of feelings without one shadow of evidence that the
feelings are from the Lord, or intended to assure any of pardon.

Members of the church should read their Bibles in their families and
to their children, and worship with them, and teach them what worship
means, and if they do not do it they will be held responsible in the
great day. We must never stop but cry aloud and spare not, till this
ignorance is out of the land. We exhort brethren, no matter where they
may be scattered, to read the Bible, explain it to your neighbor, and
be not poor, helpless creatures waiting for somebody to send you a
preacher, but go at it and read the Scriptures, and show your neighbor
how to read them, and where to read, to learn the way of salvation.
Circulate other reading calculated to show them the good and right way.
Be alive and awake to the work—read about it, pray over it, and do all
in your power to counteract ignorance and superstition.




REFORMATION A SUCCESS.


It is true, also, that “God’s word, as the only rule of faith and
practice, is as much set at naught by the religious world to-day as it
was fifty years ago,” and more too; and there is nothing so unpopular
with the masses of the people, and some _called brethren_, as precisely
the apostolic way; and the Reformation is not a failure either. Our
reformatory movement was right, and is still right. It needs no
modification, but needs to be faithfully and honestly carried out. No
reformatory movement can ever get in ahead of it. It went back to the
divine fountain to find the truth, and not something _like it_, that
could be _proved by it_. It went back to the Bible itself, and not
to something _like it_, or something that can be _proved by it_. It
went back to the religion of Christ itself, and not to something _like
it_, or something that can be _proved by it_. This was no failure. The
attempt was to go back to the Lord himself; to his own Book, his own
religion; and those who attempted this, and _did it_, made no failure.
They found the Lord, his Book, and his religion, and found the
salvation of the Lord. There was no failure in all this. This movement
has been in the world about sixty years, or about half as long as
Noah’s mission lasted. Noah found the salvation of the Lord for himself
and family. There was no failure in his case.




WHAT WE ARE FOR.


We are for the kingdom of God, and for all that pertains to it, but not
for the _kingdom of the clergy_, either as manifested in the Papacy
or among Protestants; nor are we enlisted to get up a _new kingdom of
clergy_. We will never give our influence to establish any new kingdom
of clergy, or recognize any old one. The people of God are _free_. They
do not belong to the clergy. The congregations of the Lord are free,
and not to be manacled down into human confederations and their great
work ended in an insignificant sect. The day we agree to be banded
together into some kind of general confederation of congregations,
under a conference, convention, or we care not what you call it, we
become an insignificant sect, a denomination, a christian sect, and
will be nothing more forever. _Ichabod_ will be written on us. But that
day _will never come_. Mark that. We hope that none among us will ever
make the experiment, but if they do, they will simply land in faction,
to dwindle away and die.

But, we have come to a crisis, and, it is predicted, we will soon come
to nothing if we do not do something. We intend to _do something_ and
are _doing something_, but not forming ecclesiastical confederations
to bind burdens on the necks of the people, nor scheming to get
_clerical power_. We have come to no crisis. The few scheming men that
have so fully demonstrated their aim, have come to a _crisis_ and to
a _complete defeat_. But that will not produce any perceptible jar in
the movements of the hosts of Israel. That is a mere circumstance. The
Lord’s hosts are in motion and the work is going on. Why stand with a
human figment in view, when we have stupendous matters of fact before
our eyes? Look into the columns of our publications and see the reports
that come up every week from the Atlantic to the Pacific Oceans, and
from the North of the Dominion of Canada to the Gulf of Mexico, and
tell us what of the crisis? The men in the field at work have come to
no crisis and to no panic. The Lord of hosts is with them, and they are
not to be turned aside from their work.

Read the accounts of churches established every week, the houses for
worship built, the preachers coming over from the ranks of Babylon, as
well as private members, and the vast acquisition to their numbers from
the world, and then tell us what of the crisis! Go into the field and
_go to work_, every man, in faith and hope and love, and win souls to
Christ, and the Lord of hosts will be with you, and good brethren will
come up to the help of the Lord and support you. But if we continue
the schemes that are now confessedly _failures_, or devise new ones,
we will dry up the fountains of liberality till we can do nothing. The
children of God will give money to convert and _save sinners_, but they
will not give money to _build up a hierarchy_.




A SUGGESTION.


We are not inattentive to the suggestion that we are wearing ourselves
out in holding protracted meetings, and that we should devote ourself
wholly to the management of the _Review_. We have thought of this
matter much, both before and since we saw the suggestion, and find it
not so easy to determine what ought to be done. The tendency is to find
pleasant positions, occupy them, and go on easily and smoothly; to
settle down and preach for churches, get professorships in colleges or
high-schools, edit papers and evangelize the world by _proxy_. In other
words, the popular idea is not to _go_ but to _send_ some one to preach
the gospel. If we were to sit down in our editorial chair, at home, and
write the most stirring articles about the great work of evangelizing
the world and urge men to go, we fear they would inquire, “Why do _you
not go_?” We aim to be an example—to go ourself, as we urge others to
do. We see no other way to give force to the appeal to others to _go_.

The demand for preaching is such that we can see no possible way to
excuse any man that can go. We have, therefore, rather concluded to _go
while we can_.

When we shall go hence, we desire that any who may refer to us may see
that while we said _go_ we also _went_.

We are perfectly aware that we could, in some respects, make the paper
better to devote our entire attention to it; but, that we could, in
every sense, give it the _spirit_ and _power_ that we can when we are
in the field and among the people continually, we still hold in doubt.
We desire to do all we possibly can for the cause, while it is to-day.




ANNIHILATION—FUTURE PUNISHMENT.


There is nothing about “the final annihilation of the wicked,” in the
Bible, nor “the final annihilation” of anything. The talk about the
“annihilation of the wicked,” no matter whether “final” or not, is mere
outside talk, as nothing of the kind is found in Scripture. We can see
why a man should want information about a country or a place where he
intends or expects to go, but why any man should always be talking
about a country or place to which he does not intend or expect to go,
we never could see. There is one thing clear, and that is, that any
term used in Scripture to describe or express the destiny of the wicked
beyond the judgment, is such as to deter any man from desiring it, no
matter whether figurative or literal. It is equally certain that no man
will ever be saved by explaining to him all about the meaning of the
terms applied to the destiny of the wicked, nor will a constant study
of these terms, and talking about them, qualify any man for heaven.

Some of these terms are figurative and some of them are literal. In
some instances it may be difficult to determine whether a term is
literal or figurative, but in some it is not difficult. It is clear,
however, that whatever terms are used, they all apply to the same
things. Such a phrase as “beaten with many stripes,” we doubt not,
is figurative, and so is “gnashing of teeth.” But “punishment” is
literal, no matter in what it consists. No matter what term is applied
to it, nor whether literal or figurative, the idea of “punishment” is
always in it, always present. No matter _how_ they will be punished,
what the means of punishment, or of what the punishment will consist,
there is still the reality—the punishment. This is what the Lord
calls “everlasting,”—“everlasting punishment.” See Matthew xxv. 46.
“These shall go away into everlasting punishment and the righteous into
life eternal.” In the original we have the same word (_aionion_) for
“eternal” and “everlasting.” In the same sentence the Lord uses the
same word to express the duration of the punishment and the duration
of the life of the righteous, and there is as much reason, and no
more, for concluding that the “eternal life” shall terminate, as that
the “everlasting punishment” of the wicked shall cease. At the same
time that the righteous enter into life, the wicked “go away into
everlasting punishment,” and the same word, in the same sentence, in the
lips of our Lord, expresses the duration of both; and we have just as
much respect for an expositor of Scripture that undertakes to prove
that the state of glory shall cease to exist as for the expositor that
undertakes to prove that the punishment shall cease to exist, no matter
whether he be called Restorationist, Universalist, Soul-sleeper or what.

The man that thinks of “eternal life” merely as eternal _conscious
existence_, has no adequate conception of the meaning of the term. It
is used to express the entire state of glory, with all that pertains
to it. In the same sense the phrase “second death” is used to express
the state of perdition, including all that is in it. The terms “saved”
and “lost” are used in the same sense. “Saved” includes the entire
inheritance of the saints; all they shall have and enjoy. “Lost”
includes all that shall be inflicted on the condemned; the entire state
and all that is in it.

Mortality is never applied to the soul of man in Scripture, nor is
immortality. We never read of a mortal or an immortal soul, nor of
a soul being made mortal or immortal. Mortality and immortality are
applied to the body and not to the soul. The body is mortal, but in the
resurrection will be made immortal.

It is infinitely wiser to teach men how to _keep out_ of hell, while
they are out, than to teach them how to _get out_, after they are in
hell, or to prove that they will cease to exist. We do not think much
of men that study how to _pick locks_ and escape from prisons; but we
esteem the men who teach how to _keep out_ of prisons by avoiding the
crimes on account of which men are imprisoned. There is no benevolence
in tampering with the divine penalties in any way, either in out-and-out
denying the existence of any punishment after death, or modifying it.
The Bible contains its clear discrimination between the righteous and
the wicked, and unequivocally declares that it shall not be with him
that does not serve God as with him that serves him. It is not in vain
to serve God. It would have been better for Judas if he had not been
born, as clearly stated by our Lord. There is a sorer punishment than
death without mercy. There is an “everlasting punishment,” and no sound
learning can make this mean everlasting _non-existence_. Non-existence
is not punishment, else we were always in punishment till we were
brought into existence. There is a punishment where the worm dies not,
and the fire is not quenched. There is no more evidence that this will
ever cease to exist than that the state of glory itself shall cease to
exist.




DESIGN OF MIRACLES.


Miracles are necessary to give a new institution and confirm it to
the world, but when it is given and confirmed, no miracle is needed
to perpetuate it. It required miracles to confirm the mission of the
apostles and prove to the world that they were from God. So would it
require miracles now to confirm the missions of any other man or set of
men claiming to be specially called and sent as the apostles were, and
in default of any miracles, we do not believe any men are now called
and sent, as they were. The divine attestations that established
the apostolic mission, among the people of their time, against
their established religion, all their prejudices and every worldly
consideration, was committed to record, and will establish it to all
the generations to come. The same testimony that proved a man guilty of
murder one hundred years ago, will prove him guilty forever. It does
not require that witnesses continue to be sworn and testify to prove
it to other people. In the same way, the testimony that proved the
divinity of Christ, at the beginning of his reign, has been committed
to the record and will prove it forever. There is no new testimony, and
none is needed. Those who lived in the time when the Lord was on earth,
saw him, or saw those who did see him, or, at least, many of them
did; they saw many of his wonderful works, or many who did see them;
they heard the prophecies uttered by him, or saw those who did hear
them, but did not live to see the fulfillment. We did not see him, nor
witness his miracles, nor hear him utter the prophecies alluded to, but
we now have the faithful records of history in which we find accounts
of the fulfillment of his wonderful predictions extending down through
the ages, for more than eighteen centuries. We do not, therefore, need
a repetition of the miracles, or the prophecies, or their fulfillment.
They stand there, firm as the everlasting hills, serving God’s eternal
purpose; confirming the divine mission of his Son, and the New
Covenant, of which he is the Mediator.

When did these miracles cease? They ceased when the apostles died, and
all on whom they laid their hands. Every pretense of a miracle from
then till now, has been nothing but a _lying pretense_. Not a genuine
miracle has been done.

We have in the Bible the clear statement that the spiritual gifts—the
supernatural gifts—would be superseded by “a more excellent way;”
that tongues should cease, prophecies should fail, and knowledge—the
supernatural gift of knowledge—should be done away. In accordance
with these statements, these gifts have ceased, and thus fulfilled
Paul’s statement, and proved that the Spirit of God was in him. The
eternal Spirit saw, and, through him, foretold that these gifts should
cease, as he did in the Apostle John, at the close of Revelation, the
conclusion of the sacred canon, that nothing more was to be added, and
nothing taken away. This ended the revelations from God. We have had
not one word since, and will not have till the end of time.




CAIN’S WIFE.


We do not know “who was Cain’s wife,” only that she was _Mrs. Cain_.
We do not know that it is of any more importance to us who Cain’s wife
was than who the wife of any other man was or is. We must not fall out
with the Bible because it does not gratify our curiosity in giving us
information on many little particulars of no consequence to us. We do
not know who President Grant’s wife was. We, no doubt, could easily
have found out, but it was of no importance to us to know, and we have
never tried to learn. Yet it is of as much importance to us, and as
much in reference to our salvation, as to know who Cain’s wife was. We
can not give information that is not in the Bible. The Bible does not
tell who Cain’s wife was.




WHAT IS ESSENTIAL.


We single not out baptism and make it essential, nor conversion—as
a whole—and make it essential; but we single out what the _Lord
requires_, not only in regard to conversion, or making Disciples, but
in regard to the life or the practice required of those in Christ,
in which they are to continue after they have turned to the Lord;
everything in the law of God, and maintain that it is _all essential_.
The will of God is essential, and that which is not in the will of God
is not essential. The will of God, or what is required in the law of
God, must be done. That which is not in the will of God, or is no part
of the law of God, is not to be done at all, or not to be introduced
as religion, or any part of it, nor is the peace of the church to
be interrupted with it. The only way to avoid the trouble about the
_unessentials_ is simply to leave them out—to have nothing to do with
them. What regard can a man have for the welfare of the Church, the
peace of the people of God, and the triumphs of the faith, who will
not only have himself what is not required, not essential, and what he
admits is not required, but force it upon others?




WHAT WE KNOW IS RIGHT.


We _know_ it is right to “Let the word of Christ dwell in us richly;
and with all wisdom _teach_ and _admonish_ each other by _psalms_ and
_hymns_ and _spiritual songs_; _singing_ with gratitude in our hearts
to the Lord”—to “be filled with the Spirit; _speaking_ to one another
in _psalms_ and _hymns_ and _spiritual songs_; _singing_ and making
melody in our hearts to the Lord.” This _can_ be done, and _we know_ it
is right; but that a man can make melody in his heart to the Lord “with
an organ,” a fiddle, banjo, clarionet, lute, fife or jew’s-harp, we
do not know, nor do we believe it. We want to do what is written, and
enjoin it on others, to do it. What is not written we do not want to
do. When the Lord so minutely describes _how_ we are to do anything, we
want to do it in that _way_. The _way_ he prescribes will do the thing
commanded; some other _way_ might not do what is commanded at all.




INFANT SIN—INFANT SALVATION.


In our generation, a vast amount of ink and breath is wasted in writing
and preaching about infant sin, infant salvation, idiots, etc. There is
one thing certain about it, and that is, that our writing and preaching
about infant sin, infant salvation, Christ dying for infants and
idiots, never saved an infant, an idiot, or anybody else. We do not, by
our writing and preaching about them, make them sinful or righteous. It
is simply writing and preaching _about_ them, and not _to them_, and
certainly can do them no good. It is purely curious and speculative,
pleasant for men and women to talk about, who will not love and obey
the Savior themselves.

There are some things so clear in themselves that all can see them
on the mere mention of them. Infants and idiots can not understand,
believe, receive, reject, or obey the gospel. They can not repent,
pray, praise God or rejoice. The gospel is simply not addressed to
them. Infants and idiots are plainly and simply not _gospel subjects_.
How are they then to be saved? What salvation do you mean? Salvation
from _sin_, do you say? What sin? They never _sinned_, and have no
_actual_ sin, as the schoolmen style it. They are under no guilt. They
never transgressed any law, human or divine. They never rejected Christ
nor the gospel. They have no _personal_ sin or guilt; no personal
condemnation, and need no personal justification. The justification
we receive in believing and obeying the gospel, is from our _own
sins_, actual sins, sins we have committed ourselves. Infants have
no sins of this kind and need not this justification. The remission
of sins received, in turning to God, is for _sinners_; those who, in
their own persons have committed sins, and not for infants, who have
never sinned—who have no sins of this kind. They have no guilt, no
condemnation, and need no salvation from “old sins,” as Peter has it,
or past sins. They have no sins of this kind.

But, then, this is only a partial view of the matter. We all need
something more than this. We need another salvation beyond pardon, or
salvation from actual sins; we need to be ransomed from the grave,
raised from the dead; our bodies changed, glorified, immortalized.
The infant and idiot need this. This salvation is future. “As in Adam
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” “By one man,
sin entered into the world.” “In Adam’s fall, we sinned all.” But we
are not under the guilt of Adam’s sin; only under the consequences.
These consequences came on us without our will, volition or consent;
without our action. We had no power to avert the calamity. It came
on us unconditionally. The first Adam, without our volition or
action, involved us in it. The second Adam, the Lord from heaven,
unconditionally removes it from us. Without our volition or action, he
takes it away. The first Adam involved us in death. Our turning to God,
becoming christians and obtaining remission of sins, does not save us
from death. We all die the same as those not Christians. After we die,
the best of saints, we need the same ransom from the grave, as infants
do. To be made alive; to be changed, immortalized and glorified. This
is the salvation from Adam’s sin, or the consequences of it, and this
is needed for the saints and infants alike.

“If one died for all, then we are all dead.” I. Cor. v. 14. This
includes infants and idiots. Christ then died for all. “As in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.” The same “all” that
die in Adam shall be made alive in or by Christ. Christ, then, died for
all,—all that die in Adam,—and will make the same “all” alive, or
raise them from the dead. He, then, in dying for all, died for infants
and idiots, and secured for them resurrection from the dead, and they
need to prepare them for the world to come.

They can receive no gospel, and need none; they can not repent, and
need no repentance; they can not pray or commune, and need no prayer
or communion; they need no religion, and are simply not subjects of
religion. They need no church. The gospel, repentance and remission of
sins, the church and all that is in it, is for pardoned persons—those
washed from their sins—the redeemed by the blood of Christ, and not
for those who never sinned, had no guilt, and needed no pardon—those
who have no faith and know not the Savior.




OUR AUTHORITATIVE RELIGION.


We have not time to elaborate it now, but we can state, that there is
one religion that is the _supreme and absolute authority_—that is
simply the religion of Christ. There is nothing but human authority
in any other. That religion presents a heaven and a hell, the one
as certain as the other. It is not to be tampered with, nor trifled
with. It offers life and threatens death. It has justification and
condemnation, its rewards and punishments. It has God in it, Christ and
the Holy Spirit, prophets, apostles and martyrs. Men submit when they
come to it, and yield to it, in doing which they submit and yield to
its Divine Author. The secrets of men will be judged by Jesus Christ
according to the gospel. If we expect to enter the everlasting city, we
must listen to the Bible.




REFLECTIONS FOR DANCERS.


While we were in Carlisle, Kentucky, in May, we learned that Bro.
Reynolds, who was engaged in an interesting meeting a few miles off,
had announced that he would preach on _dancing_ on a morning. As we
had no appointment for preaching that morning, Bro. Jones proposed to
take us to the place to hear Bro. Reynolds. On arriving we found a good
audience in attendance, and Bro. Reynolds prepared for his work. He
pressed us to address the people, but we declined on the ground that he
had announced his subject, the people had come to hear him, and that we
were interested in the matter and desired to hear him. He then entered
upon his work.

Bro. Reynolds is a _self-made_ man, and not a man not _made at all_,
but made in the genuine sense, an effective and telling man. He is a
cool, deliberate and pointed speaker; speaks with perfect ease, and
interests an audience from first to last. He is simply _himself_, and
imitates no one. We decided before he was near through his discourse to
write out an epitome of it, but one thing after another has hindered
us till weeks have passed, and we took not a note, and we fear now
that our article will be but little more than _an article about the
discourse_.

                                 MOTTO.
           “Prove all things; hold fast that which is good.”
                                                     I. Thess. v. 21.

This means to _test_ or _try_ all things, consider their claim, and
determine which are good. Hold that fast.

Exod. xv. 20, we find an account of dancing: “And Miriam the
prophetess, and the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand; and
all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.”
Several things are to be noticed in this dancing. 1. It was in
daylight. 2. The women alone danced. 3. It was a religious exercise, in
rejoicing over their wonderful deliverance from Egyptian bondage and
the pursuit of their enemies, and to the praise and honor of God. They
were religious people, praising and honoring God.

Exod. xxxii. 19, we have an account of dancing: “And it came to pass as
soon as he” (Moses) “came nigh to the camp, that he saw the calf, and
the dancing, and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of
his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.” We are not informed who
danced in this instance, but the whole procedure was idolatrous. The
shouting and dancing were in devotion to the molten calf.

Judges xi. 34: “And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and,
behold, his daughter came to meet him, with timbrels and with dances,
and she was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor
daughter.” 1. This dancing was in daylight. 2. One female danced alone.
3. She simply danced in joy to meet her father, and her dance was soon
followed with a terrible calamity.

Judges xxi. 19-21: “Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the
Lord in Shiloh, yearly, in a place which is on the north side of
Beth-el, on the east side of the highway, that goeth up from Beth-el
to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah. Therefore they commanded the
children of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards;
and see, and behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in
dances, then come you out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his
wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.” This
dancing was in daylight. The females alone danced. We are not told what
the object of the dancing was.

I. Sam. xviii. 6: “And it came to pass, as they came, when David was
returning from the slaughter of the Philistines, that the women came
out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet King
Saul, with tabrets, with joy, and with instruments of music.” 1. This
dancing was in daylight. 2. The women alone danced. 3. It was rejoicing
in view of a special favor of God.

I. Sam. xxx. 16: “And when he had brought him down, behold, they were
spread abroad upon all the earth, eating, and drinking, and dancing,
because of all the great spoil they had taken out of the land of the
Philistines, and out of the land of Judah. And David smote them from
the twilight even unto the evening of the next day; and there escaped
not a man of them, save four hundred young men, who rode upon camels,
and fled.” In this case the dancing was with eating and drinking, and
for amusement. It was revelling. They were not religious people, but
the wicked, and the calamity soon came upon them.

II. Sam. vi. 12-14: “And it was told King David, saying, The Lord hath
blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertaineth unto him,
because of the ark of God. So David went and brought up the ark of
God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with gladness.
And it was so, that when they that bear the ark of the Lord, had gone
six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings. And David danced before
the Lord with all his might; and David was girded with a linen epod.”
This dancing was in daylight. David alone danced. It was a religious
exercise, in devotion to the Lord.

I. Chron. xv. 29: “And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of
the Lord came to the city of David, that Michal, the daughter of Saul,
looking out at a window, saw King David dancing and playing, and she
despised him in her heart.” This dancing was in daylight. David alone
danced. He danced as a religious exercise. It was not dancing for
amusement.

Psalms cl. 4: “Praise him with a timbrel and dance; praise him with
stringed instruments and organs.” Also, Psalms cxlix. 3: “Let them
praise his name in the dance.” This also is a religious exercise.

Eccl. iii. 4: “A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn,
and a time to dance.” We do not remember the point made on this. We
have seen from the Scriptures already cited, that in the former ages,
when they danced as a religious exercise, it was always in daylight,
and in no case promiscuous dancing of men and women together, and the
_time_ for it was when the Lord had wrought some great deliverance or
brought some signal, given some great victory.

Job xxi. 11-18: “They send forth their little ones like a flock, and
the children dance. They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the
sound of the organ. They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment
go down to the grave. Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for
we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty, that
we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we pray unto
him?, Lo, their good is not in their hand; the counsel of the wicked
is far from me. How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how
oft cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his
anger. They are as stubble before the wind, as chaff that the storm
carrieth away.” Here we have a terrible description of the dancers for
pleasure, amusement; of their godless character and utter ruin.

Mark vi. 22: “And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and
danced, and pleased Herod and them that sat with him, the king said to
the damsel, Ask of me whatever you will, and I will give it to you.
And he swore to her, Whatever you shall ask of me, I will give to you,
to the half of my kingdom. And she went forth and said to her mother,
What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist. And she
came in straightway with haste to the king, and asked, saying, I will
that you give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist.”
Here we have a fine sample of the taste, the spirit and refinement of
the dancer and her mother. What had John the Baptist done that his head
should come off to gratify the mother of a dancing damsel? John had
said, “It is not lawful for you” (Herod) “to have your brother’s wife.”
This insulted Mrs. Herod, and she sought and obtained revenge through
her dancing daughter and a rash vow of the king. What a reward this for
dancing and pleasing the king—the head of the best man in his kingdom,
a prophet from God! This was dancing for pleasure, for amusement. This
dancing for amusement, pleasure, is revelling, and excludes from the
kingdom.

Gal. v. 21: “Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these: Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like;
of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in times past,
that they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.”
Bro. Reynolds gave a definition of the word “revelling,” and the
original Greek word _komos_, which it represents, which we have not at
hand and do not recollect; only that dancing for pleasure, amusement,
with eating and drinking, is revelling, and they who do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of God. He also made a happy hit on the
clause, “such like”—that is, “revellings and _such like_”; that it
included the plays of folly, the innocent games for amusement, etc.

We are sorry that we have forgotten so much of the comment and so many
of the good points in the discourse. It was in grand contrast with much
that we have. He is not trying to determine _how much folly and sin_
we can practice and still be saved, but _how fully men and women can
be saved from all folly and sin_. The Lord strengthen his hands and
the hands of every other man walking nobly in resistance against the
demoralizing influences now upon us.




SPIRIT OF INDIFFERENCE.


The worst difficulty there is to encounter is the general state of
indifference. There is a general state of don’t-careitiveness. The
Galio feeling abounds. Of all the opponents the preacher of Christ has
to contend with, there is none that we so much dread, as the man who
cares for nothing—who is wholly indifferent—who scarcely has vitality
enough to sit up in his pew, unless he can sleep sitting. There are men
in these times, who by custom, mere habit, indifferently float along
with the current to the place of worship, and sit, lean down, lie down,
or lounge in an audience before a preacher, who seem to say, by every
motion, every cuticle of the face, expression of the countenance and
move of the eye, in thunder tones, to the discerning preacher, _I do
not care what you say—whether your doctrine is true or false_. This
discomfits the preacher. What can be done for a man who does not care?
What can a preacher do for a man whose spirit is so calloused and
numbed as to be incapable of giving attention to a single discourse?
What can be done for men who have so lost the love of the truth, all
interest in it, and so unfeeling to all its appeals, as to sit before
him who pleads its holy claims with earnestness, wholly inattentive? To
such men the whole appears idle tales, a kind of dream or kind of dim
vision. Many in this description, in church and out of it, cannot be
aroused from their stupor, awakened from their slumbers and brought out
from the almost impenetrable spell of thick darkness that envelopes
them, by the efforts of any preacher. The thunders of Sinai would not
do it. The melting strains of gospel love will not do it. Heaven’s
beneficence to man is all nothing to them. Many, in this generation,
will never be awakened from this deep and awful slumber, and the thick
darkness that surrounds them, till the voice of the archangel from
heaven and the trumpet of God shall summon them to the judgment of the
great day.

An effort is demanded, such as we, as a people, have never made; such
as man has rarely made; in any age, an equal to anything in the power
of man to make, to awaken our cotemporaries from this terrible and
fearful state of death. None but men who are in earnest can do anything
in this work. Men who have no concern themselves, or who are nearly
in the same predicament, may deliver their little, dry and lifeless
harangues, but they make no impression. Men must be fully alive, have
the benevolence of God at heart, enter the work with the whole soul,
and labor mightily for the Lord. We must feel the need of a great
effort, to save man, maintain righteousness and restrain the world
from sin, and our efforts must make men feel the necessity of such an
effort. It is not necessary that the imagination should be wrought up,
but merely that the people be made conscious of the reality, to move
those in the reach of reason and argument. But, we defer approaching
any other point, for a month.




APOLOGY FOR CREEDS.


Apology _First_. “It is not necessary to make such an incessant war
upon our creed; it is just like the Bible; it is all scriptural.” In
this case admitting, for the sake of argument, what is not true of
any human creed, that it is “just like the Bible,” we reply, that is
useless, and will do no better than the Bible itself. If it is just
like the Bible it will accomplish nothing more than the Bible, and
be just as deficient. Nothing can be gained by it; nothing can be
accomplished by it which the Bible itself could not accomplish, so that
it must be utterly useless. In that case there can be no excuse for
having it—not only so, but the person holding on to and contending for
such a creed, is inexcusable on another account. To give up a creed
just like the Bible, and take the Bible itself as a rule of faith and
practice, a man would lose nothing, for he would find all his creed
in the Bible. We insist, therefore, that one of the most inexcusable,
unreasonable and unjustifiable positions a man can occupy, is to hold
on to, contend for and insist that he can not do without a creed which
he insists is just like the Bible, though he can have the Bible itself!
The Bible will certainly accomplish all that any creed just like it can.

_Apology Second._ “It is useless to be contending against our creed. It
contains nothing that is not in the Bible. It is simply an abstract,
epitome or abridgment of Bible doctrine, so arranged as to be convenient
and show at a glance what we hold.” This is quite a specious apology,
and has succeeded in deluding and deceiving many persons, and silencing
their consciences, and is, therefore, more especially deserving of
attention. This apology is dangerous because it acknowledges that the
creed contains and sets forth what the party believes—its faith.
Now, we assert, without hesitation, that any man who believes no more
than is set forth in any human creed on earth, and will do no more
than any human creed requires, has neither faith nor obedience enough
to be acceptable with God. There is not a human creed on earth, that
contains the _whole Christian faith_. Their faith is too narrow. We
have no confidence in epitomes, abstracts, or abridgments of the
faith. Nothing less than the faith, the whole faith of Christ, is
sufficient to meet the divine approbation. No man’s faith not as broad
as the Bible is broad enough for us. His faith must contain Moses
and Jesus, the prophets of the Old Testament and the apostles of the
New. There must be no abstracting, no epitomizing, no abridging. The
man not willing to receive Christ, and the whole Christian faith, as
God has set him and the faith forth, in the Holy Scriptures, is not a
christian, and had better make no pretence to christianity. We do not
wish a man to come describing how he _views every point of doctrine_.
We do not desire him to come declaring that he receives Christ as a
Trinitarian or Unitarian, a Calvinist or an Arminian, but to come with
a contrite spirit, avowing it as the desire of the heart, and his
full determination, to receive Christ with all his heart, as God has
revealed him in the prophecies of the Old Testament and the apostolic
preaching of the New.

The advocate of a human creed says, he wants his creed to “show at a
glance what we hold!” Look over your creed, then, right carefully, and
see _what you hold_, and look over the New Testament with the same
care, and see what an amount it contains that _you do not hold_, or
that is not in your creed, and you will see that your creed is not a
respectable skeleton—that it not only lacks the flesh, blood, muscles,
arteries, veins, etc., of the body, but it lacks many of the bones
and, what is vastly more, it lacks the life, the soul, the spirit.
If it contains _what you hold_, much as precious as any part of the
Christian faith, and as binding as any thing God has revealed, clearly
and as explicitly laid down in the New Testament, is not contained in
what you hold at all. Much of as precious truth as is contained in
the Bible, a vast amount as clear to the children of God as anything
contained in the Christian faith, an immense deal as consoling to the
dying saint as any thing in the word of God, as any man who has ever
looked must admit, is not found in any human creed. We say again, and
can prove at almost any length, that there is not a human creed in the
world that is a respectable skeleton, that is even a perceptible shadow
of the Christian faith. Indeed, no creed appears to have been intended
simply to set forth the _Christian faith_. It does not appear to be
the object of any human creed to set forth the simple faith of Christ
or Christianity. None of the creeds claim to be the _Christian faith_,
_the Christian confession_, _Christian discipline or Christian system_,
but one is “The Philadelphia Confession,” another “The Westminster
Confession,” and a third “The Methodist Discipline.” The object of
these books, and all of the same kind, appears to be more to set forth
the views their authors had of certain points of doctrine, or their
notions of these points, than to set forth the whole Christian faith
itself. Their object is much more to show how the parties adopting them
held certain points of doctrine, and to distinguish their views from
some others, than to set forth the Christian faith. The creeds, then,
are but little more than epitomes of men’s views of certain points of
Christian doctrine, their abridged understanding of these points. Now,
the belief and reception of _men’s views_ of the Christian faith will
not save any man, much less the belief and reception of _their views
of a few points_ of doctrine; but to be saved, a man must believe and
receive the Christian faith—_the whole Christian faith itself_.




HEAR YE HIM.


“But we want something binding.” Look then, at the command accompanying
this oracle, or confession, or immediately following it, if you desire
something binding, or authoritative. We allude to the authoritative
utterance, “Hear Him.” God, who made the worlds—God, who rules
among the armies of heaven—who hurled angels down to hell for
disobedience—whose voice shook the earth. God, who holds the destinies
of all the nations in his hand, who “weighs the hills in a balance, and
handles the isles as a very little thing,” in connection with the
revelation of his Son, to all the nations of the earth, with all the
majesty of his authority, says, “HEAR HIM;” give him audience;
regard him; bow to him; follow him; be guided by him; honor and obey
him forever. How utterly futile and insignificant the attempt of puny
and erring mortals to add anything to the great oracle, or confession,
in which is concentrated the whole christian institution, and with
which is connected the authoritative words of the ineffable Jehovah,
“HEAR HIM.” If a man receives the revelation God makes of
his Son, or, rather, if he receives his Son, from the revelation he
has made of him, and bows in submission to him, in accordance with
the command to “Hear Him,” confesses with the mouth before men, what
he believes in the heart, that “Jesus Christ is the Son of God,” and
submits to the Divine test of loyalty, in the requirement to be buried
with his Lord in baptism, while that great formula is uttered over him,
“I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit,” he gives the highest assurance in his power to give, that
he is changed in heart, that he loves God and will serve him, and is
bound by the strongest pledge, the highest and most solemn obligation
that ever did or ever can bind a human being, to love and serve God. To
add a thousand human ceremonies to this, would give no higher assurance
of the preparation of the heart, the designs and resolutions being
genuine, and bind the individual no more solemnly to be faithful to the
end. The confession that God requires, is the greatest confession that
man can make, and the making of it is the best evidence a man can give
that his heart is right. The first test of loyalty God has required
of the penitent confessor, is the strongest, highest, and most solemn
to which man can submit, and the submission to it, is the strongest
evidence of loyalty the person can give. The authority that requires
this submission, is the highest and most binding that can rest upon
a human being; and, if it does not govern, control and restrain the
person, no authority can.

If such a confession as this—one that takes in God and man, heaven
and earth, the Savior and his words, the whole revelation from God,
the sublime confession that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, made in a
proper manner, will not show that the heart is right. You need not add
any such catechisms or experiences as are common in these times. They
are all perfect nothingness compared with this great confession, which,
like the spider’s web, may catch flies and gnats, while the dangerous
wasp and hornet will pass through with ease. The safe ground, and the
only safe ground, is to follow the simple and infallible leadings of
the Spirit of God. Appeal to the sacred record, and examine his divine
and unerring procedure the day he came down from heaven and guided the
apostles into all truth. What did he require of men on that day, before
receiving them into the church? Follow him as he guided the apostles in
all the cases of conversion mentioned in the sacred record. What did he
require in all these cases? The same must be required now, and no more.
We must be led by the Spirit of God, in converting sinners, and not by
human creeds; we must be guided by the wisdom of God and not by the
wisdom of man; we must have confidence in the ways of God and show no
hankering after the ways of man. God will depart from all who turn away
from the simplicity of the apostolic practice, under the immediate
guidance of the Holy Spirit. No man is led by, or has the spirit, who
has not full confidence in requiring precisely the same of all who
enter the church required by the apostles, as by the Holy Spirit, who
guided them. He simply required the _confession with the mouth, of the
faith of the heart_.




EVANGELISTS AND EVANGELIZING.


We have had a continuous series of writing and preaching about properly
qualified Evangelists, and numerous schemes have been set on foot and
advocated, for raising up and qualifying men for this great work.
Still, the Evangelical field is not at all supplied. No scheme set on
foot is supplying, or likely to supply, the field. Some few preachers
are being manufactured, but where do they go? and what do they do?
How many of them go out into the field and preach the gospel, convert
sinners, plant and build up churches? Where is one doing anything of
this kind? In many parts of the country, they have made people believe
that the old preachers who have planted the churches and made the
principal part of all the converts that have been made, are behind the
times, and incapable of preaching, discouraged and driven many of
them from the field, and the work is not progressing. We need, and
_must have_, if we ever progress, evangelists, or missionaries, who
will travel throughout the length and breadth of the country, visit
the churches, “see how they do,” “set in order the things that are
wanting,” recruit their numbers, and maintain the faith once delivered
to the saints. We need, and must have, men who will visit weak
churches, enter new communities, where there are no churches,—bold
adventurers, pioneers to open the immense forests, and make the rude
desert blossom like the rose. This work must be done, and we _must
have_ the men that _can_ and _will_ do it.

Where are we to obtain this class of men? Can we never learn anything
from the history of the past, from all experience? Where did the men
come from, who have done pretty much of all this kind of work that has
ever been done? Is a miracle to be expected? Will men for this work,
come from a source whence such men never came? No! never while man is
man, and human nature is human nature. Men brought up in school houses,
fed and clothed from their father’s pockets, without ever knowing what
it was to earn a dollar, or a coat for their backs, without knowing
anything about the hardships and buffetings of the world, no matter if
they become scholars, and learn how to say a few fine things, _never
will_ and _never can_ do the work we are speaking of. They have not
the constitution, the physical energies to do it. They have not the
knowledge of the world, the ways and manners of the people to do it.
They know nothing of the toils, hardships, and burdens, of the masses
of mankind; are incompetent to sympathize with them, mingle with them,
become a fellow creature with them, and preach the Gospel of Salvation
to them, in an acceptable and successful manner and save them. They not
only are wholly incompetent, incapable, and could not, if they would;
but it is not their atmosphere, not their congenial sphere, and they
_never will_ do the work in the Lord’s great Evangelical field. They
never have done the work, and never will.

We must turn our eye in another direction. We must look to men who
have come up in our midst, among the people, who are of the people, in
active life, habits of industry, who have known what it was to earn a
living—men who have found out what a dollar is worth by earning it;
learned the people by mingling with them; developed their physical man
by active and industrious life; know the ways of the world by being
in it. We must look to men of this description whose hearts have been
overcome by the love of Christ, whose energies have been enlisted in
the churches, and who are brought forth by the churches, and should be
reared up and encouraged by the churches. Here is where we must look
for Evangelists. The church must open the way for her young men, set
them forth, and bring out all the talent she has within; and every
man that has the natural endowment, the energy, the love for man, the
anxiety for man’s salvation, necessary for one who would go out into
the world to save men, will make his way into the Evangelical field,
and make his mark in the world. If he lacks learning or information,
and has the proper zeal, desire for his work, and natural endowment, he
will acquire the learning and knowledge. We must open the way for
such, in all the churches; show our young men that we are looking for
them to come forth and enter upon this great work. We must give them
opportunities and encourage them to speak, to read the Scriptures and
pray in public, and we shall soon find that the Lord has plenty of
material of the first quality, for this great work.

Here is the source whence our laboring men have come—our active
effective men who are doing, and have always done the work. It is
useless for us to be deluded by the vain hope that the men we need,
will ever come from any other source. We must turn our attention to the
Evangelical work, concentrate our energies upon it, and do all in our
power to promote it. Every man that can preach at all; every man that
can turn a sinner to the Lord, should be engaged in the work, with all
zeal and power. We must preach the word both publicly and privately,
with the tongue, and pen through newspaper, pamphlet, magazine, tract
and book; in every possible way, and by all means, we must preach the
word of God from the rivers to the ends of the earth, and make all men
see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which, from the beginning
of the world, hath been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ. “Go,” brethren, the Lord says, “Go into all the world, and
preach the Gospel to every creature;” “Go,” says he, “therefore,
and teach all nations.” Let every man go, who can call a few people
together, and preach the word of the Lord to them. Yes, go if you can
preach at all, turn sinners to God and save them;—go and preach. Go
under a sense of the mighty work, remembering the language of that
great preacher and apostle to the Gentiles, “Wo is me if I preach not
the Gospel.” God requires those who have the gospel and the ability, to
preach it now, and this same _wo_ will rest upon them if they do not do
it.

What a crying sin against the Lord, who gave us the gospel, and man
to whom he commands it to be preached, for those with the ability, to
refuse to preach the gospel of the grace of God? Who but these shall
answer to God, if the people perish for the word of God? The first
disciples, when dispersed from their homes, deprived of all their
earthly good, “went everywhere preaching the word.”




A WORKING MINISTRY.


Men do not get a support, or do much good, in any calling, without
work, and there is no calling on earth where the distinction is
wider, between the industrious and indolent, than in the christian
ministry. We can not be supported in the ministry without work, and
it is not right that we should be. The Lord puts us upon the same
footing as other men. We must rise early, be at our books, off to our
appointments, through winds, rains, and snows, cold and heat, with zeal
and earnestness; preach with spirit and power, whether the audience is
great or small, rich or poor, both early and late. We must come to the
people with something cheering, strengthening, inspiring, awakening,
stirring, and thrilling the hearts of men with the theme of Calvary.
There must be no murmuring, complaining, and repining about the amount
we have to do; we must do it cheerfully, and show that we delight
in our Lord’s work. It is a most sacred honor to us—a mercy from
God—that we are permitted to work for him, in his most glorious cause
at all; and the work must be performed cheerfully, freely, and with
all the heart, or it will not be acceptable to him, whether we are
supported or not.

The Lord has said that “the laborer is worthy of his hire,” and if
the preacher of Christ imparts spiritual things, he is to receive in
return, temporal things; but a “laborer” is a _working_ man, and the
Divine rule is, “if we sow sparingly, we shall reap sparingly.” The
man who preaches the gospel is by all reasonable men expected to do as
much labor as his strength will permit. It is reasonable that he should
be expected to apply his energies as men of other pursuits. The field
is wide open before him, and he should be a zealous, enterprising, and
persevering man, making full work in his calling. A man who does not
work any save a little on one or two days in a week, does not receive
much reward in any business, unless obtained by fraud. The physician
who makes a good support, works early and late, both good weather
and bad. The lawyer who makes a good support, is one of industry
and energy. The farmer who prospers, rises early, toils hard, and
perseveres late. In all departments, industry, perseverance and energy
characterize men who prosper. This is as true of the ministry as any
class of men on earth; they can never prosper without the most untiring
industry and perseverance. It is utterly useless for a man of idle
habits, addicted to loafing, wasting his precious time in useless
gossip to speak of his wants, his lack of support, or to try to induce
persons of industrious habits to feel that he is in need. They will
throw the whole matter off by saying, “Let him make an effort and
apply his energies, as I have to do, and he will have plenty.” But
let a preacher apply himself to his calling; persevere in it, making
every effort in his power; thus showing to all who know him, that his
labors are actually arduous and incessant, and he will receive full
credit from not only his brethren, but the community generally, for his
industry and faithfulness, and his temporal wants will as certainly
receive attention, as that _his work is of God_.

The Lord has men yet in this world, good and true, who will reward
labors of the faithful and persevering preacher of the gospel and
support him. Indeed, there is a kind of fixed principle among men, as
well as in the Divine administration, that industry shall be _rewarded_
and indolence _punished_, and it is not more certainly a settled
principle in reference to any class of men than preachers. We can not
expect to be wrapped in cloths, silks, and satins, with fine salaries,
for preaching one or two short discourses on Lord’s day, and then lying
in the shade all the week; much less can we expect christianity to
prosper, or the approbation of heaven rest upon us, in such an order of
things. We must penetrate the whole land in every nook and corner, and
preach the Word of the Living God to every creature.

We have not written this for any preacher older than ourself, but for
the sake of young men, whom we desire to see useful, influential, and
well sustained ministers of the Word of God. All such we entreat, to
study and labor to do the Lord’s work, and he will supply their wants
out of his inexhaustible storehouse.




PRESENT PUNISHMENT WILL NOT SAVE.


The mere circumstance of a man being punished for his sins in this
life, has nothing in it to purify his soul, purge his conscience, or
prepare him for the enjoyment of God. The Egyptians, the Antediluvians,
the Sodomites, and the Jews, had a just recompense of reward sent upon
them in this world, but this only sent them down to _tartareous_, to
be reserved, with the angels that sinned, to the judgment of the great
day, where, we are assured, Sodom and Gomorrah shall appear. Some men
appear to think, that if men are punished, to use their own style,
as much as their sins deserve, they must necessarily be happy then.
But men can not be happy—can not enjoy God, without justification,
purification of heart and conscience; and, unless thus prepared for the
enjoyment of God, they can not enjoy the world to come. This is a work
that punishment can not do. The hurling of angels, that sinned, down to
hell, the drowning of antediluvians and Egyptians, the burning of
Sodomites, and slaying of Jews, did not purify one of them. If men
live in unbelief, commit some capital offence, and are executed for
it, though this may be a just recompense of reward, it will not purify
their souls and prepare them to enjoy God. When men pass the boundary
line of life, they pass all the means, in the economy of God, for
preparing them for heaven, and no punishment will ever do what the
grace of God could not do.




THE MISSION OF INFIDELS.


The mission of infidels is not to build up anything but to pull down
churches, civil laws, governments, morals, the characters of men and
women, peace, happiness, protection of home, property and life. They
come with a mission of denials of the truths contained in the Bible—a
mission of war upon the Bible, religion, and the friends of purity
and mercy. They come not with a mission of peace and good will to
man, but a mission of hatred towards the Bible and all it enjoins—a
mission to pull down and destroy—to spread desolation among other
men’s labors and lay their work in ruins, leaving nothing but wrecks
and devastation. They come to neutralize, paralize and dishearten
all efforts for the amelioration of man’s condition—to discourage,
enfeeble and ignore all efforts to rise. They come not into our midst
with a warm, kind and affectionate appeal to the attentive, thinking
and reflective portion,—the more spiritually minded; but appeal to the
lukewarm, back-sliding, or the apostate, who is beginning to stand at a
distance, who already is descending upon the retrograde plane—not to
rescue him, or to prevent his retrograde movement, but to accelerate
it. The appeal to him is not to give him confidence, but to destroy his
confidence in his Bible, his religion, his brethren, and fill him with
doubts and distrusts. It is not to embolden him, but to intimidate him
and fill him with fears, and discourage him from all good forever.

The mission of infidels is not to enlighten, civilize and ennoble
the nations. They have never enlightened, civilized or elevated a
nation or a people since the world was made. They have never organized
society, established peace and order in any place on this earth. They
have established no civil institutions, no system of morals, no code
of laws, no system of education, and no institutions of learning
that deserve the name. Even the literature of the country has almost
entirely been left to the believers in the Bible. It is an easy work
to pull down civil government, subvert the foundation of organization,
condemn the means of enlightenment, and object to them. It is an easy
matter to deny everything and prove nothing; to doubt, vacillate and
fear. It is an easy matter to distrust, fill others with distrust,
destroy confidence, throw everything into confusion and uncertainty.
Some men have fallen so fully into this state, that they hardly will
venture to say they believe anything, have confidence in anything, or
know anything. One man, under the blinding, benumbing and stupifying
influence of unbelief, when asked whether he knew that he existed,
hesitated to say he did.

What ability, knowledge or learning does it require, to deny
everything? The most ignorant, illiterate and stupid, can deny as
stoutly, as the most learned, enlightened, and talented. It requires
no strength of mind to stand and deny—to declare in the most
pertinacious manner, disbelief, want of confidence, doubts, distrusts
and uncertainties in everything. A man who never read the Bible once
through in his life, nor ten other books, who has the most corrupt
character, can talk of inconsistencies, incongruities, contradictions
and absurdities, in the Bible, as stoutly as anybody. Any blockhead
could leap over the Falls of Niagara, or from the Suspension Bridge
below. In the same way, any man with or without much mind, learning or
talent, can leap into the dark abyss of unbelief, rejecting, contemning
and despising all evidence; but, would it not be the part of prudence,
of wisdom and discretion in such, to look before they leap? It is a
fearful experiment they are making. If the step is a mistaken one, it
can never be retraced beyond this life. He who makes the experiment,
obtains nothing now, only the unbridled privilege of declaring the
Bible false—religion priest-craft—that man will never be called to
account, hence all men can do as they list.

The mission of infidels is to risk, and induce all men to risk the loss
of everything, without the possibility of gaining anything in this
world, or the world to come. They have no worthy object—they can have
no worthy object in opposing the Bible. They have no reason for
opposing it, for they do not propose to make the world any better. They
have no proposition to make the world more true, kind, affectionate
or happy. Indeed, the very fact of their malignity towards the Bible,
shows that it is no fable. The land abounds with acknowledged fables;
why are they not enraged at these? They are read by the million;
but, sceptics are no more enraged at them than other men. If they
are satisfied the Bible is all fiction, false or human, why trouble
us about it? Why not let it pass? We hear thousands contending about
the “signs in the moon,” but we care nothing about them, and do not
even trouble those who believe in them; the reason is, we are well
and fully satisfied, that there is nothing in them. Why do they not
let the believers in the Bible pass in the same way? The reason is
obvious; they are in doubt, not fully satisfied, and feel that there is
uncertainty in their position. They see and are constantly impressed
with the fact, that if the Christian could be mistaken that his mistake
amounts to nothing—that he is as happy now, and has as high assurance
in regard to all beyond this life, to say the least of it, as they;
and that if the sceptic should prove mistaken, his mistake will be an
irreparable one. They see that a mistake on the part of a Christian
involves no danger, no serious consequences in this world or the world
to come; while a mistake on their part involves eternal consequences.
They are not constantly impressed, too, with the fact, that they are
relying upon that which amounts to anything like certainty; for a
large proportion who have occupied their position, before death have
repudiated and renounced it,—many of them in the immediate expectation
of death,—and warned all their friends against it. They find on the
other hand, that all who believed the Bible when in health, also
believed it when approaching death, and that no man who has contended
for its truth till he was in the immediate expectation of death, has
then denied it. They must, then, see that their mission is simply to
fill the world with doubts and distrusts, involving all in darkness and
uncertainty.




IS IT POSSIBLE TO AROUSE THE PEOPLE?


Is it not possible to rescue the people from the pernicious and
blinding influences of speculative theories and theorists, and induce
them to receive the simple faith of Christ, become his disciples, love
him and serve him? Have the leaders of the people, in these times, as
they did in the days of the Lord’s pilgrimage on earth, stolen away
the key of knowledge, and fastened them down with such an impenetrable
spell of thick darkness that they are unwilling to be rescued from
this servile slavery to human speculation to the rejection of the sun
of righteousness? Or is the world so lost, the mind of the people so
bewitched, the delusions around us so enchanting, that it is impossible
to attract the attention of the people, arrest their affections or
impress their hearts, by the love of God to man, by the sufferings of
Christ, by all the divine sanctions of the blood of the everlasting
covenant, by the glories of heaven, or the terrors of hell, to turn to
the Lord and follow him who loved us and gave himself for us? Is the
public mind so distracted, and are the people so confused and lost to
all that God has said and done, that they can not be induced to love
Christ better than all human theories, regard him and feel the force of
all his love to our lost and ruined world? Are the people so set upon
gnawing the bone of contention, keeping up sectarian feuds; disputing
upon the lifeless, soulless and profitless controversies thrust upon
them, that they will neither hear the Lord nor be interested in the
word of his grace? Must the public mind be wholly occupied with the
useless distinctions between the views of men, the useless comparisons
of doctrines and commandments of men, the comparative merits of
different human systems, and an eternal train of customs unknown to
the primitive church, thus bewildering the people and blinding their
minds that they may neither see the Lord nor regard his authority? Is
it impossible to bring the authority of the Almighty again to bear upon
the world, to lift up the Lord before the people, that he may draw
all men unto him, convert them to the Lord and place them under him?
Is it impossible to rescue the people from the blinding influences of
these times—from being merely followers of men, and believing human
theories, which have no power to save, in the place of believing
the great truth, that Christ died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures—that he was buried, and that he rose from the dead? Is it
impossible to interest the public mind with the things of God—with the
revelation from God to man, with the religion of Christ itself? Is the
love of God gone from the world? Has the Holy Spirit of God abandoned
the church? Is the human race mad, insane and ruined, so that all
pleadings and entreaties to turn to God must fail? Must the holy
religion of Christ be set aside for the silly disputes of these times?
Shall that holy religion that saved such vast multitudes in the days
of the apostles, fired the hearts of the missionaries of the cross and
supported the holy martyrs in passing through all the cruel scourgings,
tortures and privations for the name of the Lord, be contemned,
despised and rejected by the people of our day? O, that God would
enable us to _arouse_ the people of this generation from the awful
stupor and deep slumbers of carnal security to prepare to meet God!




A MOTHER’S GRAVE.


Earth has some sacred spots where we feel like looseing the shoes from
our feet, and treading with holy reverence; where common words of
social converse seem rude, and the smile of pleasure unfitting; places
where friendship’s hands have lingered in each other’s; where vows have
been plighted, prayers offered, and tears of parting shed. Oh, how the
thoughts hover around such places, and travel back through unmeasured
space to visit them. But, of all the spots on this green earth, none is
so sacred as that where rest, waiting the resurrection, those we once
cherished and loved—our brothers, our sisters, or our children. Hence,
in all ages, the better part of mankind have chosen and loved spots for
the burial of their dead; and on these spots they have loved to wander
at eventide, to meditate and weep. But, of all places, even among the
charnel-houses of the dead, none is so sacred as a mother’s grave.

There sleeps the nurse of our infancy—the guide of our youth—the
counselor of our riper years—our friend, when others deserted
us—she, whose heart was a stranger to every other feeling but love,
and who could always find excuses for us when we could find none for
ourselves. There she sleeps, and we love the very earth for her sake.
With sentiments like these, I turned aside from the gayeties of life,
to the narrow habitations of the dead. I wandered among those who had
commenced life with me in hope. Here distinctions were forgotten; at
least, by the quiet slumberers around me. I saw the rich and the great,
who scorned the poor, and shunned them as infected with the plague,
quietly sleeping by their side.




TENDENCY OF UNIVERSALISM.


That the obvious tendency of Universalism is irreligious; that it is
opposed to holiness, to reformation of life; that it is in eternal
hostility to all efforts to make the world better; that it paralyzes
and neutralizes the efforts of men to serve God—is one of the most
manifest impressions upon the mind, both from the theory itself, and
from the history of its practical workings among men. No pretended
system in our time has been characterized by such daring and unblushing
effrontery. It comes forward under a pretense of faith, but ridicules
the most awful and fearful things which that faith reveals. It discards
the eternal discriminations which the faith of the Lord Jesus maintains
between the righteous and the wicked—between those who serve God
and those who serve him not—between the vice and virtue—except the
reward of one and the punishment of the other, received in this life.
It proposes to believe the Bible, and would have men believe that it
teaches that he who was an atheist, a deist, and a scoffer at all that
God has said, and a blasphemer of the name of God till he breathed the
last breath, shall be received up into glory, and seated down with the
holy martyrs of Jesus, and enjoy God forever! No other system has so
far imposed upon the credulity of mankind, as to face the world, as
well as the heavens, and declare that the lake of fire prepared for the
devil and his angels, where the beast and the false prophet shall be
tormented day and night, forever and ever—the _gehena_ of fire, where
the worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched—is in this world, and
that the wicked we see are actually enduring its punishments!

No infidel desires any better opposition to religion than this. No
man who hates the Bible, and wishes its influence upon the world
counteracted, desires any more effectual method of doing it than this,
so far as men will receive it. Those who fall under its influence will
neither worship God nor keep his commandments. Atheism itself has all
the incentives to a righteous life found in this system, and may be
trusted just as far. Its influence is to harden the heart, and fill the
world with impenitence and indifference.




VALUE OF LEARNING.


If a man’s learning is combined with piety, devotion, and consecration
to Jesus Christ, and he is possessed with the humility and meekness
inculcated in Christianity, and his learning enables him to unfold
the unsearchable riches of Christ, with the simplicity, sincerity and
devotion necessary to commend it to the hearts and consciences of men,
it is of great value. If the Lord dwells in a man, if the great matters
of the kingdom of God fill his soul, and if his learning is used in
presenting the simple gospel of Christ in meekness, it may be of great
service to him; but, it requires much care to keep the Lord in front
of it, so that the hearers will see nothing but him. The more gifted
the man, the more learned and powerful, the better, if all his powers
are engaged in setting forth and honoring the Lord, sanctifying _Him_
in the eyes of the people. At the same time, he should rely upon not
learning only, or talent, or power that he possesses, but upon the
Lord, upon his gospel—the power of God unto salvation, to every
one who believes. He must look to heaven for the means to move men
to repent; he must appeal to God, keep God and his works before his
audience, and in this way show that his confidence is in Christianity
itself, and the author of it, and not in himself, not in man. Whether
men have what the world calls learning or not, they must know God, and
have the love of God in their hearts, if they would induce others to
love him and turn to him.




THE BIBLE INFALLIBLY SAFE.


Can men lead the people astray by insisting upon their adhering
strictly to the law of God, uniting upon it, living in peace and love?
Let the Lord reign. Let his law be the supreme authority. The Bible
is right if anything is right. All led by it are led rightly; all
under its influence are under proper influence; all opposed to it are
wrong—all the way wrong.

There is not one ray of light from heaven that has ever reached the
abodes of men in any creed, any book, or any man that is not in the
Bible.

If the man who honestly reads the Bible to know his duty or the will
of God, and does it to the best of his ability, praying daily for the
divine aid, both in understanding and doing, is not safe, infallibly
safe and right; no man in this world is safe.




EXCUSE FOR CREEDS.


One of the most common excuses offered for human creeds is, that “We
want something to keep us together—something to bind us in union.”
This apology is based virtually upon the same two preposterous
assumptions we have before mentioned. It assumes, with great apparent
innocence, that the Bible can not keep us together, that it cannot bind
us in union. Then it assumes, with much modesty, that a human creed
_can_ keep us together—bind us in union—_can do_ what the Bible _can
not do_. This, it appears to us, should startle any good man at once.
These assumptions are arrogant in the extreme, and not only arrogant,
but made without any regard to facts. Do human creeds keep churches
together? We assert, fearless of successful contradiction, that the
whole history of human creeds proves that they do not keep churches
together. Let us take one look at three of the most popular creeds in
this country, and see what they have done in keeping churches together.
How has the Baptist creed succeeded? Has it kept the Baptists together?
By no means. From the one original Baptist stock we have now not less
than nine or ten parties of Baptists. How has the Presbyterian creed
succeeded in keeping its adherents together? It is thought to be a very
wise and powerful document. Has it kept Presbyterians together? It has
succeeded no better than the Baptist creed. With all its adhesive
power, Presbyterians, within the last century have sundered into
some eight parties. This needs no commentary. How has the Methodist
Discipline succeeded? It is itself nothing but an offshoot of the
Episcopalian creed, which did not prevent the Methodists from stranding
off from the established church. The Discipline has not been in
operation more than one hundred and twenty years. How has it succeeded
in keeping Methodists together during that period? During that time
Methodism has stranded into some eight or ten fragments. What comment
this furnishes upon the efficacy of human creeds to cement together.
Other creeds have done no better; and yet, in the face of all this, men
want human creeds to _keep them together_!

All history shows, beyond all dispute, that wherever human creeds have
prevailed, divisions have abounded, partyism has increased, and unity
has been diminished. But where the people had confidence in the Bible,
the law of God, the “perfect law of liberty,” union has more widely
extended, and peace has more generally prevailed. Why then, in the name
of reason, hold on to human creeds to keep churches together, when
they have so universally failed, and refuse the Bible, which has never
failed?

Faith in a creed can not convert persons, or bring them to God. If they
are Christians at all, faith in God, the Redeemer and Savior of men,
in the Word of God, in the Gospel of Christ, has made them such, and
to God and the word of his grace they should commit themselves, their
everlasting trust, and not allow themselves to be divided by human
creeds.




OVER AND THROUGH THE MOUNTAINS.


This day was presented us some of the grandest objects of admiration,
both of nature and art, we ever beheld. We saw some of the grandest,
most stupendous and wonderful achievements of human enlightenment,
combined with industry, we had ever seen. At one moment we found
ourselves hundreds of feet above the tall pine trees, away in the
valley below, where, if we had been thrown off the track, we must have
been precipitated hundreds of feet down among the craggy rocks. In
another moment, we passed from the skirts of tree-tops, plunging into
the dark and dreary tunnel, cut through solid rock, hundreds of feet
under ground, where we could no more see than if we had never had eyes.
Truly is this a mighty and wonderful achievement for mortals—poor,
weak and dying mortals? It is overwhelming that _men_ should ever have
projected, prosecuted, and completed such a conveyance as this, such a
vast distance through this expanded and rugged region of country!

But, vast as this achievement may appear, when we are looking at it
as a _work of man_, it diminishes, dwindles and sinks into utter
insignificance and nothingness, when we lift our eyes above it, to “the
everlasting hills,” the workmanship of Him who “weighs the hills in a
balance, and handles the isles as a very little thing.” Also, how our
hearts are filled with reverence and our spirits impressed with awe,
when we lift our eyes above the hills, to the vast mountains, and
think of the thousands of miles over which this mighty range extends,
as well as others on our great _universe_! We are, at the same time,
filled with awe and gratitude, that we have the blessed assurance that
we are not overlooked, forgotten, and lost in the immensity of the
innumerable works of the Creator! But, blessed be his glorious name,
vast and innumerable as are his marvellous works, he has the time, the
goodness and compassion to provide for the fowls of heaven, and the
fish of the sea, as well as the beasts of the forests. Among all the
variegated multitudes of the feathered tribes, not even a sparrow falls
to the ground unobserved by Him; and, by the same Omniscient One, we
are assured, by our adorable Redeemer, the hairs of our heads are all
numbered. To the same amount, and for the same purpose, he says, “If an
earthly parent knows how to give good things to children, how much more
shall the Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to those who ask him!”
How comforting to think that he has promised, saying, “I will never
leave you nor forsake you, but will grant you grace and glory, and no
good thing will I withhold from you?” How secure, too, we can feel,
and how strengthening to reflect, when dashing through these fearful
mountains, conscious that though in one moment an accident might occur
by which our earthly career might be terminated, the everlasting arms
are underneath; and though the earthly building may be destroyed, we
have an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. To his
Almighty hand we commit our all; in Him is our everlasting trust. To
him be praises forever and ever.




REASON, PROVIDENCE, AND THE SPIRIT OF GOD, TEACH US TO OBEY GOD.


Some men are guided by _reason_, others by _providences_, and others
by spiritual _influences_, separate from, or without the word of God.
In regard to all this, it is not necessary to make much war upon them,
provided _their_ reason, providences, or influences, lead them to obey
the gospel, which we know was preached with the Holy Spirit sent down
from heaven. But, it is a sad comment on _their_ reason, providences,
or spiritual influences, when it leads them to disobey the teachings
of the Spirit of God in the Bible. Right reason, true providences, or
real spiritual influences, could not lead any in our day to disregard
what the Spirit of God taught in the establishment of Christianity. In
one short sentence: “The Spirit of God would not lead men to disobey
what he has clearly required in the Bible.” No reason, providences, or
spiritual influences, therefore, can be of the Spirit of God to lead
men to disobey what the Spirit of God taught in the Bible, or required
at the beginning. The Spirit of God required precisely the same of all
persons, who sought the way into the Kingdom of God, in the days of the
Apostles, that he does of all who seek the way now. The Holy Spirit has
not changed. It is, then, a most arrogant and unfounded pretence, for
any man who now attempts to set forth the way for sinners to come to
God, to claim that he is led by the Holy Spirit, while he evades and
refuses to set forth the plain and unequivocal requirements of the Holy
Spirit, as set forth in the New Testament, or attempts to improve upon
them. Nothing can be taken from those requirements, or added to them,
without incurring the curse of Heaven. The Spirit of God, if he did
lead men independent of his word, could not lead them to incur this
awful curse; he, therefore, manifestly, does not lead any man who will
add any thing to, or take anything from, what he required when he spake
through the apostles, of all whom he showed the way into the Kingdom
of God. That which he required in one case, he required in all cases.
If he required one man to believe, in order to become a disciple, he
required all to believe. If he required one man to confess Christ,
he required all to confess him. If he required one man to repent, he
required all to repent. If he required one man to “be baptized in the
name of Christ, for the remission of sins,” he required all to do the
same. If he promised one man pardon and the importation of his Holy
Spirit, upon his compliance with his requirements, he promised all who
complied with the same, whether all the items mentioned in one case,
are found in all, or not. No matter if faith is not mentioned in the
case of the three thousand on Pentecost; it is not left out; they all
believed; for, without faith, it is impossible to please God. They that
come to God must believe. No matter if repentance is not mentioned in
Saul’s conversion. Acts xxii. 16, he repented, for God requires all
men, everywhere, to repent. The same is true of all the items.

We, therefore, are the only people now known, who proceed upon the
infallibly certain method of collecting, and arranging in proper
order, all the items required by the Holy Spirit in the conversion of
sinners; we mean the inductive mode of reasoning. We have no preference
for any particular part of Scripture; it is all precious to us. We
have no particular class of Scriptures, as Calvinists, Universalists,
Unitarians, etc., but we take the whole Scripture; not to prove our
doctrine, but as the perfect and complete system of doctrine itself.
When we wish to examine any point of doctrine, we proceed upon the
inductive plan, and take all the Bible contains as the mind of God
upon that point. When we would ascertain what the Holy Spirit of God
requires of sinners, in their conversion and admission into the Kingdom
of God, we proceed through all the conversions of the New Testament,
collect all the items, and ascertain their order, and insist that the
Holy Spirit requires the same now; nothing more, nothing less. Let
us, then, take a brief look through the New Testament, at all the
conversions, and ascertain precisely what is required and what is
promised.

We open at the following words of the Philippian Jailor: “Sirs, what
must I do to be saved?” Here is a Pagan whose attention is for the
first time called to the subject. What reply does the apostle make to
him? The answer is, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt
be saved, and thy house,”—Acts xvi. 30-31. Here is an important item
in the form of requirement, and one, too, that can not be dispensed
with, for the Holy Spirit says: “He that cometh to God _must_ believe.”
It is not only a requirement that he should, but a positive and
unequivocal demand is that he _must_ believe, and this indispensable
demand of him that “cometh to God.” See Heb. xi. 6. But now for the
order of this item. Is it a first, second, third, or fourth item? Is it
the first item, for the apostle says, in the context, “Without faith
it is impossible to please God.” It is in vain, then, to try to do any
thing else to please him, so long as a man does not believe. It is the
first item, because the apostle required it first of a man who had
complied with no other item, in such a way as to lead him to believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ the first thing he did. It is the first item,
because “whatever is not of faith is sin.”—Rom. xiv. 23. It must,
therefore, be the first item, because everything else proceeds from it
and is done by it. The first item in the commission is Faith, and he
that sets aside that item will be condemned, let him think and act as
he may in regard to all other items. “He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be dammed,” says the
Lord. The first requirement, then, is to “believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ,” and without complying with this requirement, or taking this
step no person can ever take another. There is no reaching the second
step without taking the first. Unless the first step is taken, it will
eternally stand between any man and the second. This indispensable step
was required of, and taken by all who came to God under the guidance
of the Holy Spirit who spoke through the apostles to the people to
lead them to God. Never did one, from the days of the apostles to the
present time, get round, or by, this great requirement, and come to
God. It is true, that when the Pentecostians and Saul inquired what
they should do, they were not commanded to _believe_; but it was
not that faith was dispensed with in their cases, or that the Lord had
a different method of conversion for them, but for the good reason that
they _already believed_, and their faith caused them to inquire what
they should do.

Acts iii. 19, we find the following requirement laid down: “Repent ye,
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.” This
requirement was uttered to an assembly that had just witnessed one
of the most manifest miracles of the apostles—one which the enemies
mentioned shortly after, admitting that it was known to all who dwelt
in Jerusalem and that they could not deny it, and at the close of a
discourse which they had heard, and which had convinced them that the
work was of God. The Holy Spirit, on this occasion, demanded of them
to repent, reform, or amend their lives. This demand too, is as wide
as the actual sinners among men. In the times of ignorance before the
gospel, God did not hold men to a strict account for their sins, “but
now he commands all men, everywhere, to _repent_, because he hath
appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness,”
Acts xvii. 30-31. Repentance, too, is indispensable. “Except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish.” Luke xiii. 3. What does the Lord mean by
this word, “except”? John iii. 3, he says, “except a man be born again,
he can not see the kingdom of God.” Two verses after this, he says,
“except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he can not enter into
the kingdom of God.” Here we have the same word, “except,” again. What
does he mean by it? At verse seven, he explains as follows: “Marvel not
that I said unto thee, _Ye must be born again_.” _You must repent_ or
_perish_, then, is the meaning of the words, “except ye repent, ye
shall perish.” Repentance is then required of “all men, everywhere,”
and is indispensable—_must be_.

But what evidence have you that repentance is the second item? It is
the second item, because we have shown that faith is the first, which
shows that repentance can not be the first; and because Peter—Acts ii.
3, and iii. 19,—addressing people who believed, but had not repented
or done anything else, commanded them to repent. He makes it the second
item. It is the second item, because a man can not repent till he
believes in the Lord, before whom he must repent, and who convinces him
of sin, for, “by the law is the knowledge of sin,” which shows that it
must follow after faith; and because there is no other item in all the
records of conversions required, that he can acceptably comply with,
till he does repent. An impenitent person can not pray, confess, be
baptized, or do anything acceptable to God. The person, therefore, who
is a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, can not get over repentance, or
do any thing else acceptable to God till he repents. His faith will do
no good so long as he continues in impenitence. For his impenitence,
if he persists in it, he must perish. In the order of God, it is the
second step, and unless taken, will eternally stand between him and the
third step. No advance can ever be made till he repents. “Except ye
repent, ye shall perish.” It is true, that Ananias did not command Saul
to repent; but it was not because it was omitted in his case, for no
man ever entered the Kingdom of God without repentance; but he was not
commanded to repent, for the good reason he had repented before Ananias
came to him. We are not to expect any historian, in giving records of
conversions, and so many instances, to mention all the items in each
case.




WHAT IS CAMPBELLISM?


This has been a puzzling question. It is hard to find out precisely
what it is. Not a man yet, of all who have been engaged in fighting
this monster, has defined it, explained it, or told what it is. It
has been called a dangerous _heresy_, and so many hideous warnings
have been given against it, that the hair would almost stand upon
a man’s head to hear about it, and yet no one has told what it is.
The reason no one has defined _Campbellism_, is, simply, that _there
is no such thing in existence_, except in the imaginations of some
misguided doctors. As near as any man can now come, at what they mean
by Campbellism, it is _Christianity itself_, unmixed, unadulterated,
and without any other name. This is evident, for, when they hear a man
preach, who preaches nothing but Christianity, nothing but Christ,
simply aiming to convert men to him, and induce them to receive him
as their only Leader, they call it _Campbellism_. It is nothing but a
nick-name they have given the gospel, to keep men from hearing it. In
the same way, they call the preacher a _Campbellite_, who will preach
nothing but the gospel, nothing but Christianity, to raise prejudice
against him and prevent people from hearing him. In precisely the same
spirit, here comes Rev. N. L. Rice, of heresy-hunting memory, in a
tract of forty pages against Campbellism, which the reader may think as
he pleases about, but which is as much against the religion of Christ,
and those trying to receive it, practice it, and maintain it, and it
_alone_, as was in the power of Dr. Rice to make it, without, in so
many words, saying so. No man in this country, at this time, can preach
simply the gospel of Christ in the name of the Lord, under any other
name, and maintain the law of God, as the only rule of faith, without
being called a Campbellite, and branded with preaching Campbellism.




YOUNG PREACHERS MUST BE PRACTICAL.


The young man who would become a preacher, while he is receiving
knowledge, or obtaining the theory, must ply himself to the work,
making a practical use of what he learns. A man may study for years and
acquire an immense amount of knowledge, but having no practical use of
it, he is as helpless as an infant. In precisely this predicament are
thousands who have gone through the manufacturing process of making
preachers, without any practical use of all they have learned. Indeed,
many of them have learned nothing of consequence, of one of the most
important chapters in a real preacher’s learning, viz: “The ways of the
world.” The knowledge of the Bible—general “book-learning,” is all
right. It is indispensable. But to _know man_, is equally important.
Man must be studied to be known. We must converse with him face to
face. We must know the world by actual contact with it. We must know
the church by actual observation. We must know the obstructions in the
way of truth and righteousness by actual contact with them, with actual
and personal efforts to remove them.

Not only so, but the people must know the preacher—see him, hear
him, and have personal interviews with him. His work can not be done
by proxy. He must go _himself_ and put his own hands to the work. He
must be with them and give them a personal example of deportment and
religious conversation, read the Bible to them, pray with them in
their families, give thanks at their tables, go with them to the place
of worship, preach to them and persuade sinners to repent. A man who
does not do this, is really no preacher of Christ, and will accomplish
nothing for his name.




CHRISTIANITY.


Christianity literally subverts everything else, sets aside all
isms, doctrines and commandments of men of every grade, as the most
insignificant childish play. It comes to men, claiming the right to
have the attention of all as though all beside were undeserving of
any note or any regard whatever. Not only so, but it gives no chance
to assail, expose and refute, for it maintains nothing but the Bible,
but Christianity, but what God has given by inspiration and proved by
supernatural signs and wonders, accompanied with gifts of the Holy
Spirit, which all its assailants have to admit true! Can we expect to
present the only true religion; the religion of Jesus Christ itself;
the only true system; Christianity itself; the only revelation from
God; that contained in the Bible; the only authority of God; the
authority of the Word of God; the only true doctrine; the Gospel
of Christ itself; and declare everything else unauthorized—null
and void; hindrances to the progress of truth and righteousness; to
the edification of saints and the conversion of the world, and meet
no opposition? Not rationally. The watchmen on the old party walls
of their little Zions will see the tendency of all this. They will
see—they can not help seeing—that precisely in proportion as we
succeed in fixing the attention of the people upon God, his authority,
his Son, our gracious Redeemer and Savior, his word, his law, his
religion, as a distinct, complete and perfect system, with all the
power, grace, wisdom, mercy, benevolence, and authority of the Almighty
in it, calling the attention of man to it as the only medium of
salvation, all their systems must necessarily lose their attraction,
their command and influence, and hasten to ruin. Many of these watchmen
are pledged for life, too bigoted to look if they may be mistaken, too
obstinate, and self-willed to yield, and will oppose to the last.




KEEP POLITICS OUT OF THE CHURCH.


If a man has a leading object in view, no matter whether religious or
worldly, let him come out in his proper color, declare his object, and
drive directly at it. If a man has a favorite political scheme let him
declare it, publish a paper advocating it, or maintain it in public
addresses; but not under the name of _Christian_; not in the name of
the Lord, nor under a pretence of preaching Christ; for this would be
a manifest imposition, no matter how good the political doctrine. But
every attempt to make the religion of Christ auxiliary to political
ends, is a perversion, and in direct opposition to the whole spirit
and entire bearing of the Lord’s own reply, when charged with being
a political aspirant. When arraigned before Pilate, and charged with
claiming to be a king, he explained the matter, and obviated the charge,
or set it aside, by saying, “My kingdom is not of this world; if my
kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should
not be delivered to the Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence.”
John xviii. 36. While he frankly admitted that he was a king, and that
he came into the world to bear witness to the truth, he set aside all
ground of suspicion against him, as an aspirant to the throne, or any
other part in the civil government, or one who would in any way meddle
in the civil institutions of his country, by declaring that his kingdom
is not of this world. This declaration was no evasion, but a clear,
important and divine truth, and must be shown in the lives of the
disciples of Christ, by following his example, or the cause will suffer
immeasurably.

Our Lord was so careful to keep his kingdom and his mission distinct
from civil affairs, that when he was appealed to, to arbitrate a
dispute touching an inheritance, he inquired, who made him an arbiter
in such matters, or where was there any authority for him to step aside
from his mission, or, rather, pervert his mission and his office from
their high, spiritual and divine object, to a worldly, temporal and
business object. He was so careful to keep his mission distinct from
the world, and worldly relations, that when engaged in the work of his
mission, he refused to recognize a fleshly relation—his own mother,
brother and sister. In his kingdom he recognized no fleshly relation,
as a basis for any application to him, or a reason for his institution
conferring any benefit on any human being, not excepting his own
mother, according to the flesh. Those who _do the will of God_,
regardless of all fleshly ties, political conditions, or worldly
circumstances, whether male or female, bond or free, are mother, sister
or brother, to the Redeemer and Savior of man. So perfectly distinct
did our Lord and the apostles keep their mission from politics that
there is not the remotest hint that they ever participated in civil
affairs, in a single instance, in the whole of the sacred record. They
either never participated in politics in any way, or else looked upon
the whole matter as so distinct from their mission and work, as not to
be once mentioned in the whole Christian revelation. So distinct is
the New Testament from political institutions, that it contains not
one word of instruction to civil officers, in regard to their duties,
not one hint what kind of men we should vote for, or what form of
government we should favor. It simply enjoins that Christians “obey
every ordinance of man, for the Lord’s sake:” “submit to the powers
that be; for the powers that be are ordained of God,” and declares that
“rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil”; that “the
ruler is the minister of God, and bears not the sword in vain.”

The Christian law enjoins that we “follow _peace_ with all men and
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.” It is not enjoined
that we follow peace with a political party, but “peace with _all_
men,” and holiness. The Lord said, “Blessed are the _peace-makers_, for
they shall be called the children of God.” The angels of God shouted
when Jesus was born, “Glory to God in the highest, and on earth _peace_
and good will toward man.” Shall that religion enjoining its adherents
to “follow _peace_ with all men,” promising a blessing upon the
peace-makers, whose divine Author was introduced into the world, with
an angelic shout of “_peace_ on earth,” be made an instrument in the
hands of a misguided and worldly priesthood, in the political strifes
of the world? If it shall, we betide him who does it. It will kill
every preacher and every church that ever had the Spirit of God in
them, to do it. Indeed, all of this description are now dead. Not a
man nor a church among them, throughout the length and breadth of
the country, is doing anything for the cause of God. Not a sinner
is converted by them, nor a saint comforted. Many of them, old men,
that formerly had the spirit of the Lord, preached Christ with great
power, with their souls full of the love of God, converted sinners,
edified and comforted the children of God, now sit in the company of
worldlings, read and discuss politics on the Lord’s day, while the
house of God is forsaken.

Our mission is to preach Christ, Christianity, and to disentangle it
from all connection with these side-artifices, devised to draw men away
from the Lord. We have only alluded to slavery, and the excitement
about it, so far as to discover the proper course for a christian, but
not to discuss its merits, as a system, at all. In doing this, we have
simply applied to it the rule that we do to all questions of the kind,
viz: To inquire for the _course pursued by the Lord, the apostles, and
the first Christians, and follow it as infallibly safe and right_. In
doing this, we have certainly shown that those warring upon us in this
matter, have no commission from heaven, from Christ, or his apostles,
or, in anything in all their lives and practice. We shall, therefore,
as far as God shall enable us, preach the pure gospel of the grace of
God, both North and South, East and West, to all, both great and small,
high and low, rich and poor, bond and free; and thus labor to bring
them into the kingdom that is not of this world—a kingdom that can
not be moved—where the pure in heart can enjoy God, his Holy Spirit,
and his people, though the wicked rule and the civil governments
are corrupt, with the blessed assurance that they shall one day be
delivered from all the perplexities of an imperfect and sinful state.
Here we must all turn our attention at last.

Civil governments can never be perfected. They will always be working
wrongs and cruelties some place. The wisdom and power of man can
not avoid this. The wickedness and selfishness of men, also, are in
the way, so that the civil institutions of the country can never be
perfected; and he has studied Christianity to but little purpose, who
thinks its aim to be the perfection of the human contrivances of the
world. It looks above this, to the purification and perfection of
_individuals_, in their regeneration and personal sanctification, and
preparation for a better state. It does not, like some fleshly systems,
look upon this world as _man’s all_; but, as momentary, a pilgrim
state, not our home, not our continued city, but merely the preparatory
state to a better world. How soon this world will all be nothing to
all these political wranglers, who have suffered themselves to be made
tools for political parties, to the neglect of the church of God,
without one soul ever being able to see that all their noise, ever did
any good in any way. How silly it is, as well as unchristian, for old
friends, neighbors and _brethren_ to disagree and fall out about the
intricate and deceptive schemes of political wire-workers. Such men are
doing no good for their church or country. The very circumstance of
their falling out with their best friends, shows that they are insane
upon the very subject upon which they propose to enlighten the world,
and, of all men in the world, the most unsafe, to guide either church
or state.




UNPROFITABLE SERVANTS.


Looking at the eternal benefits Christianity has conferred upon us, and
the rich inheritance it proposes to confer in the world to come, the
little a poor mortal can do in a short lifetime sinks into nothingness,
and deserves not to be mentioned. When we think of him who became poor,
that we through his poverty might be rich—that he became a little lower
than the angels, that he, by the grace of God, should taste of death
for every man—that he had not where to lay his head—that he died for
us—think of the holy apostles and martyrs of Jesus, with all their
labors and sufferings—all we do, or can do, dwindles into perfect
insignificance. To God, over all, blessed for ever and ever, through
Jesus Christ, we owe eternal gratitude, praises and thanksgiving that
he has ever received us and permitted us to labor in his gracious cause
at all. To his name be honor and power everlasting.




BOUNDARY LINE OF REPENTANCE.


The boundary line of repentance. Life is the boundary line of
repentance. What the Scriptures call “time,” contains the whole period
during which man can turn to God. “To-day if you will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the bitter provocation, in the day of
temptation in the wilderness.” If we are ever molded into the image of
Christ, made conformable to his death, and prepared for the society
of the blessed, it must be while we are in time. To show that we are
inside of the clear revelations of God, we shall make two or three
references to the New Testament. One man, more curious to know the fate
of the masses, than his own duty to God and man, in our Lord’s lifetime
asked him: “Lord are there few that be saved?” To this the Lord
responded: “Strive to enter in at the straight gate; for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.” Luke xiii. 23,
24. He then proceeds to the time when this shall be, as follows: “When
once the Master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord,
Lord, open unto us; and He shall answer and say unto you, I know you
not whence you are.” In reply, they make an appeal to the fact that the
Lord had been accustomed to eat and drink in their streets. He replies,
“I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity.” This must be after death, for He refers to the future, “When
ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets in
the Kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust out,” or thrust away. It
is after death, because the Master of the house has never risen up and
shut to the door of the kingdom, in this life. As we sing sometimes,
“The doors of gospel grace stand open night and day.” None, in this
life, stand and knock at the door, crying, Lord, Lord, open to us, whom
the Master refuses to receive. His language now is, “Whoever will, let
him come and take of the water of life freely.” “He who cometh to me, I
will in no wise cast out.” “He who seeks shall find; to him who knocks,
it shall be opened,” and “whoever calls upon the Lord shall be saved.”
But the time will come, when the Lord shall have arisen and shut the
door, and men shall stand without, knocking and crying, Lord, open to
us; but He refuses them admittance and thrusts them away, declaring
that He never approved them.—Nothing like this can be found in this
life. It refers to the time when the fear of the wicked cometh as a
whirlwind; when distress and anguish shall overtake them; then shall
they call upon the Lord, but He will not answer them. See Prov. i. 26,
27.

Another passage to which we refer, to show that death is the boundary
line of repentance, is the case of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke xvi.
19, 31. This rich man died, “and in hell he lifted up his eyes, being
in torments.” Here we find a man in torments after death. Lazarus has
also died, and been carried by angels to Abraham’s bosom. Dives, once
the _rich man_, but now a beggar, looks up and seeth Abraham afar off,
and Lazarus in his bosom, and cries to him, “Father Abraham, have
mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame.” Now,
the question of repentance, or obtaining relief from punishment after
death, is fairly before us. In a case stated by our Lord himself, an
application is made for the mitigation of torment after death. But what
is the response of Abraham, who speaks in the place of the Almighty,
here? It is, “Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime received thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.” Here are two men after death, one _comforted_
and the other _tormented_. Can any change be made in their condition?
Let us hear Abraham. He then proceeds: “Besides all this, between
us and you there is a great gulf fixed; so that they who would pass
from hence to you can not; neither can they pass to us that would
come from thence.” This is an end of all change of condition. In that
world there is no turning to God nor falling from grace. The rich man,
then despairing of any mitigation of his torments, or change of his
condition, makes one more appeal to Abraham. “I pray thee, therefore,”
said he, “that thou wouldst send him to my father’s house; for I have
five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come into
this place of torment.” Having fallen into torments, on account of
his unbelief, and having five brethren also unbelievers, he desired
testimony presented to them from the dead, lest they also come to
this place of torment. But Abraham answers, “They have Moses and the
prophets, let them hear them.” The rich man persists: “If one went
unto them from the dead, they will repent.” This is the only New
Testament account of a request for a departed spirit to be sent to our
world to lead sinners to repentance; but this request, coming from one
already in the torments of a wicked man after death, was refused in the
following words: “If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.” This shows that God
will allow no means employed to save sinners save only those of his own
appointment, and writes the seal of condemnation upon all visitations
of the spirits of dead people to save sinners.

The next and only passage more to which we shall refer, to show the
boundary line of repentance, is Rev. xxii. 11, “He that is unjust, let
him be unjust still; he who is filthy, let him be filthy still; and he
who is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let
him be holy still.” This is an end of all repentance, of all turning to
God, and also an end to all departing from him. The holy shall remain
holy, and the wicked remain wicked, from this time forward. Jesus made
his personal efforts to save man in this world. When he left the world,
he committed to the apostles the ministry and word of reconciliation,
and they made their efforts in this world. All the means ever employed
to save man, have been employed in this life. All the cases of
acceptable repentance that we have ever known anything about, were in
this life. If, therefore, men ever turn to God, it must be in time.

We proceed in the third place, to consider the state of man between
death and resurrection. There were, in the days of our Lord’s
pilgrimage, a class of materialists, who not only denied the
resurrection of the dead, but that there was an angel or spirit. Many
were the debates which they had with the Pharisees who differed with
them upon these three points. Knowing that our Lord had sanctioned
the doctrine of the Pharisees, that there were angels and spirits,
and would be a resurrection of the dead, the Sadducees approached
the Lord with the puzzle, touching the resurrection of the woman and
seven husbands. As if they had said, “Now, Master, you agree with the
Pharisees, and teach that there will be a resurrection of the dead; but
this doctrine involves a difficulty; for a certain woman, in the course
of her life, had seven husbands, and we should be pleased to know which
one shall have her in the resurrection?” Our Lord soon explains this
matter. He says, “In the resurrection they neither marry nor are given
in marriage, but are as the angels of God.” He proceeds, “Now that the
dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he calleth the
Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
For he is not a God of the dead, but of the living, for all live unto
him.” While those departed from this life, are dead to us, they are
alive to God—“_for all live unto Him_.” “The inner man,” as Paul calls
him, or “the hidden man of the heart,” as Peter styles him which is
eternal, “not corruptible,” but immortal, which Jesus says, man is not
able to kill, though separated from us, or dead to us, is _alive to
God_, “for all live unto Him.” See Luke xx. 27-38.

The Transfiguration of Christ presents us the three states, the
fleshly, the intermediate, and the resurrection, or eternal state, all
at once. The Lord is changed into the glorified state, is seated upon
the throne, as we would see him to-day, if we were before him in heaven.
Hence Peter says, “We were eye witnesses of His majesty, for he
received from God the Father, honor, and glory, when there came such
a voice from the excellent glory. ‘This is my Son, in whom I am well
pleased.’” On this august occasion, Peter, James and John represented
the fleshly state. They were present in the flesh. Moses was here,
not in the flesh, for he had died some fifteen centuries before this.
He was not in the resurrection state, for Christ was the first-born
from the dead of every creature, that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence. But he was in the intermediate state, or the man
Moses was there separate from the body; alive, conscious, and held a
conversation with the Lord, in regard to his great sufferings to be
accomplished at Jerusalem. Though Moses had been dead to the world
fifteen hundred years, and his body mingled and lost in the dust, he
was alive to God all this time, and so are all the dead. He had not
lost his identity, nor his name, but is known and mentioned as the
_man Moses_, in a conscious state, seeing, hearing and talking. Our
friend, so much loved, lamented, but now dead to us, is alive to God,
and as conscious, and maintaining his identity as much as when here
in the body. Another dignitary present at the transfiguration, was
Elijah, who was taken to heaven without seeing death. He was in the
glorified state, in the body, glorified, spiritual, as all the bodies
of the blessed are. Probably the Lord took him to heaven without seeing
death, in view of this very occasion. What a grand scene is now before
us. The Lord of the universe is before us upon the throne; the old
prophet Elijah, stands before him who was the great prophet of all the
authority, before the witnesses of Christ. Here stands Moses, the
Law-giver of ancient Israel, and recognizes the Lord Jesus Christ,
and surrenders up all authority to him. Just at this wonderful and
interesting moment, the Almighty from the upper world, called out,
“This is my Son, the beloved in whom I am well pleased: _hear him_.”

Let us hear Paul once, on this subject. “Therefore we are always
confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord.” In a few words, he says, “Wherefore we labor,
that, whether present or absent, we may be accepted of Him.” 2 Cor.
v. 9. How could we be “present with the Lord,” and “accepted of Him,”
when absent from the body, if there be not an inner spiritual man,
who will exist separate, or absent from the body? No man living can
ever reconcile this passage with the preposterous theory, that when
a man dies, he has no conscious existence. To this we add only one
more scripture. When John, in the Island of Patmos, was in awful and
sublime vision, and saw the whole panorama of the future ages passing
in review, he says, “I saw under the altar, the souls of them who were
beheaded for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus Christ,
and they cried and said, how long, O Lord God Almighty, holy, just and
true, dost thou not avenge us of our blood on them who dwell on the
earth.” Here were souls, alive, looking back to what had been done on
earth, and looking forward to what would be done in future. They had
not lost their identity nor memory, forgotten the past nor distrusted
the future, but were alive. The intermediate state is, therefore, a
conscious state, the righteous are comforted, and at rest with the
Lord, in Abraham’s bosom, or Paradise; the wicked are in _Tartareous_,
in prison, tormented, reserved unto the judgment of the great day, with
the angels that sinned.

In the fourth, and last place, let us take one look forward to
the eternal, or resurrection state. Looking to the close of the
intermediate state, John says, “I saw a great white throne, and him
that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away,
and there was found no more place for them. And I saw the dead, small
and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another
book was opened which is the book of life; and the dead were judged out
of these things which were written in the books, according to their
works.” Rev. xx. 10-12. After thus presenting the dead in judgment,
he proceeds to tell us where they came from, as follows: “And the sea
gave up the dead that were in it; and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them and they were judged every man according to
their works.” The Greek _hades_, here translated hell, simply means the
invisible, or unseen state. In this invisible state, the book of God
reveals two distinct, or separate apartments. One is _Paradise_, the
other is _Tartareous_. In this same book of Revelations, John, speaking
in the person of Christ, says, “I am he who _was dead_ and _am alive
forevermore_; I have the keys of hell and of death; I can open and no
man can shut, and shut and no man can open.” The amount of this is,
that I have the keys or power, to open the grave, and raise the bodies
both from land and sea, and I have the power to open the invisible
state, both _Paradise_ and _Tartareous_, and bring forth the spirits of
the dead, both righteous and wicked, re-uniting soul and body, to stand
in judgment. When the last righteous sentence is passed upon man, in
the last judgment, the final separation follows. Whoever was not found
written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire. This is the
second death. Here is the last account of the wicked, the incorrigible,
and we must leave them where God leaves them without any attempt to
dwell upon their deplorable and irremediable condition.

Let us now turn our attention to the righteous—the good and virtuous
of all ages—those who feared God and worked righteousness in every
nation. John says, “I saw them coming from every nation, kindred,
tongue, tribe and people, who had washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb, and they shouted, blessing and glory,
and honor, and might, and dominion unto him who sits upon the throne
and to the Lamb, for ever and ever!” And again they shouted, Hallelujah
to the Lamb! The Lord God Omnipotent reigns! John looks again, and
says, “I John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard
a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people,
and God himself shall be with them and be their God. And God shall wipe
all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither
sorrow, nor crying, for the former things are passed away.” Shall we
who are bathed in tears, here to-day, reach the holy city, where we
shall be called to pass through the deep waters of affliction no more;
where we shall hear the groans of the sick and dying no more; where
there will be no visiting of the sick, nor funeral occasions; where
we shall no more be called to give up fathers and mothers in death,
husbands or wives, or precious children; but where the wounded heart
shall be made whole, the weary spirit shall be at rest, and the mourner
comforted. How ineffable the bliss! How unutterable the joys! of a
state where we shall not only be free from all the afflictions that
encompass us here, but see the Lord and dwell with him forevermore!
How invaluable the rich boon proposed to man, through the Lord Jesus
Christ! What everlasting obligations we are under to love God and serve
him! Let us put our everlasting trust in the Lord, our strength and our
Redeemer.




RECEIVING SINNERS WITHOUT BAPTISM.


It is an unfavorable step toward “educating a man up to the importance
of being buried with his Lord and Master in baptism,” to set the law
of God requiring it aside, and receive him without it. This would
only lead him to doubt whether we saw or cared for the importance of
it ourselves. It never can have a good influence on any sensible man
to see religious people so anxious to get him into their party as to
set aside their own established principles, and what they hold to be
clearly the _law of God_, for a man not willing to submit to the law of
induction into the heavenly family. This is not _liberality_, but
_disloyalty_ all around. It is not a question about what _we_ will do,
but what the _Lord_ will do.

Mere refinement and respectability have nothing to do in the matter. It
is a matter of faith and respect to the supreme and absolute authority.
Has a man the faith, the humility and the obedient spirit that will
learn of Jesus and yield to what he requires? We are not vying with any
people in this country in efforts to be liberal and easy in our views
and practice, but we desire to see who can live nearest to the Lord
and follow him most closely. He laid down the law of induction, or the
law for receiving members, and we have no discretionary power in the
matter. We do not make the terms, but simply exhort men to comply with
them, as found in the Book of God.




THE FALL OF BEECHER.


The American people are so familiar with the name and character of
Henry Ward Beecher, that no explanation of what follows, is needed
by the present generation. Beecher is the most gifted and noted
_liberalist_ and progressionist in America. He is out at sea, without
chart or compass. The movements of the wind, and the motion of the
current, determine his course. He cares not whither he sails or where
he lands, or whether he lands at all or not, so that the breeze is
pleasant and the waves smooth. His great mind, glib tongue, and
tireless pen, have enabled him to unsettle and pervert the faith of
thousands of honest and unsuspecting people. Even some preachers
among the disciples, who are noted for their adherence to the fixed
principles of revealed religion, have been seduced by Beecher. The good
providence of God, in time, revealed the true character of the man
of no faith, and men now see it blackened and tarnished by crime and
immorality. Let the liberalists and progressionists among the disciples
of Christ, take warning from the downfall of the far famed Beecher.

Scandal has come; disgrace and shame that would make any conscience,
not seared with a hot iron, tingle; or any face, not past feeling,
blush. But the Bible is no way responsible for it, not even in
appearance. Beecher was no Bible man. Bible men were not his admirers,
nor the men that gathered around him, that liked him only the more for
his broad views, his liberality, when he pronounced that beautiful
benediction on the Pope, “God bless his old soul,” and said he could
commune with the Pope, or worship at a pagan altar; declared that there
is not a particle of divine authority, in any church in the world;
that he was inspired as much as the apostles; and would baptize a man
every month if he desired it; that there is no authority for infant
baptism; but he was for it now stronger than ever, because it was a
good thing—it had been tried! This man identified with the Bible? Not
a word of it. The Bible is responsible for none of the scandal and
disgrace that hang upon him and must hang there forever. No, not a word
of it, you unbelieving man; we turn all over to you; we have here a
specimen of _your work_; _unbelief_; what it can do in a short time;
how it can drag a man down, and the ruin to which it can bring him.
Here is the fruit of unbelief; he can eat of it, and all unbelievers
can view it, and see what comes of a man that contemns the Bible and
puts its authority at defiance.

Gentlemen, unbelievers, if you like to view the results of unbelief,
and the ruin that follows in its train, come up here and see what
it has done in the case of an illustrious man; a man whose fame has
extended throughout the civilized world; a man of wonderful versatility
of thought, and immense gifts as a speaker and writer, with such an
opening as no other man on the continent had. This man had reached
mature years, and his influence had become so great, that many good
people would not hear a word against him, nor believe that his terrible
skeptical talk meant any harm. It was only _independence_. But, in the
midst of such a career of popularity, and that not of an ephemeral
character either, as no other man in this nation ever had, up springs
trouble in the midst of his most intimate friends, and those he knew
better, and had associated with more intimately than any others.
It comes not from persecutors without, nor from enemies or envious
preachers within, but his most intimate friends, who know him better
than all others.

But, why do not infidels make an ado about infidels falling? They never
fall! They have never attained to anything from which they can fall.
They are at the bottom and there is nothing below them to which they can
fall. We know of a case where an infidel has recently covered himself
all over with slime, but nothing of consequence is said about it. Why
not? If he had been a preacher of the gospel his case would have been
published half round the world before now. But he is _an infidel_, and
the idea of purity is not associated with infidelity, in the public
mind. There is no noise about it. His brethren, infidels, bring him
to no trial, call him to no account, appoint no committee, and have
no examination of the case! Why not? He _professed nothing_, and they
_profess nothing_. Such things do not disgrace them, or bring scandal
on them.




SPEAK PLEASANTLY.


The opponents of the truth will catch every unkind or unpleasant word;
every unlovely expression or harsh sentence, and comment on it, in the
absence of argument, and even divert attention from the main matter. We
should, then, simply study how to present the truth, in the clearest,
most agreeable and acceptable manner; how to show people the truth,
convince them and enlist their souls in it. This is the great matter to
study, and not how to avoid differences and not discuss them at all. We
are studying how to practice this, and we desire all the friends of the
Lord to study it and give the adversary no advantage.




VARIOUS KINDS OF SCEPTICISM.


Sceptics float in thin ether, if not some times in pure vacuum,
in vast, unknown and unknowable regions of pure fancy and idle
imagination. They roam in everlasting inquisitiveness in the immense
realms of intangibles and invisibles. They are variously styled in
New Testament terminology, “clouds without water,” “wandering stars,”
“filthy dreamers,” etc., etc. They spend their time, confuse themselves
and shatter their brains, in explaining “degrees in glory,” “degrees
in punishment,” “different spheres,” “the possibility of holding
converse with departed friends,” “the origin of sin,” “how God will
overrule evil for the good of man and his own glory,” “the origin of
the devil, if there be any,” or, “who made the devil,” or, “whether
he is a real being, or only a personification of evil,” “whether God
did not know, when he created man, that he would sin,” “why he created
man, knowing that he would sin,” “whether he did not know, when he made
man, who would be saved and who would be lost,” and, if he did, “why he
created those he knew would be lost,” “whether angels are a distinct
order of beings from men,” “whether we shall know each other in the
eternal state,” “with what body the dead will be raised,” “whether the
righteous and wicked will rise at the same time,” “where the spirit is
between death and the resurrection,” “whether it is conscious, or can
exist separate from the body,” “when the end of the world will be,”
etc., etc.

We have now an immense swarm of these idle dreamers; some of these
have already reasoned themselves into the hallucination that they are
in the New Jerusalem state, and that the christian dispensation, or
the mediatorial reign of our Lord Jesus Christ has passed away! These
idle away their time in discussing the ascension, through the different
grades of spheres, which they imagine they shall eternally be attaining
and passing through, with other kindred topics. Another class reason
themselves into absolute fatalism. With them, all the actions of men,
and the very thoughts that lead to them, are of _necessity_, and cannot
be anything else! There is no praise of one class, or condemnation of
another, for all do just what they do from an eternal necessity! Off,
at another angle, another party is found, theorizing upon the whimsical
notion of human pre-existence, in which state, they think a consistent
origin for sin may be found! Yet another class perceive, that deep
down in the Bible, where, till recently, none had ever penetrated, the
doctrine is found, that, at judgment, the wicked will be stricken out
of existence, thus ridding them of the idea of endless punishment,
which had previously given them much distress! Still another class
of these, have rid themselves of the same distressing and annoying
doctrine, by making the astonishing discovery, that there is no devil,
no hell, nor punishment of any kind, beyond the present state, and,
therefore, no danger of any endless punishment! Still another class
became perplexed with these metaphysical reasonings, subtleties and
theorizings, in things that they cannot help feeling conscious can have
no possible beneficial effects upon mankind, and rid themselves of the
entire concern, by making the discovery that all things come by chance,
that there is no God, Savior, angel or spirit, and death is an eternal
sleep! But we sicken at the effort of trying to describe the vain and
idle speculations of all these “wandering stars,” and shall proceed to
something more tangible.

Scepticism has no foundation, no basis, no reality upon which to
rest. It has nothing to build upon; no rock; no pillars of any kind.
Nor has it any materials or builders. Nothing can be built without a
foundation, materials and builders. Sceptics are not builders. Their
work is merely _pulling down_ old buildings. This is the reason they
make so much show; their work is easy, requires but little skill and
no goodness. Anybody can tear down, but it takes a workman to build.
Scepticism is a mere negative, consisting wholly of denials. It affirms
nothing, establishes nothing, and builds up nothing. It is a natural
impossibility to build upon a mere negative. A system cannot, in the
very nature of things, be built upon a mere denial—a mere negative.
If a man would deny, repudiate, and condemn all the foundations of
all the houses in his city, or if he would go and tear his neighbor’s
foundations all down, it would give him no foundation for a house,
but would simply put them in the same condition with himself—that
is, _without any foundation_. In the same way, if infidels could
successfully deny, disprove and overthrow the foundation of every
system of religion in the world, it would lay no foundation for them,
but would simply put the rest of us upon a level with them—that is,
_without any foundation_. The work of all sceptics has been, simply to
tear up the foundation of Christians, and not to lay any foundation for
themselves. Not a man in all the ranks of unbelief has ever presented
any foundation, or has any. Their entire clamor is against the Bible,
but if they could expunge the Bible from the universe, they are no
better off—they have nothing to stand upon.

Scepticism has no center of attraction, no gravitation, no great
central pervading idea, drawing everything to one common center. A
system must have a common center of attraction, holding it, in its
revolutions, from flying into atoms. But, scepticism has no pervading
idea, doctrine or constitution, in which everything centers, around
which everything revolves, with power to attract and bind. It consists,
simply in denials of what others believe. If the things which they
deny were untrue, and should be denied, the denial of them is no
foundation or center of attraction. Their denial amounts to nothing in
their favor, but is simply unfavorable to others—destructive of the
attraction binding others together. A million of the most unequivocal
denials of the most absurd and preposterous doctrines the world ever
contained, forms no center of attraction, doctrine or constitution, in
which is embodied and concentrated any principal of attraction that
can bind in a system. Denying simply frees men and cuts them loose,
in their own estimation, from that which they deny, or what others
believe, but binds them to nothing.

Scepticism has no law, gives no advice, and has nothing in it about
the characters of men. It does not say that a man shall, or shall
not, have a good character; that he shall or shall not have a bad
character. It contains no such words and has no such idea, or keeps
up no such distinctions as good and bad. It says nothing about love
and hatred, revenge and pity, covetousness and benevolence, vice and
virtue, happiness and misery. It contains not one sentence touching
all the relations in life, providing nothing for individuals, families
or nations. It consists of one negative principle, viz: _The denial of
the truth of the Christian religion_. Any man can see that there is no
law in this. If they could succeed in this denial, and show beyond all
contradiction that christianity is not true, it amounts to nothing.
It is no law, and accomplishes nothing in any way, only to bring
christians upon a level with them—with _precisely nothing_.

Scepticism has no rewards for the good. It promises nothing in
this world nor that which is to come. It holds out no rewards, no
inducements of any kind for the good, in time or eternity!

Scepticism has no punishments for the bad, here nor hereafter. It
contains no punishments for evil doers—the profligate, dissipated, and
corrupt; thieves, robbers and murderers. It knows nothing of crimes or
punishments for crimes, of any grade or atrocity.

Scepticism has no reformatory power. A denial, or a train of denials,
even denials of error, can never restrain sinners nor reform men. The
influence is simply negative. In the very nature of things, it cannot
act positively. Denials or negatives require nothing, give nothing,
and, as a matter of course, can produce no reformation. It is a
negative system, if we may be allowed to call it a _system_ at all,
and in the very nature of things, its influence must be negative. It
is like cold, which is simply the absence of heat; for the suffering,
in the absence of heat, is from want of heat. Scepticism is simply the
absence of the heat of christianity. Darkness is merely the absence of
light, or it is the negative of light, else it and light could exist at
the same time, in the same place. In precisely the same way, scepticism
is the absence of gospel light, or faith. The soul without faith is
empty, cold, dark, and hungry, suffering and perishing, for light,
heat and food. Scepticism is no system, not a reality, substance or
entity of any kind, but the absence of all these. To speak in general
terms of faith, both christian faith and all other faith, the absence
of it, would be the absence by far of the greater part of all we know,
or that may be known by man. There is nothing more certain than that a
man who knows much, must believe much. Scepticism is not the possession
of reformatory principles, but simply the absence of them. There is
nothing that a man can be more conscious of, than that scepticism never
did, and never can, make a man better. Inherently, there is nothing
in it. It is the absence of something. The mere absence of faith, of
religion, doctrine and principles, most indisputably can do a man no
good, and can have no power to save him in any sense. To speak of
saving a man from starving by the absence of food, saving him from
thirst by the absence of water, or from darkness by the absence of
light, or from sickness by the absence of the only medicine that could
save him, is not more absurd, than to speak of unbelief reforming man.
Scepticism is not heat, but the absence of it; not light, but the
absence of it; not faith, but the absence of it; not knowledge, but the
absence of it; not medicine, but the absence of it; not nourishment,
but the absence of it. The sceptic is a man perishing with cold,
while he is graciously offered the warmth of christianity; groping in
darkness while the light of heaven is as free for him as the rays of
the sun; starving, with an invitation to eat of the bread that comes
down from heaven; dying with thirst, while God is holding out to him
the water of life; a sick man refusing to take an infallible remedy
from the physician, simply exercising the power to reject all that
could do him any good, resting, refusing, denying and dying.




CHRIST THE CENTER.


In the kingdom of God the Lord is the center. He said, “I, if I be
lifted up, will draw all men to me.” “As Moses lifted up the serpent in
the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whoever
believeth on him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” The
great apostle to the Gentiles, after giving a brief summary of side
considerations, and many of them weighty, in his situation, says of
them all, “I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss
of all things, and do count them but refuse that I may win Christ.”
Phil. iii. 8. Again, said this man of God, “I determined to know
nothing but Christ and him crucified.” He would not be drawn aside
from the center of attraction in the kingdom of God. In the close of
his elaborate letter to the Corinthians, among whom many distracting
annoyances were operating, and in reference to those who disturbed the
peace and love of the church, he declares that “If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, he will be accursed when the Lord comes.” I. Cor.
xvi. 22. “Whoever hateth his brother, is a murderer; and ye know that
no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him.” John iii. 15. Again,
says the holy apostle, “These be they who separate themselves sensual,
having not the spirit.” James xix. The Lord says, “By this shall all
men know that you are my disciples, if you have love one to another.”

From him who thus teaches, we are not to be drawn aside, whether we
precisely agree upon every side question, or the manner of procedure in
reference to it or not. By him we must stand forever more. To him we
must pay supreme homage. This can only be done by standing firmly upon
his precise teachings, as far as poor, imperfect creatures possibly
can, and putting our everlasting trust in him. The cause is now
progressing, its prospects brightening, and its way opening beautifully
in almost all directions. The good, the reliable, the faithful and
working men, are gathering up afresh, combining and accumulating
strength, which will be expended upon the armies of the enemy around,
with tremendous effect. Let every man who can lift a Bible speak a
word, or give an expression of countenance, for the Lord, and for his
work, do it; do it with earnestness, spirit and power; do it with
strong faith and determination, and it will tell upon the world for
good, in ages to come. Let us make an effort, united, energetic and
mighty, in the Lord’s name, for his cause; and let the effort continue
while the Lord shall give us life, and exhort the brethren to push
it onward with our dying breath. To his name, be honor and power,
everlasting.




RICHES OF FAITH.


God has created man with credulity, or the ability to believe; he has
graciously given us the truth, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the
Living God, to belief; with the divine testimony that incontestably
proves the truth. But he does not compel any man to read the testimony,
to hear it read, to examine it, try to understand and appreciate it.
He lays it before the world, and demands of the nations to hear it.
It is like all the other blessings God has afforded man; it must be
sought, inquired after and received, or do men no good. Men may be none
the better of its ever entering into the world. It may be that God has
created a rich mine of gold in some part of the earth. One man seeks
all the information he can obtain, in reference to it, becomes
satisfied of its richness and accessibility; he makes a proper effort
and obtains a fortune. Another man, with equally as good endowments,
treats the whole question with indifference to it. Without examining
the testimony, he pronounces all delusion, humbuggery, a chimera, and
ridicules it, and the man that seeks information, or inquires into it.
What good will the gold mine do him? None whatever. So far as he is
concerned, it might as well never have been created.

But, it fares infinitely worse than this with him who treats with
indifference the pearls of Jesus Christ. He who prefers the darkness
of this world to the light of the Son of God, turns away his ears from
the holy and lovely lessons of the benevolent Redeemer, refuses to
inform himself in reference to Him, to whom God requires all nations
to be attentive, incurs a responsibility for which he will certainly
answer at the most solemn tribunal. He who turns his back upon the Lord
of heaven and earth, when we would call attention to him, not only
loses or forfeits the benefits proposed through him, but incurs censure
for indifference, ingratitude and disrespect, if not contempt of his
Creator and merciful Benefactor. God has created him with a heart to
believe, given the truth, and furnished the testimony to convey it to
the understanding, and holds him responsible for the exercise of his
abilities. Come, then, dear reader, and let us fix our minds upon Jesus
of Nazareth, and carefully consider his claims upon our attention. The
whole question is about him. What do you think of him whom we claim as
the Savior of the world? Do you love him and those like him? Or, are
you opposed to him?




ONE BAPTISM.


We take it as Wesley did, that “by one Spirit,” is by the _direction_
of one Spirit, we are all immersed into one body. It is clear that
the baptism alluded to is the initiatory rite, for there is no other
baptism _into one body_. The immersion in the Spirit is not _into one_
body, or _into_ anything. At the house of Cornelius they were immersed
into Christ after they had been immersed in the Holy Spirit. The
immersion in the Spirit was to convince Peter and his Jewish brethren
that God intended to receive the Gentiles as well as the Jews. Hence,
when Peter, in his rehearsal of the matter to his Jewish brethren, when
he came to this, exclaims, “What was I that I should withstand God?”

The “one baptism” of Paul is the initiatory rite—the baptism of the
Commission, connected with the faith and repentance for the remission
of sins, and will remain as long as there is one to believe, repent or
seek remission of sins. The faith, repentance, confession, immersion
and remission of sins stand connected in the gospel of the grace of
God, and we see not how any man can be so perverted as to try to evade
any one of these items.




DISTURBING ELEMENT.


The Bible is not the disturbing element, or property that prevents
fusion, for all the sects have the Bible, speak well of it and commend
it. They all bold the Bible in common. It is well received among all
denominations. The Bible is not, then, the divisive element, or the
repellent property among them that renders fusion impossible.

The Lord is not the repellent element, or property that prevents
fusion, for they all speak well of him. Indeed, they all claim to have
him with them and to love him.

The Holy Spirit is not the disturbing element, or property, for they
all speak well of him, and claim to love him and to have him dwelling
in them.

What, then, is the repellent property among them that prevents fusion,
or union? It is this very pet, dear and precious creature that they
all press to their hearts, guard so sacredly, and love so dearly, and
hold on to as to life itself—_denominationalism_. This is the element,
the corroding element, the foreign property, that will not fuse. It
is constitutionally a rebel against union. It is antagonistic and
repellent. What is it that makes the denomination? It is that which is
peculiar to it. It is not the Bible that makes a Methodist, nor the
love of the Bible, nor anything in it, for the Presbyterian has the
Bible, loves it, and all that is in it, as well as the Methodist. It
does not make him a Methodist. It is not the Lord, for the Presbyterian
receives the Lord as fully as the Methodist, and the Lord does not
make him a Methodist. It is not the Holy Spirit, for all the first
Christians received the Holy Spirit, and they were not Methodists;
there never was a Methodist before John Wesley.

What, then, is it that makes the Methodist? It is simply that which
is peculiar to Methodists, and that which is not received by a
Presbyterian. What is it that makes a Presbyterian? That which is
peculiar to Presbyterians, and not received by Methodists. Why, then,
can not Methodists and Presbyterians fuse into one mass, or unite?
Because the Methodists will not give up Methodism, that which is
peculiar to Methodists; and the Presbyterian will not give up the
Presbyterianism, or that which is peculiar to Presbyterians. That which
is peculiar, makes the denomination; it is the disturbing element in
the way of fusion, or union, and that must be given up, or union can
never take place.

The Lord prayed that those who believe may be one, that the _world
may believe_. This denominationalism is the very element in the way
of union, or the cause of division, and division is in the way of the
world believing, or a main cause of the world not being converted. The
way is now opened for carrying the Bible into all the world and turning
the world to God. Shall that ever be done, or shall our power be
expended in sending denominations into the countries now open for the
one pure and holy religion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? Or, can
we not now, under the influence of the love of Christ, receive the
one religion of the New Testament and nothing else; unite on it, and
carry it to Italy, and every other country now in Divine Providence,
opened up for the reception of King Jesus? What need we care for
denominations? The body of Christ, the church of the Living God, the
kingdom of God, is denomination enough for a man who loves the Savior;
and the Book of God, containing the law of God and the gospel too, is
creed enough for all who sincerely love our Lord Jesus, the Christ.
What a grand and glorious work could be performed, if, all in good
earnest in the work would unite under God, put their hearts into the
work and determine to push the cause of Christ, the gospel of the grace
of God, the kingdom of God, through the world. We have one book, a book
no where in doubt—the volume of God, the Bible, and, can all with one
heart, and one soul, push it through the world, enforce it on men to
read it, teach it to others, and make it the great power in the earth,
to break down and wipe out Romanism; to sweep away all pagan gods,
temples, and altars, and all sectarian denominations, and unite all
the friends of the Lord under Prince Messiah; let him go before them,
lead and guide them forever and ever. What is a mere denomination,
separated from others by some peculiarities not mentioned in the Bible,
nor received by any other party on earth, compared with what the Lord
styles, “my church,” Matt. xvi. 18; the body of Christ; the kingdom
of God, containing all the people of God? This is what we have in our
view; we will go for nothing less than the body of Christ, the kingdom
of God. It is of God, the denomination is of man.




WOMEN IN THE CHURCH.


Read the Bible carefully, and note the part the women took, the
greatest and best of them, as well as all classes, in the Patriarchal,
Jewish and Christian institutions, and follow what you find there. It
is safe to follow that, and for the good of all, both men and women.
No improvement can be made upon that. As we depart from that we injure
all. We desire to see women curtailed in no privilege or blessing;
nothing that can make them happy, useful, wise or good. But the less
they have to do in the business meetings, the ruling or discipline
of the church, the better for them and all concerned. They have a
natural and scriptural work to do, and men cannot do that work for
them, and men do not lose any of their rights, when not appointed to
do the natural and scriptural work of women. In the same way women
lose no rights, are excluded from no privilege, nor are they in any
way degraded in being limited to their legitimate sphere of operation.
The Bible gives women the highest honor they can have, and lays down
the road to the highest happiness. It has elevated women from the
abject slavery in which Paganism had bound them down, and given them
the strong arm of the man to protect and support them. The nearer they
follow the Bible, the Lord, and the apostolic teaching the better. This
is the road to greatness, happiness and goodness.




WHO CRUCIFIED THE SAVIOR.


Peter charges the crucifixion on the Jews. But the Jews only instigated
it; the Romans, who were Gentiles, executed him. The Jews were the
more responsible party, as they persisted in clamoring for his
crucifixion, when Pilate, the Roman judge wanted to let him go. The
Jews premeditated, designed and instigated the crucifixion; the Romans
performed the deed, or were tools in the hands of the Jews and executed
the will of the Jews.

But when the matter is more fully comprehended the whole world were
represented in the transaction. The entire nation of Israel was
represented in the Sandhedrim, and the nations, apart from the Jews,
the Gentiles, were represented in the Roman court, and thus all the
world was represented and implicated in the awful act of crucifying the
Lord of glory.

The Jews were, as we have said, the _instigators_ of the crucifixion,
but did not, therefore, have the sole responsibility, as the Gentiles,
or the Roman court, had the power to release him and desired to do so,
but voluntarily yielded to the wishes of the Jews in giving him up to
be crucified, and with their own hands executed him. The Jews had no
power to inflict capital punishment without the assent of the Roman
court. The Jews were the _instigators_ and the Romans the _willing
tools to execute their will_.




CHRISTIAN ZEAL.


The leading method employed anciently to impede the progress of
christianity was to persecute its adherents. This scheme of opposition
was well tried during the first three centuries of the christian
era, but, although it, to some extent, gratified the malice of the
persecutors, it was never very successful. There is a very plain
reason for this. The tendency of persecution is invariably to lead the
disciples of our Lord, to examine the ground of their faith and the
value of their profession with great care; and when this is done, there
is but little danger of “departing from the holy commandment delivered
to us.” Nothing has ever caused men to scrutinize their profession and
the whole premises thereof, in such a candid and solemn manner as the
severe persecutions imposed upon the early followers of our Lord; and
yet it is an important truth, that, during these severe persecutions,
apostasies were comparatively few. This is not all. Persecution has
always led the true followers of Christ to plead for the claims of the
cause with greater power. Men, when speaking in a cause and their lives
at stake, speak from the very bottom of their hearts, and exert every
power with which they are possessed to make an impression. At such
times there is no dull formality, but all is life and interest. Every
one feels what he saying and doing. There is no sermonizing, no
preaching by the day, but every man carries the cause in his bosom,
and labors as for eternity. All this is calculated to defeat the
ostensible intention of all persecution, and in the place of impeding
the progress of the cause must tend to spread it. Not only so, but
persecution has a tendency to diminish worldly-mindedness, and cause
the entire affairs of this life to appear transient and fleeting. Its
constant bearing, like all sufferings in this life, is to direct the
christian mind to another world, where the bondage of corruption shall
be put off, and where he shall enjoy pleasures for evermore. Under such
circumstances, how the mind is filled with piety, and how the spirit
adorns the redeeming love which, through Jesus Christ, has brought the
tidings of deliverance! Finding no abatement of persecutions here, no
mitigation of suffering, the afflicted pilgrim looks to another world
for a home—for a city upon the immovable rock, the maker and builder
of which is God, where he anticipates he will enter the eternal rest.
In all this, the effect is precisely the opposite of what is intended
by persecutors. They intend to cause people to abandon christianity by
persecuting them, whereas it only causes them to esteem it more sacred
and press it more closely to their hearts.

How perfectly had all worldly considerations dwindled into nothingness
when the apostle counted all things but loss, that he might win Christ,
and when he estimated the intolerable affliction imposed upon him,
_light_, compared with the eternal _weight of glory_ in prospect! Such
heavenly mindedness is the direct tendency of persecution, and only
calculated to make the glories of christianity shine with greater
luster, and, consequently, serves not the designs of those by whom
it is inflicted. It, nevertheless, has been tried in thousands of
instances, since the first three centuries, in various parts of the
world, even down to quite a modern date, but has never been able to
extinguish the light emanating from the lofty fountain of all light
and all knowledge. From modern developments, it would seem, that it is
now being ascertained by the great opposer of all good, that methods
more effectual may be employed, to impede the progress of the gospel,
of which we can not now speak in detail. _Indifference_, however, or
a general lack of _conscientiousness_, is now the order of the day.
Anciently, when a doctrine was preached which the people did not
believe, they were greatly excited by it. On the other hand, when they
did believe it, they moved forward most warmly and energetically. It
was the character of the Jewish people to follow their impressions with
great tenacity.

To the people of our times, it would seem strange that the preaching
of the apostles should have so excited the people. This generation can
listen to doctrine entirely adverse to their views, with comparatively
little excitement. They will frequently seem scarcely to have heard
it. This is because they do not hold themselves responsible for what
is taught, nor feel any very deep concern and interest in forming the
public mind. They are indifferent to what is taught. This is one of
the most dangerous features of our times. It grows to a considerable
extent out of reading light trash, of a novel and imaginary character,
which throws away every thing sentimental, with all concern about the
impression it may make upon the human heart. It destroys concern for
one of the most important items in the world, and seems to suppose that
our children may, with perfect safety, hear whatever may chance to fall
in their path.

When a man becomes indifferent, or falls into such a state as not
to care what is taught, he is measurably beyond the reach of all
instruction, for he places no value upon instruction. When the gospel
of our Lord was first spoken, it moved the souls of those who heard
it, and caused them to act most energetically either for or against
it. This was because they cared for public sentiment, and were deeply
concerned about what was taught. They were really conscientious and
felt highly responsible for all their actions. But how different where
this feeling of responsibility is lost? The most awful consequences may
be referred to, the most terrible appeals may be made, and the most
powerful inducements may be placed before them, but Galio like, they
are all unheeded and unappreciated. In this case, conscientiousness,
if not even consciousness itself, if not entirely lost, is so greatly
diminished as entirely to cease to perform its office.

This state of indifference is not confined to the world alone, but has
long since entered the precincts of the church. It is in the way of
every meeting, of every ordinance, of every discourse, and of every
good work. Those under its influence are ever ready to drawl out, “It
is of no use”—“it can’t be done”—or, “I do not care anything about
it.” Sometimes it is evaded, by objections or some fault being found.
How perfectly disheartening all this is to those who desire to do good,
and carry forward the conquest of a great and glorious cause.

How few there are who can properly press the claims of christianity,
knowing that such an irresponsible and indifferent state of feeling
prevails. It is hard to manifest a becoming zeal in the midst of such a
state of apathy. Yet he who rightly reasons upon the cause of our Lord,
and keeps the subject ever present in his mind, must be moved forward.
He can not be discouraged, cowed down, nor deterred. He is invincible
in his course. The spirit that burns in his breast is unconquerable.
The more he has to contend with, the more grace and ardor of soul he
seems to possess. He looks to Jesus, who for the joy set before him,
endured the contradiction of sinners, even unto the death of the cross,
and yet overcame, and is now set down at the right hand of the throne
of God. He asks the question: Why did our Lord make the good confession
before Pontius Pilate? Why did he yield to the ignominious death of
the cross? Why did the holy apostles suffer as they did? Why did the
first christians wade through floods and flames? Why were they bathed
in tears and blood? Why all their zeal and perseverance under all this?
Because they endured, by faith seeing him who is invisible. They looked
forward to the recompense of reward. They held daily and spiritual
communion with God. Their hearts were in heaven, whence, also, they
looked for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Who that has the grand theme of good tidings and great joy to all
people, first announced by angels at the birth of our Lord and Savior,
dwelling richly in his heart, can fail to have a burning and a constant
zeal to spread the same grand and glorious theme to the ends of the
earth, and thus contribute in causing it to bless the nations?

If the winds of heaven and the waves of the sea, if the diseases of
the sick and the terrors of death, if the graves of the dead and the
gates of hades, were obedient to the mandate of Jesus Christ, and, if
the veil of the temple was rent in twain, the rocks were sundered, the
earth trembled and the sun was veiled in darkness when the Lord of
glory died—should not the human heart always be filled, when his name
is mentioned? If the mighty angels fall prostrate at the feet of Jesus,
and hasten to perform the most august message at his command, should it
not be the delight of those redeemed by his blood, to do his will, that
they enter by the gates into the city, and have a right to the tree of
life?

Who can, who dare slumber in his presence? Who dare be indifferent to
the theme that dwelt upon his gracious lips? When he speaks it is the
voice of a king—more, it is the voice of the King of kings and Lord of
lords; it is the voice of him who is to bear all rule, all authority
and power, until all his enemies are subdued. Heaven is his throne
and the earth his footstool. Shall we not adore his name, that he has
graciously promised to confess us before his Father and before his
angels? To his name be honor and dominion forever and ever.




JUDGMENT, THE GROUND OF REPENTANCE.


When Paul stood in the midst of Mar’s hill, he boldly declared the
ignorance and superstition of the Athenians, before the gospel, and
stated to them, that “in the times of this ignorance, God winked at,”
or that he did not hold them to a strict account. He concedes, here,
the principle expressed by the Savior, that where there is but little
given there is but little required; and on this ground, admits that
God would not deal with them strictly according to their works. But
he approaches a different state of things. A change was about to take
place in the dealings of God with that people. How is it to be now?
The apostle responds, “But now he commandeth all men everywhere to
repent.” In the times of the ignorance before the gospel, this command
to all men every where, to repent, did not exist. But, now that the
gospel is preached to every creature, he commands all men everywhere to
repent. But he does not stop here, but proceeds to give us the reason
why God commands men to repent. That reason is not, that there is no
day of judgment to come, which might serve as a reason why men need not
repent. Why, then, does God now command all men everywhere to repent?
The apostle answers, “Because he hath appointed a day, in which he will
judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he hath ordained.” It
is not strange, with this passage before us, that preaching Universalism
never causes anybody to repent. The preachers of that doctrine deny
the cause of repentance; and while the Lord calls upon men to repent,
because he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness, they spend their time in preaching that there will be
no judgment to come. In this they set aside the grand reason why men
should repent. While the preaching of the true gospel leads men to
sorrow that they have sinned, in view of a righteous judgment to come,
the preaching of that disgraceful doctrine—which we are sorry to have
necessity to mention upon our pages—leads wicked men to laugh and
trifle, both in view of their sins, and all that the Bible says of the
great judgment day.

The apostle, however, does not merely state that God has appointed a
day in which he will judge the world, but he alleges that he has given
assurance of the fact. His words are, “Whereof he hath given assurance
unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead.” Here he
arrives at the foundation of all—the resurrection of Christ from the
dead. His logic runs thus: Christ rose from the dead. What assurance
does that give? It is the assurance that God has given that he has
appointed a day, in which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that man whom he hath ordained. And what if that is the case? Why,
then, he commands all men everywhere to repent. As certain as Christ
rose from the dead, there will be righteous judgment; and because there
will be a righteous judgment, men are commanded to reform and become
righteous.

Jesus Christ was judged by the highest ecclesiastical court on earth,
and in the highest civil court—but in both cases condemned unjustly.
He could not have righteous judgment in this world; but, when the
unrighteous sentences were passed upon him, and he had yielded to the
penalty, and his body was consigned to the prison-house of death,
while his spirit was in the unseen world, he appealed the case,
and had it referred to the high, the holy and inflexible court of
heaven, where the case was tried righteously. When this was done, the
former decisions were condemned, as partial and unjust, and Jesus was
“justified by the Spirit,” or, as Peter expresses it, “he was quickened
by the Spirit.” The decision in the case was not only reversed, but the
penalty, which had been executed, and was beyond the power of those who
inflicted it to reverse it, was reversed by the great and righteous
tribunal to which Jesus had appealed. He was justified from the guilt
of their decision, when the Spirit of God condemned their sentence as
unjust, and justified from the penalty when he was “quickened by the
Spirit,” or raised from the dead.

When justified, he breaks forth in most triumphant language: “I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which
is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty; I am he that
liveth, and was dead; and, behold! I am alive forevermore, Amen; and
have the keys of hell and death.” He had been condemned unjustly, but
had gone to a righteous judgment, where the decision was changed, and
he was justified; the penalty of death was removed, and he was made
alive forevermore; hence, “he ever liveth to make intercession for us.”
He had obtained justice. In this case, we have an assurance of a day
being appointed in which God will judge the world in righteousness
by that man whom he hath ordained. If God, after the death of Jesus,
judged in the case of the great leader of all christians, and changed
the unrighteous sentence previously passed upon him, and justified him,
why may we not expect him to judge all the world after death; and,
where the righteous have been condemned, as has frequently been, and
as will be, the case in this world, reverse the decision, and justify
them; and, on the other hand, where the guilty have been justified, the
decision changed, and they condemned.

There is not a more consoling sentiment on earth, to a righteous
man, than that there is a day appointed when impartial justice will
take place. The Lord Jesus will judge among the nations, and mete
out to them according to their works. The thought, that justice will
never take place, may be pleasing to rogues, and such a view might be
contended for with great zeal, on the part of those who know that a
righteous judgment must condemn them, and such as care not how deep
a stab they inflict upon the morals of the world; but to the man who
maintains a conscience void of offense toward God and man, and who
intends, to the best of his ability, to deport himself righteously,
nothing can be a higher satisfaction, than the doctrine, that all false
decisions will be reversed, and that a just and equitable sentence will
be passed upon all. Such a judgment we anticipate, and such judgment,
we are assured by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, will
take place.




THE GENEALOGY OF CHRIST.


One thing that has caused an apparent difficulty touching the genealogy
of Christ, is, that inquirers are not aware of the fact, that Matthew
traces the genealogy of Joseph, from Abraham down, and that Luke
traces the genealogy of Mary up to Adam. Matt. i.; Luke iii. This
will account, in some degree, for the disagreement in names. They are
evidently two distinct lines of genealogy, and the best authorities we
can appeal to at present, give Matthew’s to Joseph and the other to
Mary, and it is clear to any one, that one descends and that the other
ascends.

The best evidence we can command, sustains the idea that Matthew wrote
at an earlier date than Luke, and that he took his genealogy from the
Jewish records, from Abraham to Joseph, as the Jews would be willing
to believe their own records; and, that when Luke wrote, Joseph
had been adopted into the family of Heli, (Eli, the same) Joseph’s
father-in-law, some years, and, consequently, Luke copied the genealogy
of Joseph through Heli, which was properly Mary’s genealogy, up to Adam.

There are, however, difficulties in these genealogies, which, we
presume, no one can reconcile; but Matthew and Luke are not accountable
for them, as they simply give these as the commonly received
genealogies, which those in the day when they had the records to appeal
to, never disputed. Had the Jews been able to involve the Apostle and
Luke in a contradiction, they, no doubt, would willingly have done it,
but this they could not do, without disputing their own records.




ADHERING TO THE BIBLE.


No man should go to the Bible, or the God of the Bible, to teach him
what _man is_, or what he should be; but he should go to the Bible
to learn what _he is_, what _he ought to be_, and what he ultimately
_shall be_. He should not go to the Bible to show what it should teach,
but to learn what it does teach, for to this we shall all come in
the end, whether it is congenial with our desires or not. We intend,
therefore, to maintain it as it is, whether the number in favor of it
is small or great. We intend to maintain the old distinction between
_saint_ and _sinner_, vice and virtue, good and bad, with the same
meaning attached to them, regardless of all consequences. We shall
speak of men being saved and lost, happy and miserable, justified and
condemned, with the same ideas attached to the terms as heretofore,
and sustained by all sound rules of interpretation, whether it shall
be considered sense or foolishness. We shall continue to use the Bible
terms, rewards and punishments, life and death, heaven and hell, in the
same sense as we have been wont to do, knowing, as we do, that we are
supported by the whole canon of sound criticism, and we most solemnly
admonish all who fear God, against the glosses of that sickening and
supercilious affectation, that induces any man, for one moment, to
hesitate to declare to his fellow man, in the most faithful manner, the
terrible threatenings of the Almighty against the impenitent.

Let no preacher shrink, in this age of sinfulness and pride; let no
man of God be deterred by the ridicule of Universalists, by low wit of
sceptics, or the vulgar mocking of atheists, from declaring the terrors
of the Lord, for he says, “The Lord shall judge his people.” “It is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.” “With lies you
have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad,
and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return
from his wicked way, _by promising him life_.” “It is better to enter
into life having one eye, than having two eyes, to be cast into hell,
into the fire that shall never be quenched.” “The rich man died, and in
hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torment.” Such is but a tithe of
what abounds of this description throughout the New Testament. Is he a
friend to his God or his fellow man, who knows such language to abound
in the word of God, and shuns to declare it to those who hear him?




EXCHANGING PULPITS.


What confidence would we have in the preacher who would exchange
pulpits with a priest of the Papacy, not only a member of the Romish
Church, but made such before he knew there was a God, or a Savior, an
idolater, or an unregenerated man? The book of God forbids the saints
from keeping company with such a man, or eating with him, or to bid
him God-speed. We can meet a Romish priest and treat him as a citizen,
if he is one, a neighbor, or gentleman, but we do not know him as a
preacher of Jesus, or as a teacher of saints, or as a Christian. He
bears no such relations as these to us, and we recognize him in none of
these relations. In the same way, any man made a member of the church
without any faith, or before he knew there was a church, or even a God,
or who has had water sprinkled on him for baptism, is not in the body
of Christ, and we feel kindly toward him as a fellow-creature, as a
citizen, neighbor or gentleman, if he is one, but we do not know him as
a preacher of Jesus, nor a teacher in the kingdom at all. We can extend
to him all the amenities and courtesies of life as a fellow-creature,
citizen, neighbor, gentleman, etc., but we simply know him, not as a
preacher of Jesus, or a teacher of the children of the kingdom. He is
not in the kingdom, and is not the man to perform any service there.

The first thing for him to do, is to submit to the divinely ordained
process by which to enter the kingdom and become a citizen, according
to the law of the Great King, and then he is ready to do any service
for which he is qualified in the kingdom. But he can not work in the
kingdom till he is in it, and it is a sham, a pretense and hypocrisy
to act toward him as if he were in the kingdom, an insincerity before
the people that leads to a false impression with some, and destroys the
confidence with others.

Such procedure is intended as a show of liberality, broad and liberal
views. But is it sincere? Is it candid? Is it honest? What is meant by
it? If these men with whom you exchange pulpits are not in Christ, what
do you mean when you place them before the people as preachers of the
gospel and teachers of the saints? Do you mean that in your expanded
liberality you would act toward a man as if he were a brother and a
preacher, when you know he is not in the kingdom at all, but if he
wanted to become a member of the church, you would not receive him, or
give the right hand of fellowship till he was immersed? This will do
for people with no religious convictions, no settled principles and no
law of God on which to act. They can act in this way or that as they
think will be popular, or suit the caprice of the people. But among
men with religious convictions, settled principles, and the law of God
before them, it is only a want of principle, consistency, and regard
for the law of God. It is simply a manifest disrespect to the Majesty
of heaven and earth, a bold, open showing that the law of God is
ignored, overlooked and disregarded, in courtesy to a man not in the
kingdom at all, in deference to a man that was never initiated into
the body of Christ! This is openly trampling down the law of God and
showing contempt for it, in an empty show of liberality to those to
whom the grace of God is as free as any others, but who have never come
in the Lord’s appointments into the kingdom of God. We are as desirous
to be courteous and liberal as anybody, but religious convictions,
sacred principles, and last, though not least, the law of God must
not be ignored, overlooked, or treated with contempt. No good man
will respect any man for setting aside his religious convictions,
principles, or the law of God.




KIND OF PREACHERS AND PREACHING NEEDED.


We want no mere excitement about _a man_, nor _after a man_, who, as
Simon the Sorcerer, induces the people to think that he is some _great
one_. We want the clear, solid and telling preaching of the gospel,
enlightening the people in reference to our Lord, the way to him, and
how to serve him. We do not expect, as a general rule, to see much move
among the people for the first ten days, but a gradual increase in the
audience, the interest in the preaching and conversations about it; an
account of the people hunting up their Bibles, inquiring whether these
things are so, and occasional argument in reference to the matter. But
after due time and deliberation, persons begin to step forward and
confess Christ. While a good song is sung, everything in the assembly
is solemn, and the impression deepens. While a few remarks are made
of a solemn and impressive nature, and the confessions are taken, the
audience sits in profound silence, in the deepest and most serious
meditation, and tears are seen to flow freely from many faces. The
audience disperses, and quietly retires, as if from a funeral. This is
what we mean by _gospel work_.

We want nothing sensational, no tricks, no comic performance; no
private maneuvering to induce any one to promise, “If you will join,
I will;” no artifice to get round the people, come on them suddenly
and surprise them. Come directly to the people from the start, and
let them know what you mean, and work directly to the one point—the
enlightenment and salvation of men. The man that can tell the story of
the cross, and of a Savior’s love, in the most artless and unaffected
manner, lose sight of and forget himself in his theme most completely,
will accomplish the most in the Savior’s name. May we learn and tell
the story of infinite compassion and love in all its fullness and
completeness more successfully, with more faith and power than ever,
and may we be enabled to bring souls to Christ more abundantly than
ever.




WHERE IS THE POWER?


The genuine power—the power that will enable us to stand against all
opposition and triumph at last—is not in this man or that, money or
learning, talent or popularity, but in the _true position_. Learning is
profitable, if used wisely, as a help in finding and determining the
true position; but the power is not in the learning nor talent. A man
of very ordinary learning and talent may find the true position, stand
on and defend it. No matter what a man’s learning, talent or popularity
may be, if he forsakes the truth, the right ground, if he undertakes
to advocate false theories, it will become perfect weakness, and will
be swept away like chaff. If men desire to stand, let them not think
of their own power, learning, popularity, or personal influence, and
talent, but of the _true ground_, “the right way of the Lord,” and
depend on truth and the God of truth; never deviate from the truth,
but be faithful to it, maintain their integrity to it, and the God of
all truth and righteousness will hold them up. They will realize that
the strength of the everlasting hills is underneath, and they cannot
be moved. If men who once knew the truth, begin to higgle, tamper and
trifle; if they, little by little, begin to show a want of integrity, a
lack of moral honesty; a disposition to compromise with sectarianism;
to ignore the distinctions between truth and error, the body of Christ
and sectarian bodies; the way of the Lord and other ways, and finally
begin to abandon leading principles and leading points of teaching,
they will find their power gone and will soon amount to nothing. Many
men have, in this way, literally thrown themselves away, and others are
now going the same road.

If men desire to stand, they should seek the true ground, try to
ascertain and determine what the truth is; find, with certainty, the
_true position_, and place themselves squarely in it; maintain and
defend it, not depending on _their own_ strength, learning, talent,
influence or popularity, but on the truth; the _true position_; the
_right way_. But some one is ready to inquire: “How can we find truth
in the midst of so much error; the right way in the midst of so many
ways?” This may be a little difficult to some. There is, however, one
thing indispensable to it, and that is that a man receive “_the love of
the truth_.” This lies at the foundation of the whole matter. Men will
never be successful in finding, advocating, maintaining or defending
the truth, who have never “received the love of the truth;” nor will
they succeed in abiding in the truth. This is the very ground-work
of the whole matter. All a man’s pretences of seeking the truth, are
nothing but an empty sham, if he has not in him the love of the truth.
He must have in him “a good and an _honest heart_,” to constitute him
the “good ground” in which the seed of the kingdom, the word of God,
will grow. But the man that loves the truth, desires it, longs for
it, and has in him a good and honest heart, will make most diligent,
careful and critical search for it. He sets out, not to prove this
or that; not to maintain this theory or that, but to find the _true
ground_—the _truth itself_, “as it is in Jesus”—and rarely fails to
find the desired object, the highly prized jewel, the most precious
gem. The love of the truth has an influence on a man, in different
ways, in favor of his finding it, as follows:

_First._ It leads him to make diligent search for it. A man will
certainly strive to find an object that he loves, and if he loves the
truth, he will make most diligent search for it.

_Second._ It leads him to exercise the utmost discrimination, to
distinguish between truth and error, that he may not be imposed on and
deceived, and induced to think something is the truth that is not, and
thus have a spurious article imposed on him.

_Third._ The love of the truth has wonderful power over a man to cause
him to _retain it_. If he loves it he will not give it up.

If a man receives not the love of the truth, it affects him badly in
the following respect:

_First._ He will exercise no diligence, to find it. He will not search
for it.

_Second._ He will not be honest when it is presented to him, but will
evade, cavil, quibble and mystify it if possible; kick up a dust to
blind his own eyes, and thus keep him from understanding and receiving
the truth. The Lord will abandon such men to “believe a lie, _because
they received not the love_ of the truth that they might be saved.”
There are many men now who receive not the love of the truth that
they might be saved. They will never be enlightened or brought to the
knowledge of the truth. The truth condemns them and they do not want
it. They hate it and those who love it.

Truth has one grand quality about it; the more you know about it,
the more clearly you see that it is the truth. It is like an honest
man; the more you know about him, the more clearly you see that he is
an honest man. The more you know about error, the more clearly you
perceive it to be error. In the same way, the more you know about
dishonest and heartless men the more clearly you see that they are
dishonest.

Be careful and occupy the right ground, the true position, and no man
can ever overthrow it, or prove it to be anything else but the true
ground. It is a great thing in favor of an army to take a _strong
position_.

We have taken the strongest position that can be taken, and if we fall
back from that, no matter what we fall back to, we shall find it a
weaker position. We have gone back to our Lord and looked up to him,
and committed ourselves to him. He has given us a position and placed
us on it. It is not _our_ position but _his_ position. We know it is
right, because it came from him and is his. We have simply received
him, with all he said and did—his holy and inspired apostles, with
all they said and did. We have nothing of _our own_, but have received
Christ and his gospel, the apostles of Christ, and the gospel of the
grace of God, which they preached; the teaching of Christ and his
apostles; all things as they came from this divine source, without
anything added or taken away, anything more or less. None can find a
position above this. It is the highest ground that can be taken. The
gospel which the apostles preached is right. The apostles’ teaching for
the churches is right. This nobody denies. We have no position of _our
own_, or doctrine of _our own_, but have taken precisely the position
of the first Christians, and the teachings under which they were
placed, and no other. We, therefore, have nothing but our Lord, his
gospel and teachings, as they emanated from himself and his inspired
apostles, and no position only the one on which they have placed us to
defend.

We are weak and can do but little. Let us not rely on _our own_
position, but the one the Lord has appointed; _our own_ views or
theories, but the clear teachings of our Lord and his apostles. Here is
the strength, and those who stand here will find the Lord of hosts with
them. We must plead for the Lord, the gospel, the teachings of Christ
and the apostles, the ground on which they stood, maintain that and
nothing else. Here is the power, and it is nowhere else.




COMMUNION.


The Lord gave the commemoration of his sufferings and death to _his
disciples_, and Paul, in Corinth, gave it to the congregation of the
saints, and not to any others. Those who are his disciples, who are in
Christ, in the body, are communicants, and those not in Christ, are not
communicants. We “neither invite nor exclude,” but show to whom the
Lord has given the communion, and that no others have any right to it,
only those in good standing in the body, and _give it to no others_.

But for any preacher or church to arrange _purposely_ for communion
with persons whom they know are not in Christ, not in the kingdom, and
try to blur over the clear violation of the law of the kingdom, as thus
deliberately arranged for, by defining the position of his church to be
that they “neither invite nor exclude,” is certainly a weak and shallow
device. It is an attempt to ignore the very act by which we enter into
union with the Father and with the Son, as, also, the “whole family
in heaven and on earth,”—immersion into Christ, into the name of the
Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, under the sham pretext
of a _union_ meeting, a _union_ communion. There is no _Christian
union_ in any meeting that intends to ignore the clear law of induction
into the kingdom of God. It is only a _union in disloyalty_ to the
Great King—_ignoring his law_.




WANDERING PILGRIMS.


We know of two or three wandering pilgrims that are now old men, of
good enough talent to have made a permanent record long ago, and yet
received in doubt wherever they go, held in distrust, and, to say the
least, they have nothing that could be called a standing. To be safe,
all the overseers in the church need do is simply to receive no man
till he produces clear evidence of good standing. Look back over the
record and see where the men have gone to who have tried the _gospel
of soul sleeping_. Where are Elias Shortridge, Wm. P. Shockey, Wm.
S. Speer, J. K. Speer, Snooks, and others of the same ilk? and where
are their works? A streak of desolation has followed in their train
all the way. They have divided churches, set the people of God at
variance, and sown the seeds of discord. This is the kind of fruit that
has been gathered from their work. Look back over the ground and see
what has followed every man that has stranded among us. Nothing but
ruin has followed. Men that stood fair, had line talent and valuable
attainments, by some kind of departure or other, have gone, little by
little, blaming those that loved them, and would, had it been in their
power, have done anything to make them happy, till all is lost and
they feel averse to almost everything. This is what it brings to get
restless and dissatisfied with the plain truth of the Scriptures.

The race of some men is short, and the mischief they do is certain.
The ruin they bring to the churches is inevitable. Nothing is more
important than that the churches should guard against false teachers.
In the place of being flattered that all is well, and that they mean
all right, we should be on the lookout; watch all unscriptural words
and phrases; every false move and pretence; every doubtful man and
measure, and encourage that which is safe, sound and good. Make every
public man sensible that it is of importance to him, and to the cause,
to be known to be sound in teaching; to hold fast the form of sound
speech that can not be condemned; to be entirely safe and reliable;
to have a good record during his past history as a preacher. Make all
our young men specially sensible of the importance to them to become
permanent men, firm, decided and determined in their course. We want
no milk-and-water men, a little this way and a little that, but men of
settled principles, religious convictions and reliable purposes. Be
careful who you “indorse” as preachers of the gospel. Men who want good
indorsers should be good men.




DEDICATION OF CHURCH EDIFICES.


Nothing is more common than reading of the dedication of the Temple
by Solomon as appropriate on dedication occasions. Only a few short
years ago, a young brother of fine talent read of the dedication
of the temple, and appropriated it to the occasion of dedicating a
new meeting-house. But this is a perversion of a very inexcusable
character. It loses sight of the significance of one of the most
important types of the Old Testament. The temple was no type of
a meeting-house, nor was the dedication of the temple a type of
dedicating a meeting-house. The Lord did not give us the minute
description of the building of the temple and the dedication to show us
how to build _fine houses_ and _dedicate them_.

The temple was the type of the _spiritual building_; the _congregation
of the saints, lively stones_, built together for an habitation of
God through the Spirit. This is the temple that God dwells in—the
house of God. The dedication of that ancient temple was typical of
the dedication, or the consecration of men and women to the service
of God. The work of the Pope is to lose sight of the dedication, or
the consecration of men and women to the service of God, symbolized
by the dedication of the temple, and turn the eyes of the people to
great gatherings of people, to the flummery and parade of laying
corner-stones, dedicating houses, immense piles of stone, brick, wood
and mortar, baptizing bells and furniture, etc., etc.; but this is no
work for the followers of Jesus, nor is there anything in it to put one
in mind of our Lord.

We have no objection to holding a good meeting in a new house, setting
the congregation of the Lord in order, if it needs it in it, and
preaching the gospel to the people of the world. But we see no use then
in making a great ado about it, or thinking any more of it than a good
meeting in an old house. We do not like _extra occasions_. We like the
regular worship appointed by the Lord, with every item from him, and
not an item not from him. We love the things of God, but nothing not of
him. We want no dedication occasions, nor any others not authorized in
Scripture. When a new house is built, go into it and use it precisely
as you would if it had been there fifty years. What the Lord has
appointed will occupy our whole minds and hearts and hands.




THE CHURCH IN THE WILDERNESS.


There was certainly an assembly or congregation in the wilderness,
as mentioned by Stephen. Acts vii. 38; but this congregation or
assembly in the wilderness was the nation, or the national assembly
of Israel—fleshly Israel. It consisted of the fleshly descendants of
Abraham, as described in the language of God to Abraham, “Those born
in thy house,” or the Jews. This congregation or assembly, the nation
of Israel, or the Jews, was not the church, or body of Christ, but,
as a body, it rejected Christ, persecuted him and instigated putting
him to death, persecuted his followers and the church he established.
Those of whom the church on Pentecost was composed came out of that
old persecuting church, abandoned it and “were added to them”—to the
apostles and the one hundred and twenty brethren—the new church—the
one the Lord said (Matt. xvi. 18), “I will build.” “On this rock I
will build my church”—the “one new man” (Eph. ii. 15), “to make in
himself of twain one new man, so making peace.” “Man” here is used
figuratively, and stands for _church_, and one _new_ man is one
_new_ church. It is not the perpetuation of an _old_ church, Adamic,
Abrahamic, Mosaic or any other, but to build _one new church_ was what
the Lord intended and accomplished.

The matter now is, not to be a descendant of Abel, nor of Abraham, nor
Jacob, or Israel; nor to be of any particular line of flesh and blood,
but to be born again—born from above, born of God. “That which is born
of the flesh is flesh; that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.”
This new church has a new basis of membership, not in the flesh but
in the Spirit, not in being born in the family of Abraham, but in the
family of God, not in the first birth, but the second birth, not in a
birth of the flesh, but a birth of the Spirit, not founded in natural
generation, but in regeneration, not children of God by blood, but “all
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus.”

This church in which we are “all the children of God by faith in
Christ”—by virtue of a new creation, a birth of water and of the
Spirit, is not the one in the wilderness, nor any other church,
congregation or assembly found before Pentecost, but it is the one the
Lord said, “I will build,” but which was not built when the Lord said
this; the one _new_ man, or _new_ church which the Lord made of the
twain, or the _two_, the Jews and the Gentiles. This is the “one body”
into which all were immersed in the time of the apostles—the body
of Christ—the “temple of God,” in which God and Christ and the Holy
Spirit dwell. To be “in Christ” is to be in this _one body_, to be “in
the kingdom of God,” “in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit,” to be in union with the Father and with the Son, with
the whole family in heaven and on earth. To be in this one body brings
us to all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. This
is the body or the church that Jesus loved, and for which he gave
himself, that “he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of
water by the word”—“the church of the living God, the pillar and
support of the truth.” It is “the building of God,” established
“according to his eternal purpose” to “the intent” that “to the
principalities and powers in heavenly places may be made known by the
church the manifold wisdom of God.” See Eph. iii. 10.




SOUND MEN.


Why do men regret to hear us say of a man, “He is a gospel man;” “He
is a sound man;” “He is a New Testament man.” It implies that there
are some that are not “gospel men,” not “sound,” not “New Testament
men.” What if it does? Why need any man be troubled about that? Certain
men will be suspected of being unsound! Indeed! Must we shut our eyes
and think contrary to what we know to be matter of fact, that all are
sound? But, you imply that some are not sound! Certainly, and you imply
that some are not honest, when you put a lock on your stable, crib or
smoke-house, lock and bolt your doors at night, and when you will not
trust all men alike. When you say, “I will trust him, his word is as
good as his note,” you imply that some other man is not good—that his
word is not as good as his note.

But we tell you of A, B, C, D and E, that we have trusted, and they
have all paid, and we believe all are alike honest, and will pay.
If you are a business man, you will reply, “Yes, and I have trusted
many more than that, all of whom paid, but I have trusted a long list
that did not pay, and you need not preach to me that all will pay.”
So referring to a few men who, on a few occasions preached the gospel
faithfully, does not prove that _all do this_, or even that _these few_
always do it.

That we have the men now who are making it a constant and prayerful
effort to reproduce the gospel and all its fruits; to reproduce
the Church and all its blessings to man; to maintain all things as
delivered to us by Christ and his apostles, we rejoice to know. That
we have another class of men, who have no heart in this, and have even
repudiated the idea, we entertain not a doubt. Those determined to
reproduce the gospel of Christ and all its fruits, the Church, and all
its blessings to man, introduce no innovations; nothing new and foreign
to destroy the peace of the children of God, and are the cause of no
dissensions and no divisions. Those standing off are not from among
them. They will stand with God, with Christ, with the Holy Spirit, with
the things of God as set forth in Scripture. We stop not to count the
number, whether great or small, nor to consider whether they shall be
popular or unpopular, rich or poor. The only question is, are they of
God? Does God require that the gospel of his grace, as given by his Son
and the apostles, shall be reproduced? Does he require that the church
shall be reproduced? We maintain that he requires that the gospel, in
all its entirety and completeness, shall be reproduced, and we shall be
satisfied with nothing short of it. He requires that the Church, in
its entirety and completeness, shall be reproduced. These are matters
settled with us. The man whose heart is not in this work, and who aims
not at it, is not one with us, nor in sympathy with us.




CHRISTMAS.


We do not believe that the 25th of December is the birthday of our
Lord. We have seen abundant reasons for this, and could adduce them, if
the importance of the matter required it, though we have not the works
at hand now to refer to, as we think, settling the matter.

There is not an intimation of the first Christians making anything
of the birthday of our Lord, observing it religiously in any way, or
regarding it as a holiday, or a _holy day_ at all. This accounts for
the uncertainty about the day. If the first Christians had observed it,
or in any particular way celebrated it, as the Jews did the Passover,
there never could have been any doubt about the day. Anti-christ is
great on _holy days_, specially if, of his own appointment, or if some
paganism is mixed in them. This was one source of corruption in the
primitive church—the continual tendency to mix up pagan ceremonies
and superstitions with the simple, pure and holy religion of our Lord.
Worldly and carnal-minded men in the early ages conceived the idea of
popularizing the religion of Christ and commending it to the world by
mixing pagan ceremonies, customs and superstitions with it; adorning it
with philosophy and the pagan ideas of refinement. But all this only
corrupted and degraded it.

The Romish apostasy now has some forty _holy days_ in a year, and
as many human laws about observing them, while those involved in
it gormandize, drink, revel and gamble on the _Lord’s day_, and
thus encroach upon the laws of a civilized and enlightened people.
Protestants are patronizing them in this, and recognizing their
_holy days_, and at the same time making nothing of celebrating the
sufferings of our Lord, on the first day of every week, as all history
assures us was the practice of the first church! Instead of recognizing
the glorious resurrection of our Lord, in the assembling on the first
day of the week, they talk of the _Sabbath_, and instead of “the
communion of the blood and body of the Lord”—the commemoration of
his great sufferings for us, they listen to a pitiful ditty called “a
sermon,” and then put on long faces and keep Christmas, Good Friday,
Easter, etc., not named in the law of God at all, but derived from
paganism. If we had no other objection to sectarianism but this,
we would stand clear. People who see nothing in “the first day of
the week”—“the Lord’s day”—but _Sabbath_, or _rest_, and see not
the importance of celebrating the Lord’s death, commemorating his
sufferings, in obedience to some of his last instructions, such as the
injunction, “Do this till I come”—“Do this in memory of me”—need to
be enlightened before they can be regarded as worshipers in any true
sense, under Christ. This is the very life, the heart, the soul, and if
it be left out, all is a sham, an empty pretence—nothing. The question
is not about Christmas, Good Friday, nor Easter, of Romish and pagan
authority, but of “the Lord’s day,” and “the communion of the blood and
body of the Lord,” having the supreme and absolute authority of the
Great King.




PREACHERS BELONGING TO NO CHURCH.


We think it is quite proper for men who belong to no church to make it
known, and then if people want to uphold such anarchy, disorderly men,
as preachers of the gospel, they can do so with a clear understanding.
If preachers can live out of any church and do the will of God, other
people can do the same. This is not all nor the worst of it. These men
claim not only that they can live out of any church and do the will
of God, but they claim that they can do more good out of any church
than in one. This only needs to be run out to its legitimate result to
see the absurdity of it. Outside of _any church_ is not only outside
of churches of human device, but outside of the church of the living
God, the pillar and support of the truth. The Lord has established one
church, one body, one kingdom. He gave himself for that church. He
built it on the rock. He sanctified and cleansed it with the washing of
the water by the word. He made one new man, so making peace, or _one
new church_. It is the Lord’s _one flock_ of which he is the one
Shepherd; the temple of God, in which God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit
dwell; the kingdom which we have received that _can not be moved_.
Outside of _any church_ is outside of _this church_. Outside of this
church is the world, and inside of it is the kingdom of God—all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.




A CHOIR.


We find some brethren call a few members of the church who sit
together and lead the singing a choir. This is no choir in the popular
sense, nor is it at all objectionable, specially if the singing is so
conducted that the members generally sing. But this is not the meaning
of choir. The choir in a church is composed of artistic performers,
who _sing for the church_; sing difficult pieces that the masses can
not sing, _for music_ and _musical display_, to attract, entertain and
gratify the people—to charm them with _music_. These are _professional
singers_, chosen without any regard to their piety, and frequently
without any regard to their moral character. They sing to show how they
can sing, amuse and entertain.




COURTESY IN FELLOWSHIP.


Any man who is a christian, or is in Christ, can be received into the
fellowship of the church. If a man is not a christian, not in Christ,
he can not, in any consistency, be received into the church or into
the pulpit. We would not give much for any man’s principles, who can
set them aside for a little act of _courtesy_, or a little pretence
of _liberality_. It is nothing but a sham, an empty pretence and
hypocrisy, to receive a man into the pulpit, and recognize him before
the people, to whom you would not give the right hand of fellowship.

It is liberality to allow every man the same liberty you enjoy, but
a sham, a pretence and hypocrisy to recognize him as a preacher of
Jesus, when you do not believe he is in Christ, and would not give
him the right hand of fellowship and take him into the church. Nor is
it _courtesy_ to receive such a man into the stand as a preacher, but
_hypocrisy_. A man who is in Christ is a brother, and, if a preacher of
Christ, may be received as such, in good faith. Such an one has a right
to all the privileges of the body of Christ, by virtue of being in it.
But the man who ignores the law of the King, and recognizes persons who
are not in Christ as brethren, christians and preachers, instead of
displaying a broad liberality, an extended charity, shows that he has
no settled principles—that he disregards principles and law.

Who ever thought a Mason or an Odd Fellow was discourteous for not
recognizing a man as a Mason who did not belong to the order? Certainly
no man of intelligence. They have their initiation, and without it you
are not in the order, and they do not recognize you, charitably or
uncharitably.




PRAISE GOD BY SINGING.


We never heard Dr. Knox announce a song to be sung in public, while we
were with him in Prince Edward Island, when he did not say, distinctly
and very audibly, “We will praise God by singing,” etc. This opens out
with the right idea. How grand and sublime to _praise God_ in song! We
ought to sing in worship, not for music, or even fine singing, but to
_praise God_, to _worship_ the Lord our God as an act of _devotion_
to God. We ought not to enter into it with the heart set on _music_,
either instrumental or any other sort, but on God and our gracious and
merciful Lord Jesus the Christ. The words ought to be read frequently
and a few words of comment on them, calling attention to the _sense_,
the praises, thanksgiving and supplications. Then people who know not
God will see, as many christians appear to fail to see, the propriety
of the word in one of our hymns: “Let those refuse to sing who never
knew our God.” It is a contradiction of all common sense of the very
meaning of the worship in song, for those who never knew God, or who
never even professed to be christians or tried to turn to God, to say
nothing of vile characters, to attempt to enter in the worship in song.

We care not how well people sing if they praise God, give thanks and
pour out their souls to him. Enter into the song with heart and soul,
and sing out with full voices, enraptured with the _theme_ of the song,
Him whose praises they sing, the salvation he graciously gives and the
immortality he proposes to bestow. The theme of the song is the great
matter. To sing with the spirit and the understanding is commanded,
and to teach and admonish in singing is also commanded. The main body
of the singing now done is not with the spirit nor the understanding,
nor is anything _taught_ or any one _admonished_. This is _no worship_.
Singing merely to make music is no more worship than performing on a
piano or violin.




CHRIST WILL COME.


But that Christ will come—“that same Jesus”—as literally as he was
seen go up into heaven from Mount Olivet, we entertain not one doubt.
That the dead will be raised and pass the final judgment, after which
the wicked will go away into everlasting punishment—into the fire of
_gehena_, where the worm dies not and the fire is not quenched, at the
same time that the righteous enter into life eternal—we entertain not
one doubt. These are clear and awful matters of divine revelation, and
the main matters to set forth and enforce on men, and not theories
_about_ these great matters. Is it true that a man may “lose his
own soul?” that a man may be “cast into hell?” that “both soul and
body” may be “destroyed in hell?” that wicked men “shall go away into
everlasting punishment?” that they may be “tormented day and night,
forever and ever?” Is it true that God “has appointed a day in which
he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead?” Beyond all question, it is true. In raising
Jesus from the dead, God has given assurance to all men that he will
judge the world in righteousness. The assurance that God will judge the
world in righteousness is the reason for repentance. He commands all
men, everywhere, to repent, because he has appointed a day in which he
will judge the world in righteousness.




ONE RELIGION.


Is there one true and divine religion in the world? The answer of the
people in this country generally is, that there is. Touching this
answer we entertain not a doubt. There is in this world one religion
from God, and of supreme and absolute authority. It covers the whole
ground, and leaves not the least room for any other. All others are
departures from it, corruptions of it, or amalgamations with something
else. That one religion was given by Christ and his apostles. Christ
is the Author of it. He is the Alpha and the Omega—the Beginning and
the Ending. “All authority in heaven and on earth is given to him.”
His religion, and no other, has the divine, the supreme, and the
absolute authority in it. There is not one particle of divine authority
in any other. All others are usurpations, existing in antagonism and
rebellion, and will be overthrown.

The Papal religion is a compound, or an amalgamation of Judaism,
Christianity and Paganism, the latter, by far, preponderating. Its
great love for, and attachment to the Latin, is in deference to
Paganism. While it contains some truth, and some parts of the religion
of Christ, it can not be said, in truth, to be _that religion_.
It is another, a departure, an apostasy; beyond recovery, and the
divine command to the people of God involved in it, is to “Come out
of her, that you be not partaker of her sins, and that you receive
not of her plagues.” Rev. xviii. 4. God says, “Her sins” (the sins
of Mystery Babylon) “have reached to heaven, and God has remembered
her iniquities.” This iniquitous system, as a distinct religion, was
not in the world for ages after the true religion was established. We
need inform no one a little acquainted with the New Testament, that
no such being as the Pope was in the church, nor in the world, in the
time of the apostles; nor does he appear in the early history of the
church at all. We might as well look into the Bible or early history
for an account of Mohammed, or the Mormon prophet, as for the Pope.
Neither the Pope nor Mohammed appear at all in history, for hundreds
of years after the establishment of the only true religion. Nor was
there a Cardinal or an Archbishop, during the same period. These
dignitaries were not _developed_ till long after the founding of the
New Institution. The entire priesthood of the Papacy, as now found, as
also the Nuns and Sisters of Charity, are wanting in all the history,
and, we may safely say, in everything written in the early centuries.
There is not a trace of them in the Bible, except in prophecy, nor in
any writing, for hundreds of years after the apostles. This any man
knows who has read and reflected at all.

The idea of the Papacy existing, except in embryo, insidiously coming
up, without a Pope, a Cardinal, an Arch-bishop, a Bishop, a Priest, a
Nun, or Sister of Charity, for centuries after Christ, is one of the
most preposterous things ever imposed on the credulity of mankind. Yet
the very mention of these dignitaries is lacking in all the writings of
several of the early centuries, either in the Bible or out of it. There
is not a trace of them in any writing of the period of which we speak,
Jewish, Christian, Infidel or Pagan. There is nothing clearer than that
the Papal religion came up too late to have the least claim to be the
true religion. The same is true of the Mohammedan religion. The true
religion was in the world long centuries before Mohammedanism had an
existence. It was born too late to be the true religion.

The true religion was born in Jerusalem. The Papacy was born in
Rome. Rome has been its seat—its Eternal City. It did not begin in
Jerusalem, but in Rome. Mohammedanism was not born in Jerusalem, but in
Mecca. It did not originate with Jesus but with Mohammed. A religion
not known till hundreds of years after Christ and his apostles, most
unequivocally is not the true religion. We need not trouble the reader
with the mention of any religion, born at a later date, in another
place, or originating with another person. Such a religion certainly
has no claim to be the true one. The true religion originated with
Jesus, in Jerusalem, and in the time of Christ and the apostles. Any
religion that did not originate with Jesus, in Jerusalem, and in the
time of Christ and the apostles, and that does not appear in the
accounts found on the pages of the New Testament, nor any writings of
the first three centuries, is out of the question. If the very name of
any religion, the person with whom it originated, and other important
matters connected with it, are not found in the Bible, nor a trace of
it in history for hundreds of years after Christ, it is out of the
question.

Is there any way to determine what the true religion is? Is it anywhere
distinctly set forth, revealed and embodied in writing, so that we can
find it separate from everything else? It is distinctly set forth by
Christ and his apostles, separate from everything else. They revealed
it as complete religion in itself, containing all things necessary to
life and godliness—the final the last will of God to man. It is the
culmination, the embodiment and consummation of infinite wisdom and
goodness in one religion, for all nations of men that dwell on all
the face of the earth. Can we find it? Can we tell what it is? Can we
practice and enjoy it? We claim that we can find it, practice it and
enjoy it. Can we determine what it requires us to believe, what it
requires us to do, and what it promises us? If we have to say no to
all this, we are in a deplorable condition truly. But we claim that we
can find the true religion, determine what it is, practice and enjoy
it; that we can determine what it requires us to believe, what it
requires us to do, and what it promises us. This being so, there is
not an excuse for any man being irreligious, taking up with a wrong
religion, thinking that something is the true religion that is not,
believing something that it does not require, doing something it does
not command, or hoping for something it does not promise.

There is one book in which the religion of Christ is set forth. That
one book is the Bible. In that book the one religion, the only true
religion, is set forth; set forth correctly by the unerring Spirit of
all revelation and all divine wisdom. Not another religion is found in
that book, now in force. No man goes to that book to find an account
of the Pope, a Cardinal, or an Archbishop of the Papal type. No man of
intelligence goes there to find an account of Mohammed, or the Koran.
No man of intelligence goes to the Bible to find an account of the
Church of England, its origin, rise, or any part of its history. No
man goes to the Bible to find an account of Lutheranism, its origin,
rise, or any part of its history. There never was a Lutheran before
Martin Luther lived, in the sixteenth century. No man goes to the Bible
to find an account of the origin of Presbyterianism. There never was
a Presbyterian before John Calvin. No man goes to the Bible to find
the origin, rise, or any part of the history of Methodism. There never
was a Methodist before John Wesley. We do not go to the Bible to find
an account of George Fox, Ann Lee, Joe Smith, etc.; nor of Quakerism,
Shakerism, or Mormonism. These persons are not Bible characters, and
these religions are not Bible religions. They came not into existence
till long ages after the last words of the Bible were written. The true
religion had been in the world ages before these were born. This ends
all controversy about their claims to be the true religion. The true
religion was a finality. In its closing words it forbids any addition.

There is not an item in any religion in the world that is right that
did not come from the Bible. All parties admit that all that comes
from the Bible is right, and all that does not come from the Bible is
without authority. Their differences are about what is not in the Bible
and not about what is in the Bible. They all believe the Bible, but
they do not believe what each other have in their other books that
is not in the Bible. It is not the Bible that makes the Baptists,
for there is nothing in the Bible about the Baptists, and then the
Episcopalians have the Bible and believe it as much as the Baptists
do, and it does not make them Baptists. It is not the Bible that makes
Episcopalians, for the Presbyterians have the Bible and believe it as
much as the Episcopalians do, and it does not make them Episcopalians.
It is not the Bible that makes Presbyterians, for there is nothing in
the Bible about Presbyterians, and then the Methodists have the Bible
and believe it as much as the Presbyterians do, and it does not make
them Presbyterians.

The movement about the beginning of this century was not to establish
a new church, or a new religion, but to return to the Lord, find the
old religion and the old church; receive, believe and practice what the
old religion, as set forth in Scripture, requires, and nothing else.
No movement can go back of this, nor rise above it, if it does what it
claims. What remains for us, is to stand to it, maintain it and carry
it out practically and faithfully.




A. CAMPBELL’S SUCCESSORS AND CRITICS.


Some fifteen years ago a few of our more advanced men gradually
commenced opening up to our benighted minds, the fact, that A. Campbell
was not the great man we had thought he was; that he was not the
scholar we had thought; that some of his chief ideas were erroneous,
and that we should have much trouble in _undoing_ what he had _done
wrong_. We were growing up many young men, and being illiterate and
unlearned, we knew not but we had over estimated A. Campbell, and
that some mighty men were rising among us, that would throw him in
the shade. But we had one comfort all the time, and that was that we
were not alone in the opinion that A. Campbell was a man of superior
learning and parts. We noticed that he attracted the fire of the great
guns of the infidels, the Universalists, the Roman Catholics, the
Methodists, the Presbyterians, and sectarians in general. He attracted
the attention of the great men of Christendom, distinguished the hills
of Bethany, and gave them a name that will extend down to the end of
the ages. No man on this continent called forth anything like the same
amount of attention he did, for the space of forty years. It was not a
mere fortuity that gave him notoriety, but sound learning, correct and
abundant information, persistent and determined work, with a fixed and
settled purpose, to which he addressed the energies of his life. He was
a mighty man in the highest sense, and to this the impression he made
on the people of this great country, will testify till the Lord shall
come.

We have been amused with two classes of men among us. Those of one
class were adjusting themselves for the mantle of A. Campbell to fall
on them when he would depart. Had that mantle fallen on one of them,
he would have appeared like a boy with his father’s great coat on—it
would have fit nowhere. The other class are finding his errors and
going beyond him. But it is remarkable, that in almost every instance,
these _advanced_ men prove to be wrong themselves. Instead of their
discovering some _new truth_, they resurrect some _old error_. We do
not think it is advancing very far ahead of A. Campbell to resuscitate
the Romish and Restorationist idea of an obscure Scripture. We
frequently think of the man’s invention, that claimed that he could
grow sheep _without wool_—it is more curious than profitable.

It is not _inventive_ genius we need in the Church, nor _explorers_ to
_invent_ something new, or to _make discoveries_; but we need humble
and honest men, who know and love the truth, and will press it on the
world. We know humble men, of but limited talent and information, who
are building up churches, reforming men and women, and bringing them to
God. We know also men of considerable learning and talent, who do not
turn a bare dozen to the Lord in a year, and who build up no churches
nor anything else, but who are starting subtleties, speculations and
questions to no profit, but only tend to subvert the hearer. Why can
men not be content with the plain truth, the precious truth that makes
men wise to salvation, through faith in Christ? It is easily learned,
easily preached and readily believed and obeyed to the salvation of
the soul. It is for the people, the whole people, and adapted to them.
The kind of greatness we need, is that which manifests itself in
preaching great truth in plain and easy terms, and bringing it to the
comprehension of the people. The command is, and will be till the Lord
comes, “Preach the word.”




AUTHORITY OF A SINGLE CONGREGATION.


A single congregation of the Lord in any community can administer
and execute the work of the Lord in all its parts. This is true
of every congregation. When assembled it is a divinely-authorized
body to act in the matters of the kingdom of God. There is no other
divinely-authorized body on earth to act in the matters of the kingdom
of God. This body is under the old commission from the Lord: “Observe
all things whatever _I have commanded you_.”




CLASSIFICATION OF MISSIONARY MEN.


We have been trying to classify our missionary men, so that we can
think of them with intelligence. We put them down as follows:

_First._ Men who go ahead and preach, and continue on preaching. These
are missionary men in the true sense.

_Second._ Men that contribute liberally of their substance to support
those who are devoted to preaching, and see that their money goes to
the men that do the work. These are missionary men also in the true
sense.

_Third._ Men who _devise plans_, inaugurate missions, and call on other
people to give the money, stand ready where the money comes out, or at
the missionary box, to catch it, and propose, when they get $10,000,
to send _somebody to preach_! These may be great on _devising_,
_planning_ and _inaugurating_; but we can not work ourself into the
belief that they are _missionary men in the true sense_. We want to
see some proposition for _them to go_; and we want to know that they
are _going_. This hanging on to rich churches and fine salaries, and
proposing to receive the _money of the people_, and send somebody to
preach, is not “the Lord’s plan,” nor any other that will stand in the
day of judgment.

The people of God can find plenty of good preachers whom they know to
be worthy, who are devoted to preaching the gospel, and not ruining or
corrupting it, to whom they can apply all they can give, and not have a
dollar consumed by secretary, or any “middle man,” but all will go to
the laborer who is worthy of his hire—to the man that does the work.
The means thus given will do four times as much work as if sent through
so many hands, and all go as intended by the donor. The work is not a
_local work_, and needs no concentration of funds, but is at the door
of every man, and the way is open for every man that has it in him to
do anything, to do according to the ability that the Lord gives.




INFLUENCE OF THE DANCE.


One dancing-master in a community, with some concessions of a preacher
who has an easy conscience on the follies of the age, a little in his
favor, with one saw of his bow across the strings of an old fiddle,
will inveigle a whole community of wild and thoughtless young people
into the dance and hold them there half a night, and not one of them
will complain of the _long meeting_. Restraining these influences is
not so easy. It requires a combined effort of all the godly. We have
done all we could to restrain those terrible demoralizing influences,
and a noble band of as true men and women as live have stood by us and
encouraged us by extending their patronage and words of comfort. Truly
are we thankful to these and to the Lord who has put it into their
hearts to do what they have to aid us. We have this consciousness, that
to the best of our ability we have done our part. We have tried all
the time to exercise the best wisdom we could, and have continually
implored the Lord for wisdom and strength to perform the difficult part
of the work, in the providence of God committed to our hand.




NO MODIFICATION OF THE DIVINE PLAN.


No modification of principle has ever made any impression on our
mind, only the impression that he who proposes it, is ready for
_back-sliding_. There are some principles that are self-evidently
right. They _can not be modified_. We may depart from them, but can
not modify them. The law of God is supreme in its authority. It is
absolute. Those of us who have taken it can stand by and maintain it,
on the one hand, or depart from it on the other. We can not change it
or modify it. There are but two things for men to do, who are not under
the law of God. One is to come under the law. The other is to reject
it. There are also but two things for those who have come under it. One
is to observe it. The other is to abandon it.

We are thankful to be assured that the great body of those who have
come under the law of the Great King, are well pleased with him and
his law. They regard it as holy, just and good, and regard every man
who departs from it _untrue_. The _true_ stand by it, and the _untrue_
depart from it.

But, we have a few claims to put in for the law of King Jesus, and we
want the attention of our _liberal_ men to these claims:

We claim for the law of King Jesus that it is most magnanimous and
_liberal_. It excels in its _liberality_ all laws ever published. It
offers citizenship to all who will come and be naturalized, with full,
free and equal rights. It offers to all, the privilege of becoming
children in the heavenly family by _adoption_, and makes them all heirs
of God and joint heirs with Christ, on the _same terms_. It offers the
same pardon and on the same terms to all the world. It offers the same
divine designations to all, the same gospel, and the same spirit of
life; the same Bible, and the same law for all. The same grace of God
has appeared to all men. God is no respecter of persons, but he who
fears and works righteousness is accepted with him. It has the same
liberal terms of union and communion for all who come to God.




ONE WAY TO GOD.


We will, for the sake of the inexperienced, state the argument. When
we set forth _the way_, as laid down in Scripture, we are in the
affirmative—must show it to be _the way_, maintain and defend it. When
_some other way_ is affirmed, we affirm nothing and have nothing to
prove, but simply deny. It is no part of our work to prove that there
is no other way. We simply have nothing to prove. Let him who affirms
that there is some other way prove it. Call on him for his proof, and
in default of any proof he loses the case. He trusts his soul, and
tries to induce others to trust their souls, on another way, for which
he can bring no proof. This is the “vantage ground.” _The way_ is in
the Bible, and can be easily pointed out. _Another way_ is not in it,
and can not be pointed out. Let him try it who pleases—it simply _can
not be done_. Charitable or uncharitable, narrow or broad, liberal or
illiberal, _another way_ can not be pointed out in the book of God.

Let there be no cavil. We are speaking of gospel subjects, and the way
set forth for them to come to God.




POPULAR UNION MEETINGS.


Suppose a modern popular revivalist such as Mr. Moody, in one of his
great meetings should tell his audience that he would read the great
commission of our Lord to his apostles, and proceed to read as follows:

“Go you, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them into the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to
observe all things whatever I have commanded you.”

“Go you into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature. He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not
shall be damned?”

Then, suppose he should follow this up with the words of Peter, in
reply to the three thousand on Pentecost, when they inquired, “What
shall we do?” when he said, “Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and you
shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit,” or that he should also
quote the instructions of Ananias to Saul: “Why do you tarry? Arise,
and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the
Lord;” what think you would become of the great union meeting and the
wonderful co-operation of so many parties? They would disperse almost
as rapidly as the Jews did from our Lord when he overthrew the tables
of the money changers and drove them out of the temple. They would hear
him no more.

These great union meetings, in which many of different parties unite
and co-operate, put a part of the word of God—the language of the
Spirit of God—on the same level with their partisan peculiarities and
opinions, and ignore all together, the human and the divine! They make
no difference between the human and divine, in ignoring, but simply
ignore the matters in which they do not agree, no matter whether human
or divine. We make this difference; _we ignore all that is human_, and
_recognize all that is divine_. The true union ground is _the divine_.
We are not to unite simply on what we agree about. We may agree in
the wrong—the erroneous—the false. The true ground is to ignore
everything that did not come from God, and recognize everything that
did come from God. The entire revelation from God to man is that on
which to unite. All included in that is of supreme authority, and all
not included in that is of no authority at all.

Men may join in union meetings, co-operate in them or unite permanently
in them, but so long as they are alliances, leagues or confederations,
in an understood, settled and persistent ignoring of clear instructions
from the Lord in reference to the way of salvation, the approbation of
the Lord will not be there. It matters nothing about the number that
unite in these meetings, nor the variety of different parties, nor how
many conversions may be claimed, the approbation of the Lord is not
there so long as his authority is ignored in deference to people that
do not receive it.

These meetings, the different parties pushing into them, and the
various preachers participating in them, are simply demonstrations of
the confused state of the public mind. Neither the preachers nor the
people are settled. They are out at sea and ready for anything new, or
anything better, but know not where to find it. They have become so
bewildered that they can trust in almost anything, except the clear
revelation of God. Whatever a man thinks is right, that is right to
him, unless he thinks _the law of God is right_. They can not admit
that that is right if a man _does think it is right_! But _it is
right_, whether they think it is right or not, and will be right for
ever and ever.




WHERE IS THE ARMY OF THE LORD?


Where, then, is the army of the Lord? It is not in an aggregated body,
some vast assembly headed by great clergymen, making display and show,
of imposing ceremonies and vast assemblies. Like the ancient disciples,
they are “scattered abroad,” and are going “everywhere preaching
the word.” In their humble homes, their neighborhoods, among plain
and sincere people, they are sowing the good seed of the kingdom of
God, training their children in the way of the Lord, and, by their
godly lives, personal influence and pious instructions, spreading the
knowledge of God, and building up congregations. These are scattered
in all these States, and in all the principal Territories in our
countries. Some of them are found in all the British Provinces, except
Newfoundland, in America, in England, Ireland and Scotland, in Wales and
Australia, as also in Jamaica. If we could enumerate these, we should
find a larger army of them than many think. All of these, true to
their principles, and at work where the work is in their reach, and
most convenient to them, and so far as they, in any respect, promote
the work, advance the cause, and build up the kingdom of God, they are
co-operating in the same great work of _saving man_, and are “_laborers
together_ with God.” Their work is “associated effort” in spreading
the knowledge of God, and filling the world with his glory. They are
_standing together_ as one man, and “striving for the hope of the
gospel.”




FUTURE SUCCESS OF THE LORD’S ARMY.


We believe that the heart of the great body is true as ever, and
that the army is stronger than ever, and there never was a greater
determination to maintain every word that proceeds out of the mouth
of the Lord, than at the present time. A vast army of young men are
rising, true as ever lived, determined to maintain their ground, and
will maintain it till the last. The pens of many are already employed,
and many more are ready for the conflict. Thousands of preachers are in
the field fighting the battle, and more are coming, and the ground will
be maintained every inch. The Almighty Arm is underneath and will carry
the work on.




FEET WASHING.


There is no evidence in Scripture, or in any early writing, of any such
practice as _washing feet_, in time of worship, or associated with
worship, either public or private, as a religious rite, an ordinance,
an act of devotion, or in any other way. There is no intimation that
the washing of the saints’ feet alluded to, I. Tim. v. 10, was a
religious rite, or an ordinance connected with worship, any more than
lodging strangers. It is put down in the list of “good works,” and not
religious rites or devotions.

In like manner, the feet washing mentioned, John xiii. 1-10, was not
in time of worship, nor at the time of the Passover, but “before the
feast of the Passover,” and after supper, or “supper being ended,” he
“rose from supper and laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and
girded himself.” This was not in _public_ at all, but in the _private
circle_. It was not in a meeting, nor in time of worship at all, but
after a common meal. The washing of feet was not a new thing with them,
nor were any surprised at _feet washing_, for it was common, and a
_necessity_. That which was new about it, was for the Lord and Master
to wash the servants’ feet. Had the order been for the servant to wash
the Master’s feet, there would have been nothing new to them in it. But
they were abashed at the idea of their Lord and Master washing their
feet. With this view, Peter said, “Lord, dost thou wash my feet?”
The Lord responded, “What I do you know not now; but you shall know
hereafter.” Peter persisted, not against _feet washing_, but against
_the Lord_ washing _his feet_. “Thou shalt never wash my feet.”

If washing the saints’ feet had been a religious rite connected with
the communion, how could Paul have omitted it, when giving that which
he received of the Lord? See I. Cor. xi. 20-34. He says, “I received
of the Lord that which I delivered to you.” He then proceeds to tell
us what it was. See I. Cor. xi. 23-25. This was instituted on “the
same night in which the Lord was betrayed.” The occasion of the feet
washing (John xiii. 1-10) was not on “the same night in which the Lord
was betrayed,” but “before the feast of the Passover.” The feast of the
Passover was over before the communion was instituted. We think the
following is true in regard to the matter: That the feet washing was
_before_ the Passover, and the institution of the communion was _after
it_; that two days intervened, and that the two things done were also
at _two places_, the one at _one place_ and the other at _another_. The
washing of feet did not occur at the same time nor in the same place of
the institution of the communion, nor is there the least evidence that
it ever was practiced in connection with the communion in the primitive
church, nor is there the least authority for it.

We have never witnessed anything of the kind, but we have been informed
repeatedly that where they practice this ceremony now, they only wash
_one foot_ of each person. We would like to know where they get this.
It is not in John xiii. 1-10.




SUCCESS TO GOOD MEN.


We desire to see every man succeed who is for the “right way of the
Lord,” and hope the Lord and his people will hold up the hands of every
such man. We know the Lord will hold up the hands of every such man;
never leave him nor forsake him; but will grant him grace and glory,
and withhold from him no good thing; and we know, too, his people, when
they have time to reflect and the means of knowing before them, will
stand by the good and true, the sincere and faithful. They will let
religious adventurers pass, and turn their backs on them. They want
no charlatans under the garb of religious teachers. Be good and true,
faithful and honest, sincere and sound, in the true sense, and there is
no danger of the people getting to think you are _unsound_.




OUR PLEA.


Our straightforward and direct appeal to the people to turn their
backs on all that is human and accept all that is divine; on all
that is of earth, and receive all that is from heaven; to open the
Scriptures and receive all that came from the Lord, as set forth in
his own revelation; receive the religion of Christ itself, as he has
laid it before the world, in his own word, and nothing else, is so
manifestly correct, indisputably safe and right, that it can not fail
to strike the mind favorably. It is simply a plea to turn away from
all human religions, and except the only divine religion. This is the
sum and substance of the whole matter. We have thrown overboard all
that is human, and simply maintain what is divine. If the Bible can
be maintained over all human books; if the religion of Christ can be
maintained over all human religions; if the doctrine of the Lord, and
the commandments of God, can be maintained over the doctrines and
commandments of men; if “the right way of the Lord,” can be maintained
over the wrong ways of men, then the plea we have been making can be
maintained.

But we should not expect to revolutionize the public mind at once. Such
a thing is impossible in the nature of things, and is not desirable. We
could not maintain the position if gained in that way. We desire a
healthy and a reliable state of things. Sudden revolutions always
leave things in an unsettled state. A gradual change is transcendently
better. It is, then, not of impulse, sensation or emotion, but of
faith. When the testimony comes to the mind gradually, and the faith
becomes stronger and stronger, it finally rises to “the full assurance
of faith;” a settled conviction, and the soul is established. But the
leaven is working in the meal, much faster than many are aware of, and
the mind of the people is changing, and the way is opening more and
more. We have never seen a reason for a doubt about the righteousness
of the cause, and the possibility of maintaining it, since the day we
entered it. We are now as firm in the conviction that it is the only
true ground, and the only ground that can be maintained, and the only
ground on which all the true Israel of God can unite and stand, as we
are that the Bible is a divine book. In all this the past year has
furnished additional assurances.




NO CAMPBELLITES.


There is no such thing in this country as Campbellism, nor is there
any such body of people as Campbellites. There is a people in this
country that have gone back to our Lord to learn what he gave to the
apostles and authorized them to preach, and to the apostles and learned
what they preached to the world, and what they taught the church; who
receive what the apostles preached and taught, and believe it in full;
no more, no less. In this they claim to receive the religion of Christ
itself, as he and his authorized ambassadors set it forth. They receive
and believe it on the authority of its divine founder, the Lord, from
heaven, and enforce it on all who hear them, as the only complete,
perfect and divine system in the world; the only true religion; the
religion of Christ itself. They claim to be Christians, followers of
Christ, children of God. The body to which they belong is simply the
body of Christ, the kingdom of God, the church. Christ is their head;
their infallibility. They believe on him. They obey him. They hope for
all he has promised, and fear all he has threatened. To be in him is
to be in his body, in the kingdom, in the church, to be a Christian, a
follower of Christ. They receive him and all he has said, but reject
all that did not come from him. This is no Campbellism, nor Methodism;
but the religion of Christ itself. That is what we are for, and we are
for it because it is from God, and has the authority of God in it.




CONVERTING THE CITIES.


They must be brought to know that they must be revolutionized, created
anew, conformed to Christ, and then taught to worship according to the
Scriptures. The work is not to be done by wholesale, nor by the device
of man. Nor need we think we can take the great cities by getting a
few rich or popular men. We must preach the gospel to _the people_,
the _whole people_, and turn _them_. The gospel invariably commences
with the humbler classes, and works up through them till it reaches
all grades. It did not commence by converting emperors, kings, or
governors; nor did it reach these for a long time. It did not commence
by converting rich men, but mainly with the poor; but in time reached
the rich. It did not commence with converting priests, but after a time
we read that a great number of priests became obedient to the faith.

In the main, this has been the case in our time. We commenced with the
humbler people in the cities and have reached through to every class.
We gained the attention of vast numbers of people in the country, and
turned them to the Lord, when they were poor. They have been prospered,
and gained wealth; gone to the cities, and thus augmented the churches
there; but, in many instances, they are not the good people they were,
nor loving and maintaining the truth as they once did.




A HAPPY MEETING.


At Lower Blue Lick, in Robertson County, Kentucky, in the month of
September, 1875, Elder Franklin met his beloved father in the gospel
and veteran in the cause of reformation, Eld. Samuel Rogers. He thus
describes the happy meeting, and expresses his high regard for a true
man of God:

One morning when we were in the stand, waiting a few minutes for
the audience to assemble and become composed, we saw once more the
venerable form of Samuel Rogers, making his way up the aisle. We could
scarcely restrain our emotions when we saw the old saint, bringing
before our mind in visible form what has been our lifetime idea of one
of the old prophets. We met him in the aisle, when he spoke out with
the tears tracing down his noble face: “Bro. Ben, I am in the land of
the _dead_ and _dying_, but shall soon be in the land of the _living_.”
We could give utterance to no words. Peter said, in the mountain of
transfiguration: “It is good for us to be here.” So it was to us on
this occasion. More than forty years had elapsed since we first saw
him, and he appeared to us _old_ then. He is now in his eighty-sixth
year. He sees to read without glasses by holding the print close to
his eyes, and hears better than when we saw him last. He converses
with readiness and ease, and his voice is remarkably good. His plain
and striking comparisons are as ready as ever. He styles a dry and
prosing exhortation, after a good sermon, “snow in August.” He tells a
preacher, trying to be learned and profound in his preaching, that he
“puts the fodder too _high up_ in the rack—the sheep can’t reach it.”
The main trouble is that there is no “fodder” there. He says: “We used
to have _men_ and _women_, but now we have _ladies_ and _gentlemen_.”
He says he still _eats his dinner_ and _supper_ and lets the rest of
them _dine_ and _take tea_.

When at home he spends many hours alone, and some of the friends
inquired whether he did not get lonesome. “No,” said he, “I never get
lonesome. I talk to the Lord and he talks to me. I talk to him in
my prayers, and he talks to me in the Bible.” This is keeping good
company, and a glorious way to keep from getting lonesome. He reads
up and keeps fully posted in all that is transpiring among us, and is
fully alive to all the dangers now threatening the cause—the insidious
steps now tending to undermine and overthrow all we have done. Still,
like Paul, none of these things move him. He is firm as the everlasting
hills. He has settled convictions and purposes, and can not be
turned away from them. He can see, as Solomon says, that “one sinner
destroyeth much good,” but adheres to another saying of much importance
from the same source: “Fret not thyself because of evil-doers.” The
Lord is with him and he is as happy as he can be, full of love and
good-will to God and man. Thanks be to God for the faith of Christ that
has the power to bear up the spirit, to console and comfort him in
extreme old age, and opens to his view, now that he is about to let go
this world, “a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens;” and
now that he is about to surrender up this life, that opens to his view
a life that never ends. Blessed be the Lord who is pleased thus to deal
tenderly and kindly with him in his near approach to another world.




CHURCH DECISIONS.


But may not public opinion, or even the Church, decide wrong? It may,
and, no doubt, does sometimes. So may any court, man can establish;
and it may turn out that the world may become so bad, or the church
may become so perverted or corrupted, that a man can not get a fair
decision. Still, it is the best that can be done, for us all to be free
alike, before the court of public opinion, and the church, and if we
should get a wrong decision here, the last or final appeal is to the
court of heaven, to the judgment of the Great Day. But in a country
like this, where a man has been among a people all his life; been an
upright and true man; conducted himself with consistency and propriety;
there must be something very singular in his course, and peculiar
indeed, if he can not get a fair hearing and decision from public
opinion, or from the church. There must be something very peculiar in
his course to unsettle their confidence; to start doubts in their minds
in reference to his soundness; to fill the public mind with distrust.
There must be something not _straightforward_.




REIGN OF A THOUSAND YEARS.


We know of no proof that the righteous will be raised a thousand years
before the wicked. The Lord says, “The hour is coming when all that are
in the graves shall hear his voice and shall come forth; they that have
done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to
the resurrection of damnation.” We see no _thousand years_ between the
resurrection of those that have done good and those that have done evil
here.

The quotation from John v. 28-29, above, connects the coming of Christ
and the resurrection, and the following connects the coming of Christ
and the judgment: “I charge you, therefore, before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at _his appearing_
(his coming) and kingdom.” II. Tim. iv. 1. Other Scriptures show the
same. At the close of Matt. xxv. it will be seen, as it is from other
Scriptures, that all will be judged at the same time, and at the same
time that the righteous “enter into life eternal” the wicked “go away
into everlasting punishment.” This connects the coming of Christ, the
resurrection, the judgment, the separation of the righteous and the
wicked, and the entrance into life on the one hand, and the going away
into everlasting punishment on the other hand.

We listened to the Millerites in 1843, read pretty much all they wrote
about a thousand years’ reign of Christ, between the resurrection of
those who are Christ’s and those who are not his, and whatever the
thousand years may mean in words, “the rest of the dead lived not again
till the thousand years were ended,” we find no clear evidence of its
coming between the resurrection of the righteous and the wicked. Sundry
Scriptures show that the judgment of all, will be at the same time.

Christ sitting on the throne of David does not make him a king, in
the temporal sense, as David was, but only that he is in the royal
family, and, in the sense of that Scripture, he is now in that reign,
and not to be in the Millennium. In the end he will deliver up the
kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall put down all rule, and
all authority and power. For he must reign till he has put all enemies
under his feet. See I. Cor. xv. 24, 25. “When all things shall be
subdued to him, then shall the Son also himself be subject to him, who
put all things under him, that God may be all in all.” I. Cor. xv. 28.
The Lord has come to receive a kingdom, and is now reigning over that
kingdom—a kingdom not of this world—and on David’s throne, in the
only sense he ever will be.




METHODIST CLERICAL PRETENSIONS.


Who duly appointed the ministry in the Methodist body? A body that is
not, and admits that it is not, the body of Christ! Where did this body
get authority to appoint a ministry? It has no authority to appoint
any thing in the kingdom of God. Who “divinely called” the ministry
in the Methodist body? Not the Lord, for he has no Methodist body. He
never called a man to minister in a body that he never authorized. The
men called in that body were not called of God at all, nor divinely
called. They either _called themselves_, or were called by a body that
has no divine authority in it, and therefore are not divinely called.
Nor are they divinely qualified. The apostles were divinely qualified.
They had the Holy Spirit to guide them into all truth. They never
preached any Methodism, nor built up any Methodist churches. They never
authorized a Methodist steward, class-leader, circuit-rider, presiding
elder, or bishop, any more than they authorized that unmeaning _bread
and water love-feast_, the band-society, the class-meeting, circuit or
conference, either quarterly, annual or general. The Methodist church
has not a duly-appointed ministry, a divinely-called and sent, or
divinely-qualified ministry in it. Its worship, ordinances and
discipline are not duly nor scripturally administered. Indeed, it has
but little in it that hears any similitude to the original church. To
talk of its having a divinely-qualified ministry will strike any one
a little acquainted with the Scriptures with peculiar force. A more
absurd idea could hardly be uttered.

The apostles were divinely called, sent and _qualified_, and should
one of them appear in a Methodist revival, where persons are “seeking
religion,” crying, “What shall we do?” as they did on Pentecost, and
answer as Peter did on that occasion, “Repent, and be baptized every
one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins,”
in the place of the loud response, “Amen,” dismay would run all
along the line, and the _divinely-qualified_ ministry would want the
divinely-qualified apostle out of the meeting. His voice would be a
_strange_ voice in their meeting. If he were to tell the seekers, as
Ananias did Saul, “Why do you tarry? Arise, and be baptized, and wash
away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord,” they would soon want
him out of their meeting.




MOODY AND SANKEY.


The above named men referred to in the following, were popular
evangelists among the sects, and, though not educated for the ministry,
or ordained to that holy calling, performed all the functions of those
divines who claim to be called and sent of God. The recognition they
received in the great cities of the land, by clergymen of all sects,
Bro. Franklin regarded as a surrender of their clerical pretensions and
as equivalent to an acknowledgment of the fact that any christian man,
possessed of good christian character, and a knowledge of the word of
God, may preach the word.

                                                           J. A. H.

In the operations of Moody and Sankey, as also others that have
conceived virtually the same idea, and their surroundings, we have some
lessons of much importance. To some of these we now invite attention:

In all the principal parties there are some clerical pretensions.
They nearly all have some kind of clerical standard, that a man must
pass, to enter into holy orders at all. They have some kind of regular
process through which a man must pass, to be an authorized minister,
or to be permitted to minister in holy things at all, or to make
ordinances valid administered by his hands, or to give him official
grace and functions. But here come Moody and Sankey, Whittle and Bliss,
or Hammond, without ever having been tried by the _clerical standard_,
or ever having passed through the regular process to holy orders, and
never made clergymen at all, preaching and exercising ministerial
functions. All sorts of clergymen are rallying to them, recognizing and
indorsing their work! What becomes of clerical pretensions in all this?
Clergymen of all sorts recognizing and indorsing _laymen preaching_,
and laymen exercising all the functions of the ministry, who have never
been measured by the ministerial standard, and never have been made
clergymen. In this they are conceding that their clerical pretensions
and claims are empty—that there is nothing in them, that men that
have never been measured by the standard, nor made clergymen at all,
have as good a right to preach and minister in holy things as they.
In this they concede that the clerical cloak is nothing, and that men
can and may rightfully preach the word of God, without having it on.
The people ought to lay hold of this concession, read the Scriptures,
learn them and teach others, and thus go on till they fill the earth
with the knowledge of God. No man need wait to have clerical hands laid
on him to authorize to preach Jesus, or teach the saints in the way of
righteousness. To know the gospel and the teaching of Christ, and be
able to preach Christ and teach saints the way to heaven, prepares any
man to preach and teach. To appear in a proper manner and exercise a
good influence in preaching and teaching, a man must be a christian,
and have a good life as such, a life of piety and devotion,
corresponding to the preaching and teaching. But a man is in no shape
to appear before the world as a preacher of Christ, and a teacher in
the kingdom of God, who has no standing in the church of God, where his
home is, and a good recommendation to satisfy those abroad that his
standing is good at home.




TOO LATE FOR THE CARS.


On going to the depot we found our information about car time was
wrong, and we got to the depot just in time to see the train go out
and leave us. This has two lessons in it: 1. That it is not true “that
what a man thinks is right, is right to him.” The time we _thought was
right_ proved _not to be right_. 2. That we ought to be cautious about
saying, “There is time enough yet.”




LORD’S DAY MEETINGS.


Churches should not be compelled to hear preaching every Lord’s day,
and that the dullest and dryest kind, from the same man, the same
thing, over and over again; but instead of this, have a variety of
good songs; sundry readings of interesting Scriptures, from different
persons, each occupying from five to ten minutes, with two or three
prayers at suitable intervals, and words of exhortation. The overseer
who can so conduct these matters as to interest the whole congregation,
develop and bring out the most talent, and make the whole the most
conducive to the edification of all, is the most efficient and
successful overseer, whether he can preach or not himself. No man,
overseer or not, ought to appear before the people publicly more than
is acceptable to them. Many men kill themselves off by talking too much
and being too officious.




LAYING THE CORNER STONE OF A CATHOLIC CATHEDRAL.


But what was to be done? What was all this about? We are ashamed, for
humanity’s sake, to tell. It was to see a bishop _pow-wow_ over a
corner stone, _bless it_ and _lay it_ for a Romish meeting house! That
was what all this was about! What was there in that? No more than any
other pagan ceremony. No more than to see any other Irishman laying
any other stone or brick in any other building, aside from tradition
and superstition. This is the procedure of the Anti-christ, the Man of
Sin, the power gone out to deceive the whole world with sorceries; a
compound of Judaism, Paganism and Christianity, but described in the
book of God as the Apostasy. It has corrupted the four quarters of the
earth with its abominations and idolatries. It has two hundred millions
of the human race under its domination. It has caused the blood of
fifty millions of martyrs to flow. But the tide is receding. The wheel
is turning back. His secular power has departed. He does not have
Victor Emmanuel to bow down and kiss his great toe, nor to come and
crave favors of him. But he goes to Victor Emmanuel to know what favors
he can have. This puts the shoe on the other foot. Prince Bismarck
banishing the Jesuits from Germany, is another turn in the same
direction. The revolution in Mexico is in the same direction. The
Pope gets no favors in all these moves. He is strengthening his hands
in the United States a little just now, but this is only temporary,
and, we trust, will only serve to open the eyes of the people in this
country. Our people need a few demonstrations to rouse them from their
slumbers. They need to be made sensible who they are that want their
drinking saloons, and want them open on Sundays, that intend to parade
our streets with bands of music and long processions on the Lord’s day,
who they are that are trying to undermine our common schools and ruin
them, who they are that publish in our faces that our marriages are
all null and void—that we are all living in adultery because we were
not married by priests! We need a little more of this impudence in our
faces to rouse us up and cause us to see the viper we have taken into
our bosoms, and see what claim this Mystery of Iniquity has on our
charities.

It refuses to allow its adherents to become members of the Masonic
order, because it is a _secret Order_. The trouble is that it is a
_secret Order_ itself, with its _sworn members_ and _bound priests_,
its prowling Jesuits, nuns and friars, the most dangerous and complete
and perfect—the consummation of all secret Orders, from the hired
girl in the kitchen, and the hired man on the farm, up through every
position held, every situation in life, and every office held by a
Papist, to communicate intelligence to a set of men bound up in this
_Order of secrecy_, who are not even citizens in our Government, that
they may report to the Holy See in Rome! It is a secret, Pagan and
Jewish mixture with Christianity; an intriguing, insidious and stealthy
scheme, prying into the secrets of every nook and corner of every land,
and every move of every civil government on earth, and a friend to no
civil government on the face of the earth, only so far as it can be
made subservient to the purposes of the Pope.

The new Cardinal in this country is a minion of the Pope, and, without
being a citizen of the United States, when he pleases to do so, will
control the vote of some six millions of our population; and this all
done by the _secret workings_ of the Papacy, without any man seeing
the secret wires that are pulled to do it. These priests, bound all
over by religious _vows or oaths_, in a _secret conclave_, plan
schools to be taught by nuns, all in the _secret Order_, and gather
up vagrant children, while many of their own children are beggars, to
make Romanists of them, and shut them out from the light of the common
schools and colleges of this country.

Then how do these priests propose to gain power? Do they propose to
come out in open day; publicly teach the people and enlighten them?
Not a word of it. Do they propose to discuss their claims? Not a bit
of it. How then are they doing this work? _Insidiously._ It is all in
the dark, except an occasional demonstration like that we had here
on the first Lord’s day in July. What were the people taught on that
day? Did any one hear any instruction? Thousands of dollars were
expended. Thousands of people were weary and exhausted, but no one
was enlightened. No one was taught even Romanism, except those, who
from the word of God have learned the power of the grand delusion, the
mystery of iniquity that now works. They can understand the power of
the sorceries practiced to deceive and allure unwary souls.




UNIVERSALISM UNBELIEF.


The mission of unbelief, in this direction, is—

_First._ To force the Bible to agree with the Atheist, in theory, that
a man’s conduct in this life, no matter what it may be, can not destroy
his happiness in another life.

_Second._ That there shall be no reward in another world, for virtue,
righteousness and obedience rendered to God in this life.

_Third._ That there shall be no punishments in the world to come, for
disobedience, corruption, and crime, committed in this life.

_Fourth._ That the death of Christ amounts to nothing, as the
consequences of sin all follow now, and fall upon man just as they did
before he died.

_Fifth._ That repentance amounts to nothing, as the punishment of sin
is simply the natural result of a violation of a natural law, and must
follow its violation whether you repent or not.

_Sixth._ That there is no pardon of sin—that as you put your hand
in the fire, the burn must follow—as you spend your money, you must
become poor—as you dissipate, your physical energies must be impaired;
so, as you sin, in all cases the penalty must follow.

_Seventh._ All this being conceded, the grace of God is at an end.
There is no such an attribute as mercy in the government of Jehovah.

_Eighth._ No love of God is manifested either in the life or death of
Jesus, nor has his death produced any change in the world.

No wonder that infidels hail this theory with joyfulness, flock around
the Universalian preacher, and call him “brother.” His operations are
fatal to the Bible, to the mission and divine authority of the Lord
Jesus, and better calculated to turn the whole subject of religion into
ridicule, than any open infidelity ever advocated in the world. By this
kind of circumlocution, the Bible is now sought to be subverted, and
its influence upon the world destroyed. But all men of discernment can
see, that this is only a scheme to pull down and destroy—that it has
no efficacy to save, to make good, or improve mankind—that it can do
no good, in any event, to one soul of our race, either in this world or
the world to come. It is only an instrument, one of the most effectual
instruments of unbelief, in destroying all good, all virtue, and all
piety.




PERSONALITY OF THE DEVIL.


Denying the personality of the Devil. Here we have more _negative
preaching_—more _denying_. What a world of gospel there is in this!
Who is to be saved by denying the personality of the Devil? Who is
comforted and built up with this sort of stuff? The infidel laughs. The
Universalist nods assent; but who repents? The scoffer is delighted.
That is the man for him! But does he quit scoffing? We have recently
heard of a man who had stripped his feet bare after a rain of a warm
summer’s day, and, walking up through the mud to an old preacher,
denied the personality of the Devil; when the preacher, pointing behind
the man, replied: “He must be _alive_ and _personal_, for _there is his
track fresh in the mud_!” Another preacher allowed that when the Devil
has a man so completely blinded that he does not believe there is any
Devil, or that he is a personal being, he never expects to have any
more trouble with him. He will never listen to the truth any more.




CLERICAL YOUNG PASTORS.


That there should be occasionally a young man, with the views that
have been fostered and encouraged by some among us, of a “pastorate,”
who would assume authority to cast persons out of the church, and give
letters of commendation, is not strange. There were some even in the
time of the apostles, when no such views of a “pastorate” existed, who
assumed such prerogatives and “prated against us” (the apostles.) In
III. John 9, 10, we have a reference to one of them. “I wrote to the
church,” says John, “but Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence
among them, receives us not. Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his
deeds which he does, prating against us with malicious words: and not
content therewith, neither does he himself receive the brethren, and
forbids them that would, and casts them out of the church.” We have
fallen on the track of a few young men, and some old ones, of this
stripe; but their race is short. The brethren, whatever else is true of
them, are not prepared for clerical assumptions. They will not have the
manacles put on them. Such men will not trouble us long. Some of them
will go over to sectarianism at once, thinking that the shortest road
to a “pastorate.” Others will go to law, medicine, or to nothing. But
the main body of our young men are true and noble in the highest sense,
as humble and faithful as can be found anywhere. They are studying to
know and do the will of God. We are not sure that, as a class, they are
not generally sounder than their instructors in the gospel.

We regret to see anything like collision or rivalry between old and
young preachers. Young men get a little _fast_ sometimes, and old men
become a little _cross_; but these matters will all work their way out.
As a humorous writer said some years ago, after writing a long piece
about nothing, as a burlesque on certain persons, “We are all poor
_critters_.” We need a great deal of mercy and grace.

It is a little trying for old men, after toiling a lifetime in the
cause, and when they are struggling under the infirmities of age, to be
shoved aside, as we know some of them are, and treated with contempt by
the young men who ought to be a comfort and consolation to them. The
cause is the Lord’s, and we are his, and we shall all give account to
him. Let us keep pure ourselves, and keep the church pure; let us make
a record of which we shall not be ashamed when the Lord shall come. We
must study to bear our burdens, and to do so without murmuring. What we
can not cure, we must endure.




EVERLASTING AND ETERNAL.


Everlasting and eternal are from the same in the original. “Everlasting
punishment,” and not everlasting annihilation, nor everlasting
extinction of being, nor everlasting non-existence, is what the Lord
threatens. Matt. xxv. 46. At the same time the righteous enter into
“life eternal,” the wicked “go away into everlasting punishment.” The
original word _aionion_ here is translated, in the common version,
“eternal” in one place, and “everlasting” in the other. There is no
reason for not translating this word the same way in both places. It
means precisely the same in both places. At the same time we repeat,
that the righteous enter into “life eternal,” the wicked “go away
into eternal punishment.” The same word used by the Lord, in the same
sentence to express the duration of the life of the saints, is used to
express the duration of the punishment of the wicked. It is as likely
that the life of the saints shall terminate, as that the punishment
of the wicked shall cease. There is no word in any language that more
certainly expresses unlimited duration than this word _aionion_. It is
used to express the duration of the life of the saints, the praises of
God, and even the existence of God. A word may be used with less than
its full import, but _never with more_.




ENDURING HARDNESS AS GOOD SOLDIERS.


It matters not from what cause we suffer, whether inability on the
part of brethren, or parsimoniousness, we must bear hardness as good
soldiers of Jesus Christ, suffer and toil on, for we shall reap if we
faint not. We must not raise up a money-loving and worldly people;
and in order to this end we must not be _money-loving preachers_, nor
_worldly_ men ourselves. This is our security against the evil of
covetousness.

We do not believe the Lord will accept meeting in two or three
conventions in a year, and making three or four contributions and a few
speeches for missionary work. We must have more telling evangelizing
than this. This kind of work is demoralizing the brethren and drying up
all the veins of generosity in them. We shall have more and more _dying
churches_ till we change our course and go out into the field as we did
thirty-five and forty years ago, and hunt up these churches and wake
them up. We must not live with the idea of _sending_ some one to them,
but we must _go to_ them; and they must not be _helpless creatures_,
and think to support those who go to their relief by _relating their
stories about their being few and poor_, but do according to their
ability, and not let the preacher who visits them sacrifice more than
a dozen of them, and they only do their little _occasionally_, and he
making his sacrifices _every meeting_. This will not stand in the day
of judgment.




HOW A PREACHER MAY STAND FAIR.


All we have to do to stand right before the people, is to _be sound_
in heart, in the faith, in the life; true to the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; honest and faithful in the whole matter; maintaining,
defending, advocating it, as the only divine and gracious system
for the salvation of a lost world; enforcing it on men for its own
sake, and for the sake of humanity. Our safety is not in a tribunal
of learned men, who are _censors_ for us, but in the _judgment of an
intelligent and enlightened brotherhood_. They render no hasty judgment
and make no uncertain decisions. They do not anathematize nor hate
any man. They do not pronounce on a man for a single utterance or an
inadvertence. But when a man becomes perverse, his general course and
bearing evincing alienation, and a disposition to be in the wrong—an
aversion to the good, the true and the faithful—they begin to lose
their interest in him. Every step he takes in the wrong direction
lessens the affection for him in the hearts of the people of God, till
he finds himself cut off, if not literally by the action of a church,
that which is equally as fatal, the general turning away from him, and
utter failure in any sense to support him.

May we all maintain soundness in the faith, in the gospel, integrity to
it, faithfulness to it in all things, soundness in character, purity
and holiness. May we strive to live nearer and still nearer to God.




DELAY IN TURNING TO THE LORD.


If a person has delayed turning to the Lord, till some hindrance comes,
so that he can not take the steps, or do what the Lord has commanded,
to become a christian, he has simply delayed till he can not become a
christian. If he defers on any account, he simply defers becoming a
christian. At some point, a man passes the possibility of becoming a
christian. That point, or period, is generally thought to be at death.
Some still sing, “While the lamp holds out to burn, the vilest sinner
may return,” but this is not true. It is true that after death none can
turn to God, but it is not true that before death all can turn to God.
The apostle speaks of some men who were living in the literal sense,
but whom he compares to “trees twice dead and plucked up by the roots.
Such a tree as that never grows again.” He speaks of other men “past
feeling,” and others, still living, for whom nothing remains “but a
fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries,” and still others for whom nothing remains but
“the blackness of darkness forever.” Some are given over to believe the
lie and be condemned.

Our opinions are worth nothing in reference to those who can not do
what the Lord commands. We do not know a thing about the salvation of
any person only as the Lord has promised. He has promised that “He who
believes and is immersed, _shall be saved_,” and commanded, “Repent,
and be immersed every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins.” He who obeys the command has the promise. Outside
of this we know nothing about it. Not only so, but if we give some
_charitable opinions_ for those who can not obey, or in reference to
deferring, on account of hindrances, these cases will become more
frequent, and these opinions will be applied not simply to cases where
persons _can not_ obey, but where they can not _conveniently_, and in
a short time we have a system of salvation for those who _never obey_,
and the gospel is set aside by our _opinions_.

There are but few sick persons that can not be immersed. We have
immersed some half-dozen in the most critical situations, and some
of them in less than two days of their death, without any physical
injury, and with great relief to the mind. But we only allude to this
to show that there are not many cases where it is not possible to obey
the gospel, and not because this is the _time to obey_. It is not the
proper time to be baptized, or to make a profession. The proper time is
when persons first hear and believe the gospel; when their health, and
strength, and reason, are unimpaired, and they can voluntarily _yield
themselves_ to the service of God. When we come to die, one promise of
God is worth more than all the opinions of uninspired men put together.




WIELDING THE SWORD OF THE SPIRIT.


“The sword of the Spirit” is defined by the Spirit himself, through
Paul. It is the word of God. “Why is it called the sword _of the
Spirit_? Because the Spirit _gave it_, and not because he _uses_ or
_wields it_.” The Spirit gave it to men that they might use or wield
it. There is not a more unsupported theory in this apostate age than
the one that teaches that the Spirit wields the sword. He did not do
this even in the age of miracles. Jesus said to his Father “The words
that thou gavest me I have given them.” Given to whom? To the apostles.
What did he tell them to do with these words, or, which is the same,
the gospel? He commanded them, “Go into all the world and preach the
gospel to every creature.” Preaching the gospel is preaching the word,
or wielding the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God. After
Jesus died and rose and ascended into heaven, he sent the Spirit
to guide the apostles into all truth; to bring all things to their
remembrance. On Pentecost the Spirit came, and they spake as the Spirit
gave them utterance. The history says, “When they heard this”—the word
spoken—“they were pierced in their heart.” The Spirit brought the word
to their remembrance, and the apostles preached it—spake as the Spirit
gave them utterance. In Solomon’s porch, Peter preached, or wielded the
sword—the word of God. Philip wielded the sword in Samaria. Peter
wielded the sword at the house of Cornelius. Paul commanded Timothy to
“Preach the word.” This was wielding the sword of the Spirit, the word
of God.

This whole theory about the word being a dead letter, whether so
intended or not, is the very thing to neutralize the gospel, and cause
honest people who believe the gospel, to wait for some immediate power
to do something more for them before they come to God. This very
theory, in the place of being Scriptural, is directly opposed to the
very spirit and intention of the Scriptures, and is, we doubt not,
chargeable with hindering more souls from turning to the Lord and
receiving the salvation of God than all the out-and-out infidelity
in the country. They hear the word of God—the gospel of their
salvation—the power of God to salvation to every one that believe
it, and honestly believe it. They hear the preaching of the cross of
Christ, the wisdom of God and the power of God, and believe it with
their whole hearts; but the preacher says you must wait till the Spirit
makes it effectual, and till the Spirit quickens you and prepares you
to receive it, about which there is not one word in the book of God.




WE ARE NO SECT.


We belong to no _sect_ or _heresy_, no “denomination,” and recognize
none in any sense, only as existing in opposition to the will of
God—in a rebellion against the government of God. We know sects
only as antagonistic powers to the law and kingdom of God. They are
heretical and schismatical, in alienation to each other and to the
kingdom of God. We find them in no complete union on anything of
importance, except in opposing the gospel of Christ. In this they are a
unit. Never did loving brethren more completely unite than they one and
all do in this. One voice sounding out the gospel precisely as preached
by the apostles, and propounding the terms of pardon as they came from
the ambassador of Jesus, to whom he gave the keys of the kingdom of
God, will silence all their jars among themselves, their differences
and disputes, and bring them all around side by side, facing the common
foe. It will call out their confusion of tongues, and the cry, “Lo!
here, and lo there,” will be heard on all hands. The cry is raised.
“To your tents, O Israel! to your tents! Danger! danger! dangerous
doctrine! Do not hear him! Keep away! keep away! He will unsettle your
views!”

Why are they all opposed to this? There is a very good reason for it.
It is opposed to all of them. In its very nature it proposes to sweep
them all away. It leaves not an inch of ground for one of them to stand
on. We came not with a new doctrine, but with the gospel of Christ, a
distinct entity in itself, not only having no fellowship with any other
gospel, but pronouncing a curse on man or angel who shall preach any
other, no matter whether near like it or not near like it—a perversion
of it or mutilation. The gospel of Christ itself is the thing to be
preached, and nothing else; the power of God to salvation to every
one that believes; the preaching of the cross, the wisdom of God, and
the power of God. To this nothing is to be added, and from it nothing
is to be taken away. In this gospel, Christ, the “one Shepherd,” is
presented, and the one kingdom of God, or one body of Christ. All the
followers of Christ are members of this one body, or citizens of this
one kingdom. There are no “denominations” of them. They are all members
of his body, citizens of his kingdom by faith, the children of Abraham,
heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ, saints, holy brethren. They
know no other king but the “King of kings, and Lord of lords.” Their
King, in his times, will “show who is the only Potentate.” Their King
has no negotiations with any other spiritual kings. He puts them down
_against him_. He has no communications nor negotiations with Pope
Pius, or any other Pope. He has no _fraternal greetings_ for any of
them, but his Father has sworn with an oath that he shall reign till he
shall put down all rule and all authority and power—till he has put
all his enemies under his feet.

The kingdom of Christ recognizes no other kingdom. It is an absolute
monarchy. Christ is the Monarch. He has no Parliament, no Senate or
Congress, no legislative body in his kingdom. As the rightful Sovereign
and the absolute Monarch, he is the Law-giver. His will is the law,
as spread on the pages of Scripture—the absolute authority—and his
subjects have simply to consult the law, ascertain what it requires,
and _obey it_. They are not responsible for the law. They need not
trouble themselves about results or consequences. Do as the Supreme
Authority commands, and leave the consequences with him. He is so wise,
good and great, that he will bring all out right, for all those that
put their trust in him. His subjects stop not to counsel with those
who have other laws, to compare them with the law of the Lord Messiah,
to see how near they are to his, or how far from it. They have no
authority to make any other laws, no matter how near like his law, or
how far from it. Their business is to throw aside all other laws, and
accept him as their Monarch, and _his law_, and _obey it_. This is
simply all there is of it. He who is not for him is against him.

The citizens of his kingdom have no authority from him for negotiating
with any sectarian party, about union with his people, comparing their
views and determining how nearly they agree. He has left them no
discretionary power to compromise with anybody, or to stipulate terms
of union and fellowship. He has stipulated the terms for us all. If we
comply with these terms he receives us, and we are bound to receive
each other, and certainly will desire to do so. If we comply not with
these terms he will not receive us, and no saint has any right to
receive us. No man has a right to prescribe terms on which to receive
any man. The terms are already prescribed in the law of the great King.
We must not go to man, but to the King, to know who shall be received.
It is not a question whether _man_ will receive us, but whether the
_Lord_ will receive us.




MAINTAIN A PURE FAITH AND WORSHIP.


Who, in the midst of all this demoralization, will stand for God, for
the anointed and for the eternal Spirit; for the only supreme and
absolute, the final authority, the revelation from God to man, as
set forth in the Bible? We must maintain this or we shall be ruined
forever. We must resist all broad-guagism, liberalism, this terrible
demoralization, and maintain the purity of the religion of Christ
itself. We have taken our stand on the highest ground and must maintain
the highest purity and order, the greatest perfection and refinement
of which we are capable. We must maintain pure morality, pure faith
and worship, utter abstinence from follies and all doubtful practices,
all things held in suspicion among good people. It is a time for
general humiliation and supplication—one mighty and united appeal of
all the true and holy to heaven to save us from the general avalanche
of iniquity that threatens the ruin of the country, and specially of
religion. Jews may look on with a sneer, infidels may mock and scoff,
and hell may appear to exult; but the Lord God the Omnipotent reigns,
and the wicked will be overthrown. It matters not how popular they may
be, how great their talent, how much money they may have, nor how great
their number, the strong arm of the Almighty can reach them and bring
them down. Their doom is certain.




THINGS NOT FORBIDDEN.


Where has God forbidden infant baptism? Where has he forbidden
sprinkling for baptism? Where has he forbidden the offering of incense,
the counting of beads, in worship? What harm is there in all this?
This is sophistry, deception, delusion, and that, too, of a very low
and unworthy order at that. Where is the divine authority for doing
this or that? If there is no divine authority for doing this or that,
in religion, or worship, that very circumstance is _divine authority
against it_. “Who hath required this at your hand?” is the inquiry
of the word of God, to all such as introduce things into religion
or worship, not authorized in Scripture. We may add nothing to the
religion of Christ, the faith or practice, the precept or example, the
worship, the rewards or punishments.

Those who consider themselves free to do anything _not forbidden in
Scripture_, are out at sea, pretty much cut loose from the Bible. They
have in their horizon a broad range. They are not in search of divine
authority, not engaged in that for which there _is divine authority_,
but things for which there _is no divine authority_—things _not
forbidden_. They are not studying how to do the commandments, but
whether men can not be saved without doing the commandments; how to
obey the gospel, but how men can be saved without obeying the gospel;
not how to build up the church of God, set it in order and keep it in
order; how to worship according to the Scriptures; but how to make
the church attractive, entertaining and popular. Their theme is not
the gospel, nor is their mission turning the world from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan to God; but to so model and fashion
the church as to please the world as it is, in its unconverted state,
without the work of turning it to God. Let them have their way, and
the church, in a short time, will be so let down that men will need no
conversion to come into it. There will be no cross nor self denial in
it. Be careful and not fall “into the trap,” as Luther did. If there is
no divine authority for a thing, that is enough. We need no Scripture
forbidding it.

We can unite on the things required in Scripture—the things
commanded—but we never can unite on the things not forbidden. There
are too many of this latter class; they are too various, contradictory
and inconsistent. Let us stick to the things that are written. These
are divinely authorized. The things not written are not divinely
authorized. Let us stand to the prescribed terms of pardon, the
prescribed life of the saints, and the prescribed worship. Those who
depart from this _are going back_.




BRANCHES OF THE CHURCH.


When we say the body, we do not mean any sort of body, or any kind
of body, but _the body of Christ_; _the one body_ into which all
were immersed in the time of the apostles. This is the same as in
“the Church of God,” “the kingdom of God.” The body of Christ has no
_branches_ except the individual members. There are no _branch bodies_.
The kingdom of God has no branches. Every citizen is in the kingdom,
and those not in the kingdom are not citizens at all.

The Church of God, the body of Christ, or the kingdom, is a divine
institution. The Lord built his church on the rock, and no man who
understands the matter, “loves the Lord Jesus Christ with all his soul”
while he says, “I care not to what church a man identifies himself.”
The man who identifies himself with the Church of God, or the body of
Christ, identifies himself with God, Christ and the Holy Spirit—with
the entire heavenly family. This is what we _care for_. But identifying
a man with those bodies styled _branches_ is another matter. We can not
love the Lord Jesus Christ with all the soul and _care not_ whether we
are identified with his body, or, which is the same, with him or some
other body or person.

But let us inquire about these branches. Are they branches of the
Church of God? The Church of God has never _branched any_ that we
know of. The body of Christ has no branches except the individual
members and they all belong to _the body_, and not to a branch of the
body. A man is simply in the body, or not in it. The kingdom of God
has no branches. A man is simply _a citizen_, or _he is not_. If our
correspondent desires to know whether he is in a branch of the Church
of God let him trace the _branch_ with which he is identified back to
where it _branched off_, and see what it branched off from; whether it
branched off from another branch, or from the main body. If it branched
off from another branch, then he might trace that other branch and see
what it branched off from. Before he gets back to the _body_ he may
find some _branches_ that are no credit to anybody.

The departures from the body and from the law of God are not honored as
_branches of the body_. They are styled in Scripture a “falling away,”
the _apostasy_. They are departures from God, from Christ and from the
Holy Spirit. The great apostasy is styled the Man of Sin, the Son of
Perdition. That is the first branch. We do not want to be identified
with it, or any branch of it, or any _branch of a branch_ of it. We
have gone back to the body of Christ from which it departed, and become
identified with that body itself, and will recognize no departure from
it, no matter how many pretty names may be given to it, nor how many
good people belong to it, but will still hold it to be an apostasy, or
a departure from God. There can be no union in _branches_ only _branch
union_; there can be union in the _one body_, in the one faith, under
the one Lord, and nowhere else, such as the Lord will approve.




WHOM THE LORD RECEIVES.


There is no half-way fellowship to which we can receive persons,
and allow them all the privileges we enjoy, and they not in full
fellowship. It is not a question about _our_ receiving a person, but
the Lord receiving the person. The very _act_ in which the penitent
sinner comes and is received by the Lord is baptism. When he comes in
_full assurance of faith and penitence_, and is immersed into Christ,
the Lord receives him. All we do in the matter is to execute the law of
Christ. The entire matter of inquiry is about _how the Lord receives
persons_. This is all we inquire about.

When we turn aside from the way the Lord receives persons, and receive
them in some other way, it is no difference what that other way is. It
may be styled more _liberal_ than the way in which the Lord receives
persons, but the Lord does not propose to present something more
liberal than men; but he is a Law-giver, and lays down the law on which
he will receive men, and if men desire him to receive them, they must
come in the way laid down in _his law_. But if we only desire to be
received by men, we can consult them and learn the terms on which they
will receive us; but when we act thus we must not deceive ourselves,
and think we are becoming servants of the Lord in so doing. We are
simply becoming servants of men.




NOT OF ONE CLASS.


In what sense except an extremely _general one_ are the Romish,
Episcopalian, Methodist and Presbyterian clergy of one class? Not that
there is much fraternity, fellowship or agreement among them; nor even
that there is any general sympathy, harmony or co-operation; nor that
they are engaged in _one work_. They belong to separate kingdoms. In
their official acts they never act together. If they act together at
all, it is not officially, nor in any sense, only on certain occasions,
to be friendly, courteous and polite toward each other, but with the
distinct understanding that it is _not official_. Their actions are
as distinct as those of a United States Congressman and a member of
the British Parliament. They are both _officers of State_, and so far
on _common ground_, and, as such, treat each other with respect and
courtesy; but, in their official acts, they have no fellowship, and are
not under the same government. In the same way the clergy of the
different parties we have mentioned, in their official acts never act
together, and have no fraternity. They are not acting under the same
government, nor are they officers in the same kingdom. The official
acts of one of them are not regarded by another at all.

In what sense, then, are they _classed together_, or what is it that is
_common_ among them? Simply that they are _ministers of religion_, or
men whose lives are devoted to religious instruction, and matters of
church. But not of the same order, nor of the same church; not of the
same religion; not of the same faith, nor of the same practice. They
do not speak the “same thing,” nor are they of the “same mind and the
same judgment,” or “perfectly joined together.” They are not of the
“one fold and one shepherd.” They are not “one as we” (the Father and
the Son) “are one;” nor were they “all baptized into one body,” nor are
they in “one body,” with “one Spirit” and “one hope,” under “one Lord,”
and with “one faith,” and “one baptism,” and “one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and in you all.”

We have not a railing accusation to bring against these men as a
class, nor do we hate or denounce them; nor have we an unkind feeling
toward them. We can recognize every good trait they have; all the
moral influence, the learning and intelligence, as well as their
devotion to their several causes. We can make all reasonable allowance
for early training, association and education, and admit all their
good intentions. We can treat them with all the common courtesies and
civilities of an enlightened and a refined age, as gentlemen, and moral
and orderly men. All this and much more we can do. What we can not do
is not from any unkind feeling toward them, nor because they have
treated us with a special indignity, or given us any personal offence,
or anything of the kind. But it is because we can not, without
setting aside principle that we are as certain is correct as we are
that the Bible contains a revelation from God, recognize their airs,
pretensions and claims. We can not without ignoring, overriding and
utterly disregarding matters of the most vital, fundamental and central
importance. It is not the class of men that we denounce, or that we
speak against, but the _positions they assume_, the work they are doing
and the obstruction they are in the way of the work of Christ.




HOW THE WORLD REGARDS DANCERS.


The people of the world look upon a member of the church, that enters
the dance, as let down, degraded, and his profession trailed in the
dust. “Look there,” he exclaims, “that lady is a member of the church.
I saw her immersed, and have seen her commune; she is no better than I
am, and I know I am no Christian.” If the dancing professors could hear
the numerous remarks thus made, in regard to their letting themselves
down, degrading their profession and putting themselves on a level with
the world, or below that level, their faces would burn, if they were
not too much hardened to exercise a lively conscience.

We are only deceiving ourselves, and that too, most woefully, if we
think that the dancers, theater-goers, horse-racers, gamblers and
drunkards, claiming to be members of a church, are on their way to
heaven. Their baptism is all nothing. Their communion is mockery, an
insult to the Majesty of heaven and earth. Their sitting in choirs
and taking into their polluted lips the pure words of praises,
supplications and thanksgiving, in the midst of the pure worship of
saints, is a desecration of the appointments of God.

When we think of saving men, we must not think merely of getting them
into immersion, or into the church, but, in the true sense, we must
turn them to God—turn them from their sins. The love of sin must be
destroyed in them, and the love of God established. They must, in the
full import of the term, be made “new creatures,” conformed to the
image of Christ. We must see in them not simply a desire to see how
near they can be like the world, and not be excluded from the church;
how deep they can dip into the follies of the world, and not be lost;
how near the verge of perdition they can run and not fall in. But they
must “love not the world, nor the things of the world,” make it a
matter of prayer, and study how to live and walk with God; how to have
the continual care and gracious providence of God over them. No man is
a profitable member of the church, that simply escapes being turned
out, any more than he is a good citizen who barely escapes fines,
imprisonment and the gallows, or who does everything and any thing that
the law does not expressly _forbid_. A man may be a bad and worthless
fellow and not be fined nor imprisoned. So a member of the church may
be bad, and not only worthless but injurious to the church, and not be
turned out. There may not be enough spiritual life, moral standing and
respect for the law of God, in the church, to enforce the law of Christ.

May we awake to the state of things, cry aloud and spare not, and never
cease our supplications to heaven till we see an improvement. We are
only deceived in dancers to allow them to remain in the church, and
thus permit them to enjoy the idea that they are Christians.




SAVED WITHOUT BAPTISM.


Jesus don’t say, “He that is not baptized shall be damned.” Suppose he
does not. Baptism is a commandment. To do a commandment is an act of
obedience. To refuse to do a commandment is to refuse to do an act of
obedience. The Lord will take vengeance on them who know not God, and
_obey not_ the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. But our friend says,
“I believe if a man willfully and stubbornly refuses to receive the
ordinance of baptism, that man will be lost.” What, then, of all those
people who have the Bible in their houses, printed plainly in their
mother tongue, and know that baptism is commanded, or may know it, as
certainly as they know their names, and will not be baptized? And what
of the preachers who encourage them in it? The Lord’s will is that they
should obey—be baptized. They refuse to do this. They _know_ his will
and _do it not_. Will they be saved?

But there are cases in which baptism is impossible. There are cases
where the gospel can not be administered. Where the gospel can not be
administered, we can not have the promise of the gospel. But will they
not be saved by the _atonement_? The atonement is the reconciliation,
and reconciliation is by the Mediator, or by the belief and obedience
of the gospel. But what of those who can not hear the gospel? They are
not gospel subjects. The gospel can not be administered to them. What
will you do with them? Nothing. Where the gospel can be made known
preach it to the people. Where they can believe and obey it, urge
them to do it, that they may be saved. Gospel salvation is the only
salvation we have anything to do with. It is freely and graciously
offered to men who believe and obey the gospel. The work of the
preacher is to preach the gospel to all and exhort all to obey it,
showing that “God commands _all men everywhere_ to repent,” and that
this repentance is in view of the judgment.

But what of infants? Gospel salvation, or the salvation of the
commission, is salvation from sin, or remission of sins. Infants have
never sinned, and need no remission of sins. They need nothing only
precisely what a saint needs—to be raised from the dead, changed,
immortalized and glorified.




RECOGNITION OF, BY SECTS.


What do we want recognition of any sects for? What do we want to come
on a level with them for? Not one of them has a creed that is indorsed
by any party but his own. There is not a party in Christendom that
receives or believes the Methodist creed except the Methodist party.
The same is true of every other party. Their creeds are not even
popular, only as they agree in the _human-creed_ idea _that they must
have a human creed_. What a coming down, for a man that has a creed
that they all believe—the Bible—to come down on a level with a man,
standing on a little _side platform_, discarded by every religious
party, in the world, except his own. We do not want his recognition and
do not intend to recognize him till he abandons his _side platform_.
The Evangelical Alliance have been trying, twenty-five years or more,
to make a platform and are as far from making one that these parties
can stand on as they were at the beginning. What use have we for
tampering in this way? We have a creed that every party in Christendom
admits to be right. The Bible is that creed. We have a doctrine that
they all admit to be right—“all Scripture given by inspiration of
God,” as Paul says, “is profitable for _doctrine_.” There is no doubt
about it. We have “the faith once for all delivered to the saints”—the
belief “that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God,” and not a
party among all the contending parties doubt or denies this faith. The
doubts are not about what we hold, but about what these others hold.
We hold and practice no doubtful baptism. The burial of a penitent
believer in baptism is valid baptism with all the parties of any note.

We can take down the books from their own libraries and show from
their standard works that all we hold, teach and practice, is found
in their main works, indorsed and sanctioned in numerous ways. We are
not standing upon any doubtful ground. We know we are right, and what
remains for us to do is to make every possible effort to attain to a
more perfect practice of what we know to be right, and not be trying
to get recognition from any of these modern parties. They will never
indorse us till we abandon our ground, and this, many among us will
never do.




WEALTH OF ALEXANDER CAMPBELL.


First. This matter of gaining wealth does not depend _altogether_ nor
_chiefly_ on loving money. If it depended altogether or chiefly on
loving money, many more would gain wealth than do, for no doubt more
love money as ardently as those that obtain it. Men who love money
devote themselves to schemes of money-making, or what they consider
such, and, in some instances, break at it, and come out bankrupt. A.
Campbell never did devote himself to making money. But he was right
in two respects: 1. He was a good manager in temporal things. 2. He
was an economist. He knew the use of money and never wasted it. He
built no fine houses, rode in no fine carriages and drove no fine
horses. He was a plain man. He had everything necessary for comfort
and nothing for show. We think he lived in the same house in which he
was married, adding considerable, but plain buildings to it, affording
accommodations for his numerous guests, but nothing costly or fine,
in any part of it. In this he was a noble example. On the one hand
not an indication of parsimoniousness, and on the other, not an item
of extravagance. The same was true of the entire outfit, furniture,
table and all. There was an abundance for all, and nothing wasteful or
extravagant.

_Second._ This thing of gaining wealth is not fully to be explained.
It is not to be ascribed entirely to the _art_ of man, to his great
business capacity, his industry or energy, for we find plenty of men
that have these qualities, but accumulate but little. Wealth gathers
round some men as naturally as it departs from others, when no man can
see the reason. Some call it fortune, others luck, and, in other cases
we say, they know how to make it. True, there must be the industry, the
energy, the management and economy; there must be the good judgment,
sagacity, etc. These are main articles in running the world, but wealth
bears no just proportion to these. We speak not of a fortuity, which
brings an estate at once, but of the growing up of an estate. There is
something lying back of all industry, economy, management, foreseeing
sagacity, etc., call it fate, luck, fortune or providence, or what we
may, that no philosophy or reason can fully explain. Men accumulate
a vast estate without struggling for it, aiming at it, or seeming to
think about it. Alex. Campbell was of this class. We can see that he
managed well, that he wasted nothing, that he saw that business was in
shape, etc., but this does not account for the amount that accumulated
around him. Much of it came in a way that he knew not, and certainly
never _planned_.

_Third._ Alex. Campbell did not _raise himself up_. God raised him, not
for _himself_, nor for us to _glory in him_, but for _his own glorious
purpose_, and he did not leave him without the _means_ to accomplish
that great purpose. He always provides a way for a man to do the work
for which he has raised him up. Alex. Campbell could not have gone, as
he did, at his _own charges_, traveling thousands of miles, and for many
long months at a time, and through immense districts of country, where
he had no kind brethren to entertain him and support him, if the
means had not been provided. Nor could he have started, maintained
and sent forth a publication, coming in collision with all the
religious publications in the world without the means to sustain him.
God provided him the means, so that he never lacked. No man ever had
the power to stop his mouth by cutting off his support. He stood
independent, except upon God, who was with and prospered him. How could
he have founded a seminary first and then a magnificent college and
prosecuted his great work without means? How could he have supplied
his extension table, always extended in his long dining hall, along
which the vast numbers that visited him at all seasons, but specially
on commencement occasions, sat, were fed and satisfied, and went away
admiring their noble host, of whose munificence they had partaken,
had not the Lord prospered him? God enabled him to give examples in
generosity, hospitality, and to push on his great work. It was of the
highest importance that he should be free from all pecuniary pressure
and embarrassment, and the Lord kept him in that condition all the
time—made “all grace abound” to him. Growing _rich_ and _money making_
from the _love_ of money, or _money’s sake_, were ideas that occupied
no place in his great mind or heart. He made and used money, as God
intended it, as a _means_ for doing the work of God, and _means_ that
the work could not have been done without.

_Fourth._ But how did so large an estate accumulate if he did not love
money, or love “filthy lucre?” We answer that a large amount of his
estate came to him as he explained to us, when we visited him, in the
only conversation we ever had with him about his temporal affairs, and
that a very brief one. We can not remember the particulars, but we do
remember distinctly all that is of any interest here. Several large
items—items that would have changed the amount _largely_—came to
him without the most distant idea of ever making money. This occurred
in his listening to the importunities of friends to loan them money,
and securing it by mortgaging lands then cheap, and these lands thus
finally falling into his hands, by the failure of his friends, to whom
he had loaned the money, to pay. These lands remained in his hands
many years, and he was not necessitated to sell them. As the country
improved and railroads were constructed, these lands proved to be
in important places, where in many years they grew up in into heavy
amounts in value. In this there was no _far seeing_ nor _reaching_ for
“filthy lucre,” nor any thought of obtaining it. He simply listened to
the requests of his friends to _help them_, and in many long years it
turned out to yield him a heavy amount.

_Fifth._ His talents put forth in Bethany, the works he issued from
there and the establishment of the college, made employment for
many persons, called a number of these as educators and students,
established the church there, and resulted in building up quite a
village. This enhanced the value of the fine tract of land owned by him
there, and certainly without his foreseeing and working to that end,
made a considerable item in the estate he left behind him.

_Sixth._ The sale of his various works toward the latter part of his
life brought a considerable income. This could not have been foreseen
and planned to make money. In the early part of his life, and the time
he put forth his most vigorous efforts, he had no assurance that such
works as he issued would ever be a source of profit. Men who start out
to make money do not start out _against_ the main current of mankind.
We have some now whose business is _making money_, but they do not
start out nor travel the road trod by Alex. Campbell. They do not make
a square issue with the religious world, nor war upon the men in power.
They do not generally think that is the way to the gold mines. Had he
been starting with money in his eye, his keen perception would have
seen something of more promise than a square fight with the popular
clergy of the world; the creeds, councils, conferences, assemblies,
etc. It, however, turned out that his productions found a sale that
resulted in an income. There was no close management or calculating on
his part, nor careful looking after the matter.

But the pen of Alex. Campbell was a terror to men who did not love “the
right way of the Lord,” and his words were burning; but the idea that
he was morose and unamiable is entirely an erroneous one. His very
nature was amiable and lovely; and, in his devotions, he was as humble
as a child. We never heard any man who could pray like he could. His
terms, in addressing our heavenly Father, were characterized with a
sense of the absolute dependence, profound awe and reverence of us, the
creatures of mercy, and the simplicity of a child. All was easy and
utterly without affectation.

The reader may think we have occupied too much space with this matter.
We think not. There are great lessons in these matters.




FAITH, REPENTANCE, AND BAPTISM, DO NOT PARDON.


Faith changes, purifies or christianizes the heart, or converts the
subject in heart. Repentance changes, purifies or christianizes
the man in character, or converts him in character. But this is
all simply a change _in_ the man, but no change in his relation or
state. It is simply preparing the man to enter into a justified
state, or a state of pardon. There is no forgiveness of sin in all
this. There is no salvation of the soul from sin here. The salvation
of the soul from sin, pardon or forgiveness of sins, is as distinct
from all the preparation of heart and life, or all the change in the
subject, as heaven or earth, as the work of God and the work of man.
_Man_ believes, repents, feels and confesses, but _God_ pardons. No
believing, repenting, feeling or confessing, saves the soul or pardons.
It is God that pardons. Nor does baptism save the soul. It, too, is but
the act of the creature; but it is the initiatory rite, consummating
or transition act, where pardon is promised in the divine process. The
candidate is baptized “_into_ the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Spirit.” All the prophets bear witness of him, that
through his name, whoever believeth in him, shall receive remission of
sin. His is the only name given under heaven and among men whereby man
can be saved. When we come into his name, there is salvation, or
forgiveness of sins. As many as have been “baptized into Christ, have
been baptized _into_ his death.” In his death, his blood flowed to wash
away sin. When man comes into his death, he comes to his blood that
cleanses from all sin. When he enters the body of Christ, he comes to
the life, to all spiritual blessings in Christ, to the salvation of our
God.




PROTRACTED MEETINGS, EXCITEMENTS. ETC.


It has been a question of serious doubt with some of the most excellent
on earth, whether the protracted meeting is compatible with the genius
of the Christian Institution, and whether more evil does not attend it
than good. But from the day we engaged in the service of our Redeemer,
to this hour, we have had no doubt of the propriety of protracted
efforts for the conversion of men. It is true, these efforts may be
made in such a _manner_; such policies and appliances may be employed
and a resort may be made to such means of excitement, as would be
wholly unjustifiable. But this may be done on any other occasion,
as well as at the protracted meeting, and the fault is not in the
protracted effort, but in the _means_ employed.

All efforts made to excite men without enlightening them; to rouse the
feelings without informing the judgment; to produce action without the
knowledge how to act, are wholly unscriptural, and equally at war with
the best interests of mankind. To hold a protracted meeting, while
talented orators shall picture to men, in the most startling manner,
the sinfulness of sin, the lost condition of man, the awfulness of
death, the ineffable bliss of heaven, and the unutterable horrors
of hell, without giving any adequate instructions how to obtain
deliverance from sin, or the dangers of punishment, and an ultimate
admission into the felicities of the eternal state of the blessed,
we all admit to be as irrational as unscriptural. Indeed, we can not
conceive anything more incompatible with all enlightenment and all
revelation, than to awaken the human soul to a sense of its danger,
without affording a knowledge of the means of escape. That such,
however, is the case in thousands of the revival movements of our
times, no intelligent person can deny. Who has not seen the penitent,
when the invitation has been extended, come, inquiring, “What must
I do to be saved?” and not a man on the ground who could answer the
question. Who has not heard the preacher invite, persuade and entreat
the sinner to come to the Lord, assuring him that he who seeks shall
find—he who comes shall in no wise be cast out—that if any man knocks
at the door, the Lord will open to him, and, when persons, induced
through such invitation, come seeking the way, not a man present could
point it out? We have all witnessed occasions of this kind. Nay, more,
we have known such seekers to come, time after time, seeking, honestly
and devoutly seeking, but still not finding! Yes, this is not the
worst. We have heard the preacher advise them to join the church, that
probably the Lord would bless them, that persons had been known to “get
religion” after joining the church, etc., etc., and we have known them
to take this advice, join the church, and remain for years, _seeking_
all the time, and still failing to find! Every community can testify
the same.

Now it is not strange that men should become sceptics, under the
influence of such a system as this. It is a failure. It makes false
promises, and men try them and find them to be false. Such a system
promises, that they who seek shall find, and hundreds, even thousands,
have sought—have done, and have done _honestly_, all the preachers
pointed out for them to do, and have failed to find. They know
positively that the system is a _failure_, for they have tried it, and
found it to be such. It is precisely what we might expect, that persons
trying such a system, seeking and striving honestly for years and not
finding, should be brought to doubt that there is any truth or reality
in the whole concern; and we have no doubt, that such unenlightened
excitement will be chargeable with a large amount of the unbelief, so
rapidly increasing in our times.

But if the preachers on all such occasions, were enlightened, so that
when any sinner is awakened, becomes penitent, and desirous to know
what he should do to be saved, and he _could_ and _would_ tell him
forthwith what God required him to do, in the unequivocal language
of the New Testament, who can fail to see that the results would be
entirely different? This, we affirm, may and should be the case in
every instance, and we hesitate not to say, in the most unequivocal
language, that such _is the case_ under the preaching of enlightened
men. We go even further, and declare with all possible emphasis, that
God never authorized any man to preach who could not, on any occasion,
point out to the believing, inquiring penitent, what he should do to
be saved, or what he should do to enter into the kingdom of God. We
have it recorded from the Lord’s own lips, and from the lips of his
inspired apostles, what they directed inquirers or seekers to do, to
obtain pardon and admission into Christ’s kingdom, and any preacher who
can not or can, but has not the honor to do it, give their holy and
infallible directions to the dying sinner, _seeking_ his way to God,
was never called, sent nor authorized by God to preach the gospel, and
should not be regarded as such.

It is also of the highest importance that we employ gospel means for
the awakening sinners and arousing them from their slumbers. Some
preachers have contracted the habit of making an immense variety of
appeals to affecting occurrences—describing sympathetic scenes, simply
for the purpose of producing feeling in the audience. Great injury may
be done in this way, by arousing human sympathy, moving the soul and
causing men to act, who do not love the Lord and have not had the first
serious thought of consecrating their lives to his holy service. We say
not this, because we fear too much excitement, too much feeling, or too
much interest, but because the excitement is not of the right kind. The
work is of no value unless it be the Lord’s work.—It is not his work
unless done by his acknowledged and approved instrumentalities. The
gospel is his power for salvation. The excitement produced in a
community by preaching Christ—the work produced in the heart by
preaching the gospel, is the Lord’s work. It is a divine cause,
producing a divine effect. But if the cause be merely human, the effect
can be no more than human.

We want the protracted meeting then, to deliver an unbroken series of
gospel discourses to the people—that we may be enabled to call off
their attention from the ordinary cares of life, and more especially
from their sins, and place our glorious Lord and Redeemer before their
minds—induce them to consider him, in all his gracious condescension,
his life filled up with acts of kindness, goodness and humanity, his
prayers, agonies and tears, his wonderful death, his descent to the
grave, his victorious conquest over death and his triumphant and
glorious ascension into heaven and coronation, as the King of kings and
Lord of lords—that he is now exalted to the heavens—to the throne of
the universe, to grant repentance and remission of sins, and that there
is no other name given under heaven, nor among men whereby ye can be
saved.

When a full exhibition of Christ—of the gospel, is made to men, in a
series of discourses, and their hearts are moved, their souls filled
with love and gratitude to him whom they discover to be their only
Benefactor, their Lord, their Savior and only Redeemer, then we meet
them with his own infallible directions, as they fell from his own lips
and the lips of his holy apostles, and we never find it fail to give
peace to the soul, and if carried out to give the utmost assurance in
after life and death of acceptance with God and an eternal reward. Go
on, then, brethren, with the protracted meetings, and preach the word
of the everlasting God to sinners as long as a man can be found who
will bear it, and then be careful to take care of the young converts
and keep them in the work of the Lord.




SCENE IN A HOTEL.


October 7th, we started for Lebanon, where we had an appointment at
night. The rains not having extended east, the road was fine and we
glided along beautifully and reached Germantown about twelve o’clock.
Not being acquainted with any person in the place, we drove up to
the only public house we saw, and called for dinner and horse fed.
On entering the bar room, the landlord skipped around the counter,
and running his keen eye over the immense assortment of intoxicating
liquors which lined one end of the room, politely inquired what we
would drink. We answered, “a cup of cold water sir, if you please, when
dinner is ready.” His countenance fell, but he recovered himself and
invited us to take a seat. Presently in came a dirty, rough looking
fellow, with his greasy pants patched from top to bottom, and placed
himself at the counter, with his feet about as far apart upon the floor
as his legs were long, and rolled up his red eyes as he looked out from
his bloated face, while the landlord called out, “What will you have
sir?” He answered, “Hand down old Rough and Ready,” when a huge bottle
of the fiery stuff was instantly set down. He poured a common sized
glass tumbler two-thirds full, swallowed it, smacked his lips and took
his seat. During this time he uttered some dozen or two of the most
horrid oaths he could think of. One after another came in till some
twenty had entered the room in a similar style, among whom there was
not one, not excepting the landlord, who was not a profane swearer. Now
the dinner bell rang, and in a perfect rush we gathered round the table
well spread with the bounties of life. The stream of oaths continued
from almost every mouth. Presently my right hand man commenced
entertaining the company by giving an account of his travels among the
_Hoosiers_, how ignorant they were, and that he had some notion of
turning out preacher among them, as he was certain he could have made
lots of money in that way! Poor silly creature thought we; you must get
sense enough to eat your dinner in a civil manner, when you are in the
company of a stranger, before you can even be an impostor.

Should we call at such a house to stay over night, we should surely
leave, after finding what kind of company we had fallen into. To be
annoyed by the awful stench of tobacco smoke, spit and snuff, with the
wretched scent of a company of men who are never sober, is what we will
not endure if there is any other chance.




“FAITH COMES BY HEARING.”


How remarkable the difference between the apostles’ method of producing
faith, and that pursued by some modern preachers. The latter class
frequently theorize on faith, and the method through which it comes,
but the former, understanding his mission more perfectly, first, set
forth the things to be believed, and secondly, the witnesses by which
God intended to prove them to the world. An august phalanx they are
too! consisting of all the prophets and apostles. “They all bear
witness of him.” Suppose we could see them standing in a long rank,
and among the most distinguished we could see Enoch, Elijah and the
venerable Abraham. We could place our eyes upon the great commander of
the hosts of the Israel of God, and the mighty law-giver, who feared
and trembled, in the midst of thunderings and smoke at Mount Sinai,
viz. Moses.—We look again and behold Samuel, Isaiah, Daniel and
Ezekiel. Passing the lesser prophets, we behold the commanding face and
hear the voice of John the Baptist. Still gazing we behold Peter, James
and Paul and last of all the eye rests upon the venerable John. We then
pause, and reflect upon the tears, the poverty, nakedness, hunger,
thirst, stripes, imprisonments and deaths through which these men
passed and inquire what was all this suffering for? The fact re-echoes
back upon us in the awful and sublime sentence: “For the word of God
and the testimony of Jesus Christ.” Did they thus suffer on this
account? They did. Could they have been anything else but faithful men?
Surely not. They must have been the most sincere and solemn men the
world ever produced: Well could they have been mistaken. Impossible.
The things concerning which they bore witness they SAW and HEARD. “We
were with him in Jerusalem, in the land of the Jews, and _saw him_
after he rose from the dead.” We say then emphatically that they could
not have been insincere nor mistaken, and what they said must have been
infallibly true.




WHAT MUST I DO TO BE SAVED?


Awakened sinners feel that they must do something, but they see, or
think they see, some “lion in the street”—some difficulty in the path
which they have marked out to Christ, which prevents them from finding
the Savior in the pardon of their sins. The chief reason, perhaps, why
every inquirer does not rejoice in a felt sense of God’s pardoning
love, is, that they seek in their own way. They endeavor to arise and
“go to Jesus,” in their own strength. No sinner ever did find Christ,
seeking thus. He must first arrive at the point where he can feel his
own helplessness, before Christ will help him. When he does realize
this helplessness, then God will meet him and give him the new heart.

Would you know, then, what you must do to be saved? The essence of the
whole matter, we think, is this:

1. You must resolve that you will put off the interest of your soul no
longer, but that you will go earnestly about the matter, and seek and
persist in seeking, until your sins are pardoned. 2. You must see your
own helplessness and feel it. 3. Having arrived at this point, humbly
submit to Christ. With the prodigal, let the feelings of the heart be,
“I will arise and go to my Father”—He can help me—I can not help
myself—if he save, well—if not, “I can but perish if I go.”

And, did ever a sinner perish with such feelings? No, thanks to Christ,
not one! Try it, dear sinner, try it.

We clip the above from the _Presbyterian Advocate_, as a specimen of
“the blind leading the blind.” Why is it that when men attempt to
answer Scripture questions, they can not give Scripture answers? When
the Philippian Jailer propounded substantially the above question, the
holy apostle answered him, “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shalt be saved, and thy house. And they spoke unto him the word of the
Lord, and to all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour
of the night and washed their stripes; and was baptized, he and all
his, straightway.” Acts xvi. 30-32. When this pagan officer asked what
he should do, he was not blindly told that he _could do nothing_—that
the first lesson to learn in salvation was that he _could not do
anything_, but he was told what to do, and forthwith did it and was
saved.

When Saul asked the important question, “Lord, what wilt thou have me
to do?” he was by no means told that he could not do anything. But he
was told to “Arise, and go to Damascus, and there it shall be told
thee, all things that are appointed _for thee to do_.” Acts xxii. 9-10;
see verse 16. Would God appoint things for men to do, and say, “Why
tarriest thou? Arise, and be baptized and wash away thy sins, calling
on the name of the Lord,” if he knew they could not do anything?

When three thousand cried out, “Men and brethren, what shall we do?”
there was no blind guide to say, “You can do nothing,” but there were
present apostles, under the influence of the infallible Spirit of all
wisdom, who said, “Repent and be baptized, every one of you, in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins.” Acts ii. 38.




EVANGELISTS—PASTORS.


The evangelist is not an officer in a church, or for a church, but his
work is at large, to build up the churches, strengthen them and turn
sinners to the Lord. He should introduce the gospel into new places,
establish churches, and in due time set them in order. He is not an
ecclesiastic, an official dignitary, who has much to say about his
_office_ and _authority_, but a _gospel man_, a man of influence, and
can command respect and do a good work.

A shepherd, or, which is the same, _pastor_, is not an officer at all,
but a figurative term applied to him who takes care of the flock. The
flock means the church, and the shepherd is the correlative of flock,
and is applied to an overseer, or one who oversees or looks over the
flock as a shepherd. “Pastoral work” is, then, the work of a shepherd,
or overseer, who can not be a novice or a young convert.

The work of the evangelist is now needed as much as ever, and the
evangelist is by no means done away. So the shepherds to take care
of the flock are now needed as much as ever, and the teachers are in
demand as much as ever. These are not now raised up and qualified by
miracle, but by ordinary means; nor is the work gone that they are
severally to do. The evangelizing is now needed as much as ever; so is
taking care of the churches and teaching the disciples all things that
Jesus commanded. True, as our brother has said, there is no office in
the church except overseer and deacon. The office of an evangelist is
not a church office.

We have a glorious army of young men now called into the field, capable
of one of the noblest works ever done by men. They have it in their
hearts to do that work; but if they are perverted they will be ruined
and will never accomplish the work to which they have given themselves.
They must not, on the one hand, be discouraged and disheartened, but
encouraged and their way opened; and, on the other hand, they must not
be arrogant, conceited and vain, but humble, gentle, and kind; examples
of piety, purity and moral excellence. They must not think to leap into
authority by virtue of being preachers, but, by faithful labor and
noble deeds, win their way and gain an influence among the people of
God. If, now and then, one of them is puffed up, filled with conceit
and arrogance, the same is true of other classes of men, and it is no
argument against them as a class, but against the individual.




THE SECRET OF SUCCESS IN PREACHING.


Nothing short of the highest morality and the most perfect
subordination can ever secure complete success. Most indispensable is
high reputation in all its public functionaries. A religious body whose
public organs do not sustain purity of morals, chastity of address,
and dignity of character, with most elevated natural and acquired
attainments, can never do much towards the purification and elevation
of the debased and degraded children of men. So important is this that
some rule seems to be necessary to enable us to distinguish those who
labor to show themselves off to a good advantage, from those who seek
the honor of the blessed Master. It is one thing to preach in such a
way as to make the people think of and confess their sins, but it is
quite another thing for the mere actor to show himself off, in such a
way as to induce the hearers to say, _he is the greatest man we ever
heard_! A fine speaker may present such a beautiful theory on faith,
as to delight a popular audience, without producing faith in a single
soul, while the most immethodical speaker, whose heart is greatly
impressed with the facts to be believed, will throw out the great
realities of revelation with such earnestness and zeal as to make
believers wherever he goes. Just so fine theories on repentance may be
delivered in the shape of sermons, and listened to with applause,
without inducing any one to think of repenting, while some old-fashioned
preacher reasoning upon righteousness and a judgment to come, in the
most immethodical manner, will cause sinners to tremble all around. The
reason of this is not that one class has method while the other has
not, but one class presents the mighty truth of God, while the other
simply presents a fine theory concerning the truth. The result is that
in one case the truth itself is believed and admired, while in the
other case the fine theory is the only thing seen, and the preacher who
delivered it the only object adored.




TEDIOUSNESS IN PUBLIC DEVOTIONS.


We wish to allude to some errors into which some elders have fallen,
for their advantage. We have an opportunity of being better acquainted
with some difficulties in churches than the elders themselves can.
When we visit some congregations, the elders complain that they will
not turn out to meeting. The brethren say the reason more will not
turn out is, that the elders are in the habit of preaching long and
uninteresting sermons, which they have heard over and over again, until
they know every comma and semi-colon. And now the congregation has
dwindled down to insignificance, and the few who are faithful enough to
attend are annoyed with a lengthy harangue on the subject of the
non-attendance of the members. There is certainly a great impropriety
in this course. But few men are able to interest an audience with a
lengthy discourse on every first day of the week. Those men who have
been most successful in holding large audiences, where they preach
very frequently in the same place, are usually very brief in their
addresses, and very fearful of wearying the patience of their hearers.
Some men of very fine talent have lost their audiences, on no account
but their tediousness; and if it thus fares with men of talent, what
may we expect from men of slender abilities? It is very wearisome to
those, who can hardly be induced to attend the place of meeting at any
time, to hear a brother of limited information, and a poor speaker, for
the space of an hour or an hour and a half. Time seems doubly long to
them.

The uneasiness seen in this class, causes all the rest to be uneasy,
and every one wishes the sermon to close. Some begin to leave, others
begin to button up their coats, get their hats and whips ready, look
at their watches, and appear almost on the rise, while some through
respect try to appear contented. Let the fault lie where it may in
such cases, it is as certain as any thing can be, that the preaching
is doing no good. If the same brethren would make their addresses
very short, and be as interesting as possible, they would not have
to complain half so often about the delinquency of their brethren in
attending meeting, and secure the reputation of much better preachers.

There is another kind of tediousness, almost as insufferable as long
sermons. The selecting and singing of long hymns, in a cold and formal
manner, after a tedious sermon, can have no good effect. Lengthy
ceremonies in administering the communion, are always in opposition
to its good influence, and very wearisome to the restless. But last,
though by no means least, it is not to be endured for elders to detain
the audience, while they may consult together five or ten minutes,
about appointments and other matters of this kind, and then be very
tedious in announcing them. All matters of this kind ought to be
despatched with readiness.




RESURRECTION—ADAMIC SIN.


We doubt not that precisely what was lost in Adam will be restored in
Christ, or, that whatever the injury that resulted from the agency
of Adam was, it will be removed by Christ. Whatever was included in
the word “die” will be counteracted by what was included in the words
“made alive.” The penalty inflicted on account of the Adamic sin will
all be removed from the whole race, in Christ, the second Adam, or the
Lord from heaven. No man will be lost in the world to come on account
of the Adamic sin. There is not an intimation in the Bible of any man
being punished in the world to come on account of _original sin_. The
punishment in the world to come is threatened in view of _our own_, or
what schoolmen call “_actual_ sin.” The penalty sentenced on account
of Adam’s sin has fallen, as a _consequence_, on the whole race. By
Christ, in the resurrection, this _consequence_ will be removed, and
pardon, through the blood of Christ, will release _all who come to the
Savior_, from _their own_ sins, or their _actual_ sins, and thus save
them from punishment in the world to come.




PAYING PREACHERS A STIPULATED SUM.


If a man, or a certain body of men, wish to control the labors of a
farmer or mechanic, and apply them as they may see proper, it is but
the voice of reason and Scripture that they give him a reasonable
compensation to support him while performing his labor. In precisely
the same way, if any man, church or co-operation, wish to control
and appropriate the labors of the preacher of the Word, they should
give him a reasonable compensation. But when the question is under
advisement, of employing a man at a certain point, and for a certain
amount, the question is not whether he _will preach_, but whether he
will preach _at that point_ and for _that amount_. He is bound in his
covenant with the Lord _to preach_, but the Lord has left him to select
his own field of labor. He selects his field, performs his labor, and
looks to the Lord for his support. But all this does not say, that his
brethren should not promise him a certain amount, and with the utmost
punctuality fulfill their promise.

“I do not think it is right to promise a certain amount,” says one,
“we can not tell what we shall be able to give.” Did you hire that man
to work on your farm without promising him a “certain amount?” Did you
buy that farm that you are in debt for without promising _a certain
amount_? We judge not, and not a small amount at that. Why, then,
should men, constantly in the habit of promising _certain amounts_
for everything else, be so cautious about promising the poor preacher
of the word of God—the man to whom society is more indebted than any
other man, for all that is pure and good, a _certain amount_ to subsist
upon while he sojourns in this life?

“I thought you said the preacher should trust to the Lord for his
support,” says one? Certainly he should, just as you trust to the Lord
for his preaching. You trust to the Lord to enable him to perform his
preaching according to arrangements, and he trusts in the Lord that
you will be enabled to support him as promised, the same as your hired
man trusts in the Lord for what you promised him, or as you trust in
the Lord for the products of your farm. Yet the preacher knows not the
ability the Lord may give him, nor what amount of money he may need. It
may be more or less, but it is not his reward for his labor, but merely
his support—or, if you prefer it, his _board_ while he labors for the
Lord. But he does not intend to spend the whole reward of his labor in
this life, but is laying up a good foundation against the time to come.
They are prodigals who run through all their earnings as fast as
earned. The Lord does not intend his servants to do this. He gives them
a subsistence as they pass along, or money for their expenses, but the
main bulk of their wages is laid up in heaven, and can not be estimated
by dollars and cents. May God put it into the hearts of the children
of God to look to the temporal wants of the young men who have entered
this great work.




SELF-LAUDATION.


To see the mere worldling, whether the politician, the lawyer,
physician, or whatsoever, an egotist—full of self-laudation—giving
himself the glory for everything good, and acquitting himself from
everything evil, is contemptible enough in all conscience. Nothing can
sink a man faster in the estimation of sensible men. But in the kingdom
of Christ, where all is purely of the grace of God—where none has
anything that he did not receive, and where all are held responsible in
proportion to the ability that God gives, and where each one has to get
down upon his knees, before his holy and perfect Master, and confess
his weakness, imperfection, shortcomings, and nothingness in the sight
of God, how transcendently ridiculous to see egotism, self-laudation
and an effort to glorify the creature in the place of the Creator! And
how perfectly incompatible, too, such a spirit with the meek and lowly
spirit of Christ and the apostles!




PREACH CHRIST, NOT OURSELVES.


Paul says, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of
Christ.” Again, he says, “I determined to make known nothing among
you, but Christ and him crucified.” I come not to you with excellency
of speech, and the wisdom of men’s words, but with the demonstration
of the Holy Spirit and of power. He further asserts that the gospel
which he preached, he did not receive from man, but by the revelation
of Jesus Christ. Many such expressions are found in the writings of the
holy apostles going to show the precaution constantly used by them,
lest the glory of Christ should be attributed to them. The very first
sentence that escaped the lips of Peter in Solomon’s portico, was to
the same effect. “Why look ye so steadfastly upon _us_, as if by _our
own_ power or holiness, this man had been made whole?” He proceeds:
“The _name of Jesus Christ_, through faith in _his name_, hath given
him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all?”

The good Cornelius tried Peter, at the same point, on his first
approach into his presence. He fell down before the apostle and was
about to worship him. Peter told him to stand up—that he himself
was also _a man_, and demanded of him why he had sent for him. After
hearing the account given by Cornelius, of his prayer, his having seen
an angel, and what the angel said to him, the apostle began upon the
great burthen that he carried upon his soul. In a few words he declared
that God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power.
This was the great subject the apostles carried upon their hearts.
Respecting themselves, they knew not what would befall them, save the
testimony of the Holy Spirit, that bonds and imprisonment awaited them;
nor did they count their lives dear unto themselves, but they counted
all things but loss, if they could but win Christ.




THE CHURCH OF CHRIST A PROSELYTING INSTITUTION.


One of the most striking differences between the Mosaic and Christian
institutions is, that the latter is a proselyting institution, while
the former was not. Errorists among the Jews, contrary to the spirit of
their institution, ran into great proselyting efforts; while errorists
in the kingdom of Christ, contrary to the spirit of their institution,
leave the spirit of proselyting. Those Jews who had such a desire for
proselyting, should have been Christians, and the Christians who have
no zeal for proselyting should have been Jews. It would have suited
their capacity, views and feelings better, to have been born into a
church as they were born into the world; and a sign in the flesh, such
as circumcision, as a mark of distinction between them and the rest of
mankind, put upon them when eight days old; and when the numbers of the
church were replenished by natural generation and birth, and not in an
institution where men can not enter except by being born again—where
they are begotten, not of corruptible, but of incorruptible seed, by
the word of God, which liveth and abideth forever—where men can not
enter by natural generation, but must enter by _regeneration_ or not
enter at all.

If men who have no zeal to proselyte, had been born in an institution
where every child born of church members is also a church member, they
would have suited well to them the lessons from the law of Moses on
the Sabbath day, and perform the dull and spiritless ceremonies of
the synagogue. No doubt they could have gone through the performances
with as much formality and as little grace as a Jewish rabbi. Many
of these, if they had the priestly robe, Aaron’s rod, the pot with
manna, the shew bread, etc., would figure much more decorously back
among the types and shadows, than they do here among the good things
to come. They are better adapted for the letter than for the spirit,
for they almost convert the house of God—the spiritual building, where
the spirit of God dwells, and where we are required to worship in
spirit and in truth—into the dry and irksome ceremonies of the Jewish
synagogue.




OBSERVING THE SABBATH.


What is there in teaching that Christians must keep the seventh, or
Sabbath day, to impart or perpetuate spiritual life? The very seed
of ruin is in such teaching. There is no Christ in it. It did not
originate with Christ, but is anti-christian. The Lord never taught
his disciples to keep the seventh or Sabbath day, nor did his apostles
ever teach this. The first Christians did not meet on the seventh
day “to break bread,” but on the _first day_. When they met on the
first day they did not observe it as the Sabbath. It was a different
day from the Sabbath, took its rise from a different event, and had
a different object and entirely different associations. The Sabbath
originated in God’s _resting_ on the seventh day. It pointed to this
rest and originated in it. It had no Christ in it, did not originate
with Christ, nor point to him. It had nothing in it to bring him, or
anything he ever did to view, and nothing can be done more directly
calculated to draw the mind entirely off from Christ than to fill the
mind of the christian with the Sabbath, and get the first day of the
week and all its hallowed associations and memories out of his mind.
The first day of the week derives its entire religious significance
from the resurrection of our Lord, and the commemoration of the
Savior’s sufferings keeps his death continually before us, pointing
back to his death for our sins, and forward to his second coming.

Are Christians to be perverted and their minds and hearts carried away
from the death of Jesus, his resurrection and his coming, and all the
sublime associations and memories connected with the first day of the
week; turned back and put to the meditations of a Jew, commemorating
the rest of God on the seventh day, after he had completed the work of
creation? Nothing can be more anti-christian than this. This is Judaism
in the most deadly type. It is literally turning away from Christ to
Judaism; from the day that brings the great event to view, that lies
at the foundation of the faith and the entire kingdom of God; the
resurrection of our Lord from the dead, and the death of Jesus for our
sins. If purposely designed to lead us away from the Savior and ruin
us, nothing could be more completely suited to the purpose than this
Judaizing, Sadducean, no-spirit, no-angel and no-resurrection theory.
The theory, on its face, carries its own condemnation; but, in the
numerous cases of ruin wrought by it, we have the demonstration of its
destructive character.




MARK THOSE WHO CAUSE DIVISIONS.


We have no confidence in men and theories that have no power except to
scatter, tear down and destroy. The time has come when the brethren
should put their mark upon all this description of men we care not
what their idol may be, who are simply prating, whining, complaining,
and murmuring among loving disciples gathered by the labors and
sacrifices of other men, but who never built up a church, healed a
difficulty, or promoted peace any place in their lives. Nothing is so
ridiculous as for such men to go grumbling round the country, finding
fault with everything, pulling down other men’s labor, and building up
nothing, all the while prating about _progression_ and _reformation_.
Tremendous progress, that miserable prating, whining, and grumbling
that never builds up anything but always pulls down, catches the
sheep and scatters them! Mighty _reformers_ they, who never reformed
anybody since God made them, who never built up a church or gave any
prosperity to the cause, any place, or did anything more than scatter
and devastate! Atheism has done this much, and will do it again. If men
have found any new light worth anything, and are themselves men of any
force, improvement will appear; fruits will follow their labors. But
nothing can be more manifest than that God did not send those men who
only spread desolation, who only pull down, scatter, and kill, we care
not what fine theories they propagate, nor how prettily they may talk.
We want men who will preach the Lord Jesus Christ, who will regard him,
adore him, and obey him, and not a set of self-willed men, who idolize
their own notions, and are determined to have them and propagate them,
if the Lord’s name is forgotten, and the fold scattered asunder. Mercy
and peace upon the Israel of God. Mark them who cause divisions and
contentions.




RELIGION AND POLITICS.


Are we, as disciples of Christ, citizens of a kingdom not of this
world, a religious community, to be distracted, disconcerted, and
thrown into confusion? or, are we drawn to a common center, by an
attraction so heavenly, commanding, and binding, that no side-influence
can divert us from our course? The Lord is about to test us, prove us,
and show whether we are true, sincere, and men of integrity to the
great principles which we profess, and have been inculcating, or will
turn traitor to them, despise them, and trample them under our feet. We
have been preaching union upon the Bible, and the Bible alone, to our
neighbors; but, the time has come to test us practically, and compel us
to apply our philosophy in an instance of the greatest moment, and best
calculated, of all others, to show its power—its moral and spiritual
efficacy among ourselves.

What course shall we take, then, during the coming campaign? Shall
preachers of the gospel of Christ enter the pulpit, with exciting
political news in their heads and hearts, and make Kansas-Nebraska, and
anti-Kansas-Nebraska, Slavery and anti-Slavery speeches? Shall their
themes be the Constitution, Liberty, Popular Sovereignty, North, South,
Fillmore, Buchanan, Fremont, American, Democratic and Republican. Shall
these be the themes that consecrate the house of God during the coming
months, while thousands are perishing for the word of God, and dying in
their sins? We say, and would if we had a voice louder than the seven
thunders of the Apocalypse, and more immutable than the oath of the
angel of God, standing with one foot upon the land, and the other upon
the sea, say, _no_, by NO MEANS, for the following reasons:

_First._ Jesus and his apostles, in all their official acts, never
attempted to correct the political institutions of the country, no
matter how corrupt they were, but left them, and those who made them,
to take care of their own responsibilities. We must follow their
precedent, or we are not the disciples of Christ.

_Second._ Our Lord and his apostles, in all their official procedure,
never made a decision, or gave even an opinion, upon the merits or
demerits of any form of civil government, republican, monarchical,
either limited or absolute. They left all these matters to take their
course, and lifted their thoughts above them to a spiritual kingdom,
that shall endure when time shall be no more. We must do as they did,
or forfeit our claim to be one with them.

_Third._ The Lord and his apostles never made a decision, or gave an
opinion, on any system of slavery, though slavery existed, in some form
or other, in every country where they preached and wrote, in all their
official career. We must humble ourselves to the same limits.

_Fourth._ We have the infallible directions of the Spirit of God, to
believers, connected with slavery, both masters and servants, and these
directions we must give, when we speak on the subject at all, or depart
from the faith, because we are opposed to it. Every man who does not
do this, manifestly repudiates the practice and teachings of the holy
apostles.

_Fifth._ Jesus and his apostles did not found slavery of any kind, and
neither our Lord nor his religion can be responsible for any system of
slavery or its results, no matter how good or how bad. Slavery is an
institution of the world, as all other political institutions are, and
neither the kingdom of God nor its subjects are responsible for its
results.

_Sixth._ Our Lord and his apostles never formed an issue between the
kingdom of God and the kingdoms of this world. How utterly preposterous
and absurd it is, to the mind of one who has noticed, that our Lord
never made an issue between his kingdom, or his religion, and any civil
government or kingdom of the world, to see some misguided creature
trying to form a direct issue between the kingdom of God and whatever
political institution he may chance to fall out with and trying to set
the citizens in the kingdom of Christ in battle array with the citizens
of the civil government! Such a man has no use for a church only as a
kind of battering-ram to beat down some sinful institution that he
has just perceived is to ruin the nation. He would have the kingdom
of God a convenient engine, properly adjusted and poised, himself
commander-in-chief, so that he can now bring it to bear upon Masons,
then upon Odd Fellows, anon upon Sons of Temperance, then upon Slavery,
or any other monster that may rise. But the man who stands upon an
eminence lofty enough to discern the kingdom of God, beholds an
institution with an aim transcendently higher than deciding upon the
rights and wrongs of the political governments of the world, amending,
correcting, and perfecting them; the superlatively noble, grand, and
beneficent object of translating _individuals_, whether high or low,
rich or poor, bond or free, whether their political institutions are
good or bad, out of darkness into light, and out of the kingdom of
Satan into the kingdom of God, and in their few remaining days here,
no matter what their earthly condition, prepare them for guests of the
redeemed hosts who have washed their robes and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb, in the house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens.

_Seventh._ Christianity is _the thing_ to be promoted, and not to be
used as a mere _instrumentality_, by men who care nothing about _it_,
and who are doing but little to advance _it_, to promote some object of
their _own worldly ambition_. We must promote Christianity _itself_,
and not employ it as a mere means to promote something else.

“Well, sir, what would you have a christian do in regard to rulers and
civil governments?” says one. When acting as a citizen in the kingdom
of God, or in the house of God, “Pray for kings and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in all
godliness and honesty.” “Be subject to the powers that be,” remembering
that “we have no continuing city here,” and that “this world is not our
home.” When acting as a citizen of the civil government, be candid,
quiet, peaceable, and kind, and do just what _you think right_,
allowing every man the same privilege, as Christ has left us all free
here, and leave the event with God.

There are spiritual-minded persons in almost all the parties around
us; and if we determine to know nothing but Christ, nothing but pure
Christianity, and confine ourselves strictly to the clear revelations
of heaven—preach the pure gospel of the grace of God—preach Christ,
and determine to know nothing else, while a mere carnal and worldly
priesthood harangue their assemblies on politics, mix up church
and State, law and gospel, turning their religious organizations
into mere political engines, the very thing we have condemned the
Romish priesthood for, thus wounding the feelings of all the more
spiritual-minded members and splitting their parties asunder, thousands
of them will seek a church where the name of Jesus has charms, where
the Lord is loved and worshipped, and where the true worshippers
worship the Father in spirit and in truth. Let us keep the way clear
for such, receive them to the fold of Christ, and show them how they
can serve God and get to heaven, whether they can ever understand the
slavery question or not.

Many of us have labored long and hard and sacrificed the main energies
of our lives in gathering the many thousands to the fold of Christ that
now throng places of public worship, and we can not remain silent and
see them scattered by the indiscreet and imprudent course of brethren,
in thrusting upon them, and seeming to think that their souls’
salvation is suspended upon their rightly understanding the question of
American slavery. We admonish the brethren to have nothing to do with
any such question in the church. The Lord has not required the church,
the preachers, or religious editors to make any decision, or to hold
any particular class of opinions on the subject, nor can any man be
blameless and push any such question into the kingdom of God. _We will
stand square upon the Bible, by the Lord, the apostles, and every man
who will stand by them._ The Lord direct us!




PRAYER BOOKS.


The Church of England has abounded toward her people in all wisdom and
prudence. In doing so she has supplied them with the “Prayer-Book,” not
only for weak members, who can not pray, but for her strong members,
specially the clergy, giving the very words they must pray on all
occasions. In this exuberance of her benevolence she has supplied a
deficiency in the will of God, an omission in the law of God, an item
that Paul overlooked when he “shunned not to declare the whole counsel
of God;” an item not in the “all things that pertain to life and
godliness,” mentioned by Peter, nor in “all Scripture given by
inspiration,” mentioned by Paul, to “perfect the man of God and
thoroughly furnish him for all good works.” There are many among
them that can _read_ prayers, as they have them in print in the
“Prayer-Book,” and do _read them_, but we are not aware that they have
any more that can _pray_ than those who have no such “Prayer-Book.”

If we can not learn from the Lord and the apostles how to pray; from
the Scriptures, so that _we can pray_ we would not learn from all
the prayer-books ever printed. Read the prayers of the Lord and holy
men, recorded in Scripture, and the instructions of the Lord and the
inspired writings; take the “Concordance” and run through the Bible,
read and study all you find about it, and practice it daily, and you
find not only that you can learn _how_, but to _love_ to pray, and to
be impressed continually with the _importance of it_. Let the desire be
in the heart in the words, “Lord, teach us how to pray,” and you will
soon learn to ask for any thing you need.




UPWARD TENDENCY—REFORMATION NOT A FAILURE—MISSIONARY WORK.


The effort we have made, and are now making, at reformation, can
never prove a failure upon any ground, unless it be that we have not
moral courage enough, as the disciples of Christ—have not sufficient
integrity to the great principles of the gospel, to which we have
pledged ourselves, to maintain them against the mighty torrent of
opposition from the various ranks of bigotry, prejudice, and partyism,
together with the combined influence of unbelief and sin. The position
we occupy can never fail. While the holy prophets live and speak in
their writing; while the preaching of the apostles, their lives,
miracles and martyrdoms, live in the memory of men; while Jesus lives,
and the throne of the Almighty, upon which he sits, stands unmoved,
the position we occupy can not fail. The gospel will live and he who
believes it shall never die. The men who believe the gospel, who love
it, and hold on to it—keep the faith, press it to their hearts, love
and reverence him who gave it, will live co-existent with the years
of God. They will never fail; their lives, in this mortal state, will
fail; but they, at the same moment, will triumph. They are not in any
doubt and uncertainty, in calling upon their fellow man to return to
the faith as it was at the beginning. They have no fears that they are
wrong, or that they can possibly be mistaken in making the best effort
in their power to determine precisely what the ancient faith was,
separating it from everything else, and maintaining it before the
world. They know they are right in this. In one word, they believe the
gospel, maintain and defend it, and nothing else. It is the system they
believe, maintain and defend and nothing else. They may not understand
everything contained in it, as others who have other systems, do
not understand everything in their system; but the system itself we
know to be right, infallibly right and that we are infallibly right
in maintaining it; not because we understand everything contained
in it; but because we know the author of it, and know him to be
divine—infallible. We know him, love him and regard him; therefore we
know that what proceeds from him is infallible, and love it and regard
it.




MEN CAN BELIEVE AND DO BELIEVE.


Why does the speculator offer one dollar more to-day, than he did
yesterday, per barrel for flour? Because he believes the news he has
received, of an advance in some other market. Why does that pork dealer
advance the price one dollar per barrel? Because he believes the news
of an advance in some other market. Why does that trader refuse that
bank bill? Because he believes the statement in the detector, that it
is under par. Look through the various departments in life, business
transactions and all, and see what a vast amount of it is done by
faith. All business men are daily and hourly acting in matters where
thousands of dollars are involved upon faith, and acting with great
confidence, too. Look at that man at the post office, opening a letter
and reading! In a few minutes you see him stopping quickly and closing
an engagement, involving thousands of dollars! What is he acting upon?
Faith in the letter just received and read. Look at that other man,
waiting for a dispatch. Presently he receives and reads it. In a few
minutes he is waiting the arrival of the cars. As the cars approach,
you notice him eyeing the passengers as they come out of the train.
Presently he rests his eye upon a man. In the next moment the man is
arrested! What is he acting upon? Faith in the telegraphic dispatch
he had just received. Thus we perceive men are constantly acting upon
_faith_ in all the affairs of this life.

Is it possible that men who are thus constantly, and without
hesitation, acting upon faith, will have the assurance to apologize
for their unbelief in matters of religion, by saying they cannot
believe? It will also be observed that the men thus acting are not
merely a few credulous and thoughtless persons, but business men of all
classes—men of the first order of mind, thus showing that they _can_
believe and _do_ believe, in matters of great importance, and thus
demonstrating that they can believe in matters of religion, as well
as others, if they will but give a candid attention to the evidence.
The same faculties of the mind exercised in believing the news of the
day, political, commercial, or of sickness, health, or accidents, etc.,
are exercised in believing the divine testimonies. The same mind that
believes the testimony of men, is exercised in believing the testimony
of God. The difference in the effect produced upon the human soul,
by divine testimony, or divine faith, from that produced by human
testimony, or what is purely human faith, is not that the same mind,
or the same faculties of the mind are not exercised in both cases, nor
is it owing to the difference between divine and human testimony; but
the difference is in the things believed—the difference between divine
and human things believed. Heavenly things believed would, beyond all
dispute, make a different impression from that produced by the belief
of earthly things, however true they might be. A mere earthly truth,
even if proved by divine testimony, could produce no more than an
earthly impression; but a heavenly truth, if proved by earthly
testimony, would produce a heavenly impression. The same mind that
understands and believes that there is an advance in the flour market,
believes that the Lord rose from the dead, but the effect produced
by the faith in one instance, is very different from that produced
in the other instance; not because different powers are exercised in
believing; nor because the testimony differs; but because the things
believed differ.

The relation a thing believed sustains to the believer, is the main
cause of its effect upon him. Robert Owen, who professed to have
read, and traveled forty years, without being able to find any
evidence of the truth of christianity, has lately become a believer in
Spiritualism. How is it, that he is so slow to believe in one case,
but so ready to believe in the other? The reason is to be found in
the relation these two things to be believed, sustain to him. The
belief in modern Spiritualism involves nothing, requires nothing and
promises nothing. It is merely a speculative subject, for vain and
idle curiosity; placing no man under any new obligations who believes
it. It is a very suitable thing to catch a man of a perverted mind and
heart; one who has rejected Jesus; resisted the testimonies of the Holy
Spirit, and despised the Bible during an earthly pilgrimage of many
years, which God has mercifully and graciously granted him. But the
fact that Jesus of Nazareth is the Son of God—that he is divine—that
he is alive and lives forever and ever, is a fact sustaining a
different relation to time. It is not a speculative fact for idle
curiosity; not a mere theme for empty, cold and unfeeling hearts; for
idle, confused and wandering brains; but a fact, intimately connected
with all mankind; a fact, in which the destinies of all men are
involved; one, too, bearing upon the lives and conduct of all men. Here
is the reason that many are so slow to believe this, the greatest and
most important of all the facts presented for the belief of mankind:
it _requires a holy life_. A strange feature truly is it, in men, that
they should prefer to believe that which requires nothing, proposes
nothing and promises nothing, to that requiring the purest life, most
exalted character, and ennobled feelings, promising the approbation of
the Almighty now, and eternal joy in the world to come!

What reason can any man give for such opposition? No man believes that
the Lord Jesus Christ ever made any human being worse. No man sincerely
believes that the Bible makes any person worse; or that the Christian
religion does any harm to any one of our sinful race. No human being
solemnly believes that any harm could result from the universal
prevalence of pure christianity, as set forth upon the pages of the
New Testament, throughout the world. All men, upon cool and deliberate
reflection, must be satisfied, that if all the peoples, nations, tribes
and tongues of the earth, were fully under the power and influence of
the Bible, mankind would be infinitely blessed by it. Not a sceptic in
the world can give a reason for his opposition to the Lord Jesus and
the Bible. O, that men knew Jesus! O, that they possessed his spirit
and temper! O, that they would love him and be blessed by him!




CHURCH MEMBERSHIP.


The act of uniting with a church is not with the idea of being
_changed_ or _made better_, in ourselves, but to be placed in the right
relation. The man who is a christian ought to be united with other
christians in a congregation where he can worship according to the
Scriptures. It is one thing to become a christian, and another thing to
find and unite with a congregation of christians where the ordinances
are kept and the authority of Christ is maintained.

It is one thing to become a member of the body of Christ, or, which
is the same, enter into the kingdom of God, and another thing for
a person to unite with a local congregation. The Ethiopian officer
became a christian, or entered into the kingdom of God, or the body
of Christ, in obeying the gospel; but this did not make him a member
of any particular local congregation, where he would meet with other
christians and worship. This required an additional step. By faith,
repentance and baptism he entered into Christ, or in the body of
Christ, or became a christian. But if he has thus come into the general
body, or thus become a christian, and then united with the Baptist
church, or any other church, where he can not worship according to the
Scriptures; where they do not commemorate the sufferings and death of
Jesus regularly on the first day of the week, as the first christians
did; where they have an unauthorized name, a human creed and other
things contrary to Scripture; he has a right, and more, he ought to
seek a gospel church where he can worship according to Scripture.




BELIEVERS ONLY TO BE BAPTIZED.


Baptism, the initiatory rite, or the act of entering the church, is a
command. All commands must be preceded by faith. The divine authority,
requiring baptism, must be recognized, before the command can be
obeyed; and the divine authority can only be recognized by faith.
How, then, can a command be obeyed by one without faith, without a
consciousness of divine authority, or even the knowledge that the
command exists? Such a practice subverts the command of God in every
case where it obtains, and if it should become universal, would set
aside and annihilate all obedience to the command to be baptized. In
every case, where an infant is baptized, and prevailed upon, in after
life, to be content with its baptism and infant membership, one person
is effectually prevailed upon never to obey the command to be baptized,
and never, personally, to bow to the authority of Jesus in voluntarily
entering into covenant with him. The person is deceived, and made to
think, when come to the years of accountability, that two things have
been done that never have been done, viz: 1. That the command to be
baptized has been obeyed. 2. That the requirement to enter into the
church has been complied with. Neither the one nor the other has been
complied with at all.




THE KNOWLEDGE NECESSARY BEFORE BAPTISM.


Some person,—name not known—writing from Ripley, Ohio, inquires
whether persons baptized when very young, under excitement, having but
little understanding of the import of baptism; and, after coming to
mature years, become dissatisfied and desire to be baptized over again,
should he then be baptized again? This question is entirely outside of
the New Testament, and purely a question of opinion. Among the many
thousands baptized by the apostles, there were many, evidently, who
had but an imperfect understanding of the whole matter, not only of
very young persons, but many very illiterate persons. Yet there is
no account of any, on coming to a fuller understanding, who desired
to be baptized in the name of the Lord. It matters not how little
understanding persons have, if they believe in the Lord, repent of
their sins, confess and obey the Savior. Nor is the circumstance that a
person afterward understands the matter more fully, a reason why such
an one should be baptized again; but simply an evidence of a proper
growth in knowledge. There has been much said about the measure of
understanding that must be had before baptism, that would cut off one
half of the apostolic converts. Conversion is simply _turning to God_,
and there are but few who aim not to do this.




PAUL AND JAMES, ON JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH.


The difficulty in this case is not to be solved in dreams about
_different kinds of faith_. Writers may speculate upon different
kinds of faith till doomsday, and neither extricate themselves from
the difficulty, nor their readers. James and Paul were speaking of
precisely the same kind of faith; but Paul’s “deeds of the law” are
not the same as James’ “works;” or no man can avoid a contradiction.
Paul and James are both speaking of the faith that justifies man,
but neither of them are speaking of faith _alone_. Paul and James
were speaking of the faith of Christ, by which the heart is purified,
“without the deeds of the law” of Moses, and both would have agreed any
time, that by the deeds of the law of Moses, no man could be justified
in the sight of God. But the deeds of the law of Moses and the deeds of
the gospel—the “good works which God has ordained that we should walk
in them”—as mentioned by Paul—Eph. ii. 10—and the works of James,
are not the same by any means. Paul was arguing against opposing Jews,
who contended that men could be justified by the works or deeds of the
law of Moses, and maintained in opposition to them, that, by the deeds
of their law, no man could be justified in the sight of God; but man is
now; justified by the faith of Christ, that works by love and purifies
the heart—through the deeds of the gospel—the good works of the
gospel—not the deeds of law, but the works of faith, like the works of
Abraham, of which James speaks.

Neither Paul nor James believed that justification was by faith alone.
Neither of them believed, or taught, that justification was by the
deeds of the law of Moses. Neither of them believed that a man could
be justified by faith, without the works of the gospel. Justification
is by faith, not in the law of Moses, but in Christ; not alone, but,
as Paul has it, in the “good works (of the gospel) which God hath
ordained that we should walk in them;” or, as James has it, in the
case of Abraham, his faith, wrought with his works, and through the
divine appointment of both his faith and his works, the Lord justifies
those who come to him. It is neither faith nor works, either of law or
gospel, that justifies the sinner. It is God that justifies; but he
only justifies those who come in a proper spirit, to his appointments.




CONTROVERSY.


Let no man infer from this, however, that we favor, or in any way
encourage, a _love for controversy_. This is another thing entirely.
By no means do we love controversy. It is deplored always, or at
least the occasion of it. But shall a man, because he deplores
controversy—because he is sorry to come in collision with men—because
he knows unpleasantness will arise, and the smooth surface will
be ruffled, evade the issues between light and darkness—between
christianity and everything else? We did not make these issues and are
not responsible for them. They exist whether we say anything about them
or not, or whether we see them at all. The simple question is, whether
we will stand by christianity and maintain it—whether we will face the
issue, in a kind, a manly and noble manner, or shrink, depart from it
and allow it to be crushed down. Our motto is, _Meet the issue fairly
and squarely, in every instance of opposition to the gospel, in that
way that shall prove most effectual_. Let there be no evasion, but
stand firm and present an unbroken front.




CONTROVERSY ABOUT THE SPIRIT.[A]


Many brethren are inquiring of us about the Spirit, “correct views
of the Spirit,” and of “the influence of the Spirit,” and insisting
that we should respond to some things that are published, etc.; but,
for the present, to all this we must simply say, that the Lord knows
our hearts. He knows who have the Spirit, who are led by the Spirit,
walk in the Spirit, mind the things of the Spirit and endeavor to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. He knows them who are
his, who love him and keep his commandments. Blessed be his name; he
is able to keep them from falling, make all grace abound to them and
preserve them to his heavenly appearing and kingdom. With them, his
great work is a reality, a real work, the greatest and best of all the
works in which human beings have ever engaged; and they believe he is
with them, will be with them while they shall struggle for his cause in
this world, and will be with them in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to the gospel. In him they
have put their everlasting trust;to him they have committed their
cause, and to him they look for their final reward. They fear not what
man can do to them, nor what he can say of them, but they fear him
who is able to save and able to destroy, who is able to kill and able
to make alive. We have nothing at stake only the cause of truth, of
righteousness and humanity. We have no theory of our own to maintain,
no philosophy to defend, nor pride of opinion to guard, but are willing
to learn of the most humble disciple in the whole kingdom of God. If
any brother really has more of the spirit of the Lord than we have, we
envy him not because _he has more than we_, but we are only sorry that
_we have less than he_.

       *       *       *       *       *

By the way, as we now appear agreed that the Spirit of God should be
actually received and enjoyed by the saints, whether that agreement
be enforced by the terms of Scripture merely, or from the heart,
God knows. There remains but a single point of importance in our
mind. That is not, and has not been, whether the Spirit of God is
actually received and enjoyed by the children of God; but whether any
_teachings_ are communicated to man, or revelations made, either before
or after conversion, to saint or sinner, except _through the senses_.
Are not the revelations of God inscribed upon the sacred pages of the
Bible, the only teachings from heaven, for both the church and the
world, and are not these imparted to man through the senses? We do not
believe that there are any revelations from God, or teachings, binding
upon man, for saint or sinner, only those in the Bible, and these are
imparted to man through the senses. If this is sensuous philosophy,
then we are in for it.

[A] A discussion of the subject of Spiritual Influence was carried on
among the Disciples during the Decade, beginning in the year 1856.
Benjamin Franklin’s position, and indeed the gist of the controversy,
is presented in the opening and closing paragraphs of an editorial in
the _A. C. Review_.




SECTARIANISM.


Much as has been said upon the evils of sectarianism, within the last
forty or fifty years, it is still true, that no one has given the
subject too high a coloring. Its evils are equal to the most brilliant
description we have had. Indeed, it is difficult to conceive how any
one could speak, in too strong terms, of this one evil; yet, the sin of
partyism, like many other sins of these times, is so fashionable and
popular, that it is scarcely seen to be a sin at all. It is true, all
seem to look upon it as a sin, for a man to create partyism and strife
in the party to which he belongs, or any other party. But, to keep up
the parties now in existence, and defend the peculiarities upon which
they are predicated, and from which they receive their very existence,
is considered _serving God_. Now, if it can be considered service to
the Lord, to build up and keep up that old mother and mistress of all
heresy, the Roman Catholic Church, then, why was not the very mystery
of iniquity, already working in John’s day, doing service to God, in
originating that grand establishment of sin and iniquity? Surely, it is
giving as much glory to God to set on foot a great or a small religious
scheme, as to keep it in motion after it is once started.

If it is doing the will of God to build up and sustain the Episcopalian
Church now; surely, he was doing the will of God who originated
it. This, no one will doubt. The same is true of the Lutheran, the
Presbyterian, the Methodist Episcopal and all the indescribable parties
which have descended from them. If it is service to the Lord now, to
build them up, it was equally as great service to him to originate
them. It is a fact, too, that all these parties honor their originators
as the greatest and best men the world has had.

Now, how much should the opinions of these parties be considered worth?
or, how much are the most earnest and solemn decisions they ever made,
to be regarded? They would consider us highly uncharitable, if we did
not regard these decisions as most solemnly true. Well, if the Roman
Catholic Church ever made an earnest, an authoritative decision, in the
world, it was when she declared Martin Luther a heretic. And what man,
since his day, has broken off from an old party and established a new
one, without most earnestly and solemnly being declared a heretic? No
such man can be mentioned. The old party always decides that a new one,
that breaks off from it, is a heresy. In this way, all the parties now
in existence, have been decided _heresies_, and the leaders in them
_heretics_. Yet, these _heresies_, as they have styled them, headed
by those who have been decided _heretics_, have grown up, and are now
called “_evangelical churches_.” How is all this? If the Lord never
authorized them to be started, did he authorize their perpetuation?
And if he did authorize them to be started, were not the old parties
awfully wicked in condemning them, when they were doing the will of the
Lord?

It, then, presents a fearful picture—turn the matter which way you
may. If the parties, passing sentences, were wicked, and opposing the
will of God, then are almost all wicked and sinful—for all the older
and more popular, have passed such sentences. But if those upon whom
sentence has been passed, are sinful, and under condemnation, then
there are but few good, for such sentences have been passed upon nearly
all. Such is the dilemma, in which partyism has involved the religious
world.

If ever the adversary of man discovered an effectual stratagem, by
means of which to defeat all piety, and do execution in opposing the
faith of God’s elect, it was when he succeeded in sowing the seeds of
dissension in the church of God. Our Lord’s words show that he had this
before his mind, when he uttered the solemn prayer, John xvii. 20; “I
pray not for these alone, but for them also who shall believe on me
through their word; that they may all be one, as thou, Father, art in
me and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that _the world may
believe that thou hast sent me_.” Here it is clearly implied, that if
those who believe, through the word, were _one_, the tendency would be
to induce the world to believe. Nor is this any more clearly implied
than the opposite, viz: that the lack of union among believers, leads
to unbelief. How vain and imaginative the thought, that the existing
parties of our times, will ever be instrumental in the hand of God, in
converting the world, when the structure of their own organization, in
itself, has a continual tendency to infidelity. Are we told that such
is an ungenerous charge? Well, who can avoid it? The language of the
Lord, just quoted, clearly implies that the faith of the world depends
on the unity of believers; and we all admit, that the world cannot be
converted without faith, for “without faith it is impossible to please
God; for they that would come to him must believe that he is, and
that he is a rewarder of them who diligently seek him.” The matter is
too clear to be misunderstood. The Lord saw that the world would not
believe, till his people were _one_; hence, he prayed that they might
be one, _that the world might believe_.

Need we pray for the conversion of the world? need we send missionaries
to convince the pagan nations? need we print and circulate bibles? need
we build churches, and preach with the zeal of apostles, in all the
length and breadth of the land? I say, need we do all this, thinking
to convert the world, while we maintain our own unhallowed divisions
among believers? And, if we do, what evidence have we that the object
we have in view will ever be attained? Not the least in the world; for
so long as the Lord prays that we may _be one_—that the _world may
believe_—we need not expect the world to believe, while we are _not
one_.

It is true, we may convince, convert and save some, under the most
disadvantageous circumstances; but what is this, compared with the
_world believing_ or being converted? It is only a drop to the ocean.
Why not, then, come back to this great obstacle, and remove it, that
the conquests of righteousness and grace may extend over the earth?

It is confessed by all, in our time, that the Lord’s people are a
spiritual people, and if any have not the Spirit of Christ, they are
none of his. All are aware, too, that carnality is the opposite of
spirituality. What, then, is an evidence of carnality? I. Cor. iii. 3,
Paul asserts: “For ye are carnal.” What reason does he give for this
assertion? “For,” says he, “whereas there is among you _envying_, and
_strife_, and _divisions_; are ye not _carnal_, and walk as men?” He
here alludes to their divisions, as an evidence of their carnality, or
want of spirituality. But he argues the case further, as follows: “For
while one saith, I am of Paul; and another, I am of Apollos; are ye not
carnal?” He here continues the charge, that their following different
leaders is an evidence of their carnality. It should be kept in mind,
too, that the divisions among the Corinthians were of the mildest form.
If they could not be justified by the apostle, none since his time
could be, for none less offensive have ever existed. If the Corinthian
church, then, deserved the charge of carnality, as they certainly did,
how will the parties of our times escape the same charge?

Now, let reason ask—let righteousness ask—let every thing great and
good ask: Can the believers now on earth, sincerely, devoutly and
fervently, pray and labor for the conversion of the world, to the Lord
Jesus, in this state of carnality? It is alleged that _carnality_, or
the absence of the Spirit of God in the hearts of believers, is not the
cause of division? Then who are they that _separate themselves_? Let
the Scripture answer: “These be they who separate themselves, _sensual,
having not the Spirit_.” There is no higher nor surer evidence of
sensuality, carnality, and the absence of the Spirit of the Lord, than
division among the professed followers of Christ.

While this evil exists among the believers, can we pray in faith for
the conversion of the world? Can carnal professors, in the absence of
the Spirit of the Lord, without a sufficiency of the love of Christ,
to fellowship but a small portion of those for whom Christ died,
and who profess to love and serve him, hope that God will make them
instrumental in converting the world? No, we need not flatter ourselves
with the fond conceit, that anything like general saving influence will
ever be felt by the world, until those for whom Jesus prayed are _one_.
The meek and lowly Spirit of the Lord is displaced by the proud and
fierce spirit of the partisan. The lovely and inviting character of the
first church has disappeared and in its stead we have the inducements
of gorgeous worldly and fleshly establishments. In the place of even
being truly turned from sin to righteousness—from the power of Satan
to God—we have conversions that merely consist in opposing all creeds
and parties but the one into which the converts happen to fall, while
they frequently love the Lord no better than before their conversion.
In the place of that universal philanthropy exhibited by our Lord’s
death, for the whole world, such converts are merely filled with party
bigotry, which _dislikes_—yes, even _hates_—every body not of the
“same faith and order.” Under the influence of such religion, people
live near each other, see each other every day—yet associate not, nor
allow their children to associate, nor even worship the Lord their God
in the same house. And why this careful separation? They differ in
faith! What difference? Well, they cannot tell exactly, but the learned
_doctor_ who sermonizes for them, knows the difference. Go to him, and
he will explain it to you. This is no extreme case. Nine-tenths of the
members of churches cannot tell the difference between their own church
and another. Yet, it is so great, that they cannot fellowship the other.




DANCING IS A HEALTHFUL EXERCISE.


To make serious reply to this deceitful, deceptive and empty pretence,
is a little hard to do. To see a person who can not go three squares
to the house of God on foot, especially if it should be a little
unpleasant, who can dance till midnight, “for amusement,” speaking of
its being _healthful_, is ridiculous in the extreme. It may be, for
anything we know, that for any person who has become so useless as
to sit, day after day, and not move enough to circulate their blood,
dancing would prove healthful. But there are a thousand things better
for them. A visit to the sick, to the poor and the distressed, with
something for their necessities, would be vastly better for both soul
and body. Almost any kind of useful labor would be more healthful, and
leave vastly less remorse of conscience. But if a person has such an
aversion to labor to visiting the sick, the poor and needy, or doing
anything useful, they deserve no health, and the world will only be the
better off when they are out of it. More health, permanent happiness
and real enjoyment are found in an industrious and useful life than all
the seekers of pleasure ever knew. The man of useful life has no time
for pleasure and amusement. His time is taken up, wholly taken up,
and he is so happy in it, that it appears short, in constant acts of
usefulness. But pleasure-seekers are constantly devising how to while
away time, to pass it off or murder it. Time appears the greatest
burthen they have, through their whole life, and, at death, the trouble
is, that they have not more time. The good man appears pressed through
life to do the good he desires to do, but when death comes, his work
is done, well done, and he dies in hope of hearing the Lord say, “Well
done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the joys of thy Lord.”




PRAYER.


There is nothing in Scripture called “family worship,” and yet what
we mean by that expression, is the oldest worship in the world. Holy
men in every age worshipped God in the family. But the time and manner
of conducting it, is left to the sense of propriety, and discretion
of the head of the family. Paul says: “I will therefore, that men
pray everywhere.” 1 Tim. ii. 8. He also speaks of remembering the
brethren in his prayers, _night_ and _day_. He could not do this,
without praying “night and day.” The Lord went out into a mountain and
continued in prayer all night. Luke vi. 12. The first disciples
“continued with one accord in prayer and supplication.” Acts i. 14.
Cornelius said, “at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house.” Acts
x. 30. This, we presume he got from pious Jews, as it was before
his conversion to the christian faith. “When they prayed the place
was shaken where they were.” Acts iv. 31. These are but meager
specimens of what the Scriptures say about prayer. The history of
the first Christians is full of prayer. If you wish to know where
they prayed you only need find where they were, for they were
“instant in prayer”—“prayed night and day”—“prayed always”—“prayed
everywhere”—“prayed without ceasing.” They prayed “on the house-tops,”
“in the house,” by the “sea-shore,” “in the prison,” and “in the
assembly.” They prayed wherever they were. We should do the same.

They spent much more time upon their knees, than the professors of
religion in our day. The sin that we fear is not that brethren do not
pray in their families, but that they do not _pray any place_ half as
much as they should. Now if the first Christians prayed wherever they
were, even when confined in a prison, why should any man who wishes to
do the will of God hesitate to pray in his family? Can any man show
a better place, ordinarily, for reading the Scriptures and prayer?
Can there be any objection to this place? Are not christians required
to pray everywhere? Will not God hear a christian in his family? No
one doubts that it is as suitable and appropriate as any place on
earth. “Why then, is it not commanded?” Because there are thousands of
christians who have neither houses or families, and the Lord has left
the way open so that they can worship God just as acceptably in
whatever place they may be, as the man who has an orderly family and
home. The Lord has left the head of the family free to determine the
appropriate place to worship. But woe to that christian who objects
to the family circle, as a suitable place, and then does not worship
any place. But we never saw a good reason and do not believe there is
any, against the orderly custom of reading a portion of Scripture and
praying in the family, and we believe that those fathers and mothers
whose children never heard them pray, will most solemnly lament it when
they see the Lord Jesus at his coming. “Pray without ceasing, rejoice
evermore, and in everything give thanks.”




WE HAVE A PERFECT GOSPEL TO PREACH.


We claim that the religion of Jesus Christ is a complete, perfect and
divine system, in itself; distinct from, superior to, and as high above
every thing else as heaven is above this earth; and that all who desire
to do so, can determine what it is, practice it and be christians. We
claim that the gospel is complete, perfect and divine; distinct from,
and independent of, everything else, and that he who desires it, may
know precisely what it is, believe it with all the heart, obey it and
be saved by it; otherwise the Lord could not be just and good in
condemning the man who does not believe it, or does not obey it. The
matter, therefore, with us now is not to determine what the truth is,
or the gospel; this we have long since settled. We, as a people, know
the truth, the saving truth, the only saving truth, as a whole, or in
its embodiment, or concentrated form, though many may not understand
it in detail, and the great matter now is to practice it, enjoy it and
advocate it. God intends or purposes it for all mankind, as much as
he did for us. It is now our duty to make it known among all mankind;
or, as Paul expresses it, “to make all men see what is the fellowship
of the mystery, which, from the beginning of the world, hath been hid
in God, who hath created all things by Jesus Christ; to the intent
that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places, might
be known by the church, the manifold wisdom of God, according to his
eternal purpose.”




BIBLE NAMES.


But there is one course infallibly safe for us, and that is to follow
the New Testament phraseology. We ought not only to use New Testament
names, but should pay some regard to the frequency of the use of those
names. When a man uses the name _christian_ more in one half hour
than it is used in the whole New Testament, it is a clear evidence
that there is something wrong with him. The same is true of the name
Disciple, or any other designation found in the Scriptures. The man who
is truly under Jesus, not only uses New Testament designations for the
people of God, but uses them in the same manner as found in Scripture.
We never find “Christian church” in Scripture. We find no “Disciple
church,” or “Disciples’ church,” in the New Testament. Such names are
incongruous. Yet they are current in some sections of country. In
some parts of Kentucky and Indiana you hear of the “Christian church”
very frequently. In the Western Reserve, Ohio, you will hear both
“Disciple church” and “Disciples’ church” very frequently. In the New
Testament “the church of Christ” is found; but “the church of God”
much more frequently. The members are called Christians, Disciples,
and frequently only designated “people of God,” “children of God,”
“brethren,” etc. By giving a little attention, we can converse in the
same way. In nine cases out of ten, we can express ourselves in the
simple words, “the brethren,” “the church,” etc., and be as perfectly
understood as if we would adopt the most sectarian designation.

The adoption of all names unknown to the New Testament, is wholly
unwarrantable. There is no matter of more importance than this. Let us
learn to use the precise language of the New Testament, and use it in
the same sense as used there; and, above all, see to it, that we not
only call ourselves Christians and Disciples, but that we be indeed
_Christians, Disciples_.




INDIVIDUALITY AFTER DEATH.


Will the dead maintain their _identity_ and _individuality_? Is there
any clear light on this? We will not discuss it, but refer to a few
evidences. Fifteen hundred years after Moses died, and before any had
risen from the dead, he held a conversation with Jesus in the mountain
of transfiguration. He had not lost his identity nor his individuality.
He did not lose his consciousness. See Matt. xvii. 1-4; Mark ix.
2-4; Luke ix. 28-30. The rich man died, and in _hades_ he lifted up
his eyes in torment. See Luke xvi. 23. He did not lose his identity,
individuality or consciousness. Nor is there any account of his
existence being such as he had before he was born. Nor did Lazarus
lose his identity, individuality or consciousness. These men were both
identified, conscious, and retained their individuality. They were not
in the same place or state, though both were in _hades_. There was a
great gulf between them—the one in Abraham’s bosom, and the other in
_tartaros_.

We are not to assume that, because we find _soul_ and _spirit_ used
interchangeably in some instances, they always mean the same, much less
that they always mean life. When Paul prays that the “whole spirit and
soul and body be preserved blameless,” he does not use the words soul
and spirit in the same sense, any more than he uses the words soul and
the body in the same sense. He does not use the spirit, soul and body,
in the same sense, or as meaning the _same thing_, but each having its
own meaning. The word soul is used with more latitude than the word
spirit. The word _soul_ is frequently used in the sense of _person_, as
“the soul that sinneth shall die;” “eight souls were saved in the ark,”
and other cases. The word soul is used in the sense of _life_, in some
instances. But it is used synonymously with spirit, in the following:
“Are not able to kill the soul.” Matt. x. 28. Man can kill the body and
the natural life, but the soul or spirit, man can not kill. The living
being that dwells in the body, or the “inner man,” does not die when
the body dies. This “inner man” may be “at home in the body, or absent
from the body and present with the Lord.” This “inner man” may be
caught away to paradise, in the body or out of the body. But we cannot
go into the discussion of these matters, now.

We do not receive the idea of men losing their identity, individuality
or consciousness; the transmigration of the soul, or the pre-existence
of the soul; nor the atheistic idea that “death is an eternal sleep.”
We can find better, and certainly more profitable themes than these, on
which to dwell, both in our meditations, preaching and writing. Let us
be careful and not get out where the water is too deep—we might find
it over our heads.




BELIEF IN THE BIBLE IS INFALLIBLY SAFE.


It is infallibly safe, because no man has ever been able to show any
evil consequences that could possibly follow the believer, upon any
hypothesis. No man of any reason has ever doubted the safety of relying
upon the Bible, if it be true. But we go beyond this, and declare,
without hesitation, that if it were possible for it to prove untrue, it
is infallibly safe to believe and rely upon it. Its moral precepts, to
say the least, are good as any on earth. Its requirements in all our
present relations are competent to make us as good and happy as we are
capable of being in this life. And, certainly, if it could possibly
prove untrue, the belief of it could not endanger our happiness in the
life to come. Beyond all controversy, he who believes and practices the
Bible, attains to the highest perfection and happiness of which
his being is capable in this life, and stands as good a chance for
happiness in the life to come as he who rejects it. And if, in the end,
the whole could be shown to be a mistake, no man living can show that
the believer in the Bible can possibly be in danger, in this world or
in the world to come. No evil consequences can possibly follow the
believer, in any event. It is strange, if that which is infallibly
safe, should not prove true.




REVELATION OF THE MYSTERY.


God is unchangeable; the same yesterday, to-day and forever. Jesus,
the manifestation of God in the flesh, and the exact representation of
his person, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, bodily;
the concentration and embodiment of all divine benevolence, goodness
and perfection, is unvaryingly the same—the constant, the ever
blessed and merciful philanthropist. Christianity, as set forth upon
the sacred pages of the New Testament, is but the revelation of the
mystery from the beginning of the world, hid in God who created all
things by Jesus Christ, but the development of the eternal purpose of
God, the unfolding of the infinite benevolence, mercy and goodness, in
a gracious system of pardon, restoration and final redemption, for all
them who obey him, through the proclamation of the glorious gospel of
the blessed God. It was the infinite goodness that prompted it, the
infinite will that resolved it, the infinite wisdom that devised it,
and infinite power that executed it. God first purposed the gracious
scheme of benevolence. He then promised it to Abraham, saying, “In
thee, and in thy seed, all the nations of the earth shall be blessed.”
He succeeded this promise by many clear predictions of the prophets,
and divine testimonies from their hallowed lips. Yet these things were
not understood by mortal man. Great and good men believed the promise
and the testimonies of the prophets, rested in hope and died in faith,
without understanding; fully appreciating or comprehending the full
import of the good things to come. Eye had not then seen, ear had not
heard, nor had it entered into the heart of man to conceive the good
things God had prepared for them that love him. The things now revealed
in the gospel, had been hid for ages, and not made known to the sons of
men. Christianity is now a mystery explained, a secret revealed—that
which was hid in God, made known—the purpose of God developed—a
promise fulfilled according to the Scriptures of the prophets, and the
commandment of the everlasting God, made known among all nations for
the obedience of faith.




EARNESTLY CONTENDING FOR THE FAITH.


An apostle has thought it needful to enjoin upon us, “Earnestly contend
for the faith formerly delivered to the saints.” An old soldier of the
cross, when about to put off his armor, rejoiced that he had fought a
good fight, kept the faith and finished his course. In the course of
his warfare, we are informed that he disputed “two whole years” in a
certain school, or contended for the faith. This warfare, disputing or
contending, is an advocacy, a defence and maintenance of the faith once
delivered to the saints. The first thing, in order to this advocacy,
is to ascertain what the “faith once delivered to the saints” is, and
the next thing is to advocate it, maintain and defend it with every
power. The faith exists in two forms: 1. In its concentrated, embodied,
or constitutional form, as it is presented for the confession of the
new convert, in a single proposition, that it may be received or
rejected by either an affirmative or a negative answer. 2. In its fully
developed or detailed form, as we find it spread upon the pages of the
christian Scriptures. This is the creed of the church by which she is
governed and guided in all her journey through this world.

The whole of the detailed or fully developed creed, so far as its
truth or authority is concerned, is in the concentrated, embodied or
constitutional creed. Indeed the whole system of christianity was in
the purpose of God, which he purposed in Christ before the world, in
the promise to Abraham, in the good news borne by the angels to the
shepherds of Bethlehem, in the last commission, in the same sense
that it was in Christ. But it was not put in due form for mankind to
confess, receive and place themselves under it. The same that was in
the “eternal purpose” of God, in the promise, in the good news of
great joy and in the commission, was in the announcement, “This is my
Son, the beloved, in whom I am well pleased,” in the confession of
Peter, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” the same that
John testified that we might believe, when he said, “These things are
written that you might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of
God,” or that God uttered in the mountain when he gave him honor and
glory, or the same is contained in any one of these that is contained
in “the gospel.” Any one of these expressions, and many others that
could be maintained, contain christianity in its concentrated, embodied
or constitutional form. These all embrace Christ. All christianity
centers in him, comes from him and is authorized by him. Through the
holy witnesses of Jesus, men are made acquainted with Christ, convinced
that he is a divine person, the Son of God and the Savior of the
world; and, in the confession, receive him as their only Leader. This
is simply receiving christianity in its constitutional form, without
having examined its details or knowing what they are. We do not,
therefore, read christianity through, sitting in judgment, as we do, a
merely human composition, noticing every expression to see whether it
is good or true. When we become acquainted with the Author, find him
sent from God, declared his Son in his resurrection from the dead,
divine and infallible, we place ourselves under him, and receive his
holy instructions implicitly, only wishing to know that they are from
him.

Christianity, therefore, in its embodied, or constitutional form,
embraces christianity in its details. “The faith once delivered to
the saints,” is simply christianity, the complete system as the Lord
gave it. All who have confessed Christ intelligently, have received
christianity, committed themselves to it. This is “the faith,” that
which is to be advocated, maintained and defended. The man who has
received it with the whole heart, practices it, and enjoys it, is a
christian. The requirement of heaven resting upon him is, to earnestly
contend for the faith, advocate, maintain and defend it.




THIRTY YEARS AGO.


We showed from the pulpit, fully thirty years ago, that the answer
of Peter to the three thousand on Pentecost, was not the same as the
answer of Ananias, to Saul, of Tarsus, and the answer to Saul was not
the same as the answer of Paul, to the Philippian jailer, and gave the
reason for the difference. But that was not a difference between _then_
and _now_, but difference in view of the difference in the conditions
of persons at the _same time_. The same difference is observed now,
by all intelligent preachers, where they find the difference in the
conditions of persons. If a man is a believer, they do not command him
to “believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.” If he has repented, they do not
command him to repent. Or, if he has been immersed, they do not command
him to be immersed; but to go on and unite with others who have been
immersed into Christ, and observe all things, whatever the Lord has
commanded. But attention to this is no difference between _then_ and
_now_, nor did the preacher, thirty years ago, fail to observe this
difference, any more than now. On the contrary, the preachers then
generally understood this better than the preachers do now.

We noticed the articles in question, carefully, to see the difference
in the condition of things _now_, demanding the different treatment,
but in vain; we did not see it. The plain state of the case is, that
there is no _general difference_, and we now need the _same gospel_,
presented in the _same manner_, as they needed then. Preaching always
did take better effect, when presented in a pleasant manner, than when
presented in an abrupt and repulsive manner. This we knew thirty years
ago, as well as we know it now. All that can be truthfully said about
this, opens the way for no change—no _new departure_. Whatever was
then true in this respect, is true now. A good and acceptable _manner_
in presenting the gospel was appreciated then as much as it is now, and
was of precisely the same value. It was understood then as well as it is
now, that every improvement in manner had its value, and more attention
was given to the _matter_ then, than now. There was then more sound
preaching and teaching, than there is now, and less that was unsound.

We need solid and sound men now, faithful and true, not to preach
something different, but _the same_, not in a different _manner_ from
what we had thirty years ago, but in the _same manner_; not to _undo_
what has been done by the labors of the holy men of the past fifty
years, many of whom have fallen asleep in Jesus, but a few remain to
this present; but to maintain, defend, perpetuate, and transmit it
down through the ages, to the end of time. We want men that will not
demoralize the people, specially our young preachers, by opening the
way for something _new_ and _different_; but maintain the same things,
and be of the same mind, and of the same judgment; not preparing the
way for something _new_, but maintaining and defending the _old_,
_tried_ and _unquestionable_; not getting ready for _change_—_new
departure_—but “preach the word”—“continue in the things they have
learned, and been assured of,” and not demoralize our young preachers
with the idea of being on the wing; on a flight from one thing to
another, in some wonderful career of progress; but exhorting them
to be “rooted and grounded in the truth;” yes, more, in the “_love_
of the truth;” not only to maintain “sound speech that can not be
condemned”—“sound words,” but the very “_form_ of sound words.”




JESUS REVEALED AS THE SAVIOR.


We turn our eyes to the infant in a manger in Bethlehem, and place
them upon the child of promise, born according to the divine purpose,
to whom God had been pointing from the beginning of time, who is to
be the rise and fall of many nations, and the hope of the world, and
find that all the divine prophets, and holy Seers of olden times, have
been looking to him; that the attention of all heaven is directed to
him, and, that the object now is, to engage the attention, enlist the
hearts, and center the affections of the whole family of man in him
who is called Jesus. Accordingly, wonders surround him of a stupendous
character, when he is born. Angels of heaven appear, exclaiming, “We
bring you good news of great joy, which shall be to all people. Unto
you, this day, in the city of David, a Savior is born, which is Christ
the Lord.” After a few incidents connected with his birth, and up till
he is two years of age, he passes pretty much without observation,
through the period of his minority, and the time comes for the Lord
to make him known to Israel. We look and see him approach John the
Baptist, demanding baptism at his hands. The good man knew him not as
the Messiah, though he knew him as a kinsman, and, in humility says,
“I have need to be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me.” The Lord
replied, “Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness.” With this righteous explanation, the Baptist walked by
the side of his Lord, not knowing him to be his Savior, for he says, “I
knew him not, but he who sent me to baptize, said, ‘On whomsoever you
see the Holy Spirit descending and remaining, that is he.’” Down they
enter, hand in hand, into the water. The immerser takes his Redeemer in
his hands, and lowers him till his person is buried in the waters of
Jordan, and then gently raises him up. As they ascend from the water,
they lift their eyes and behold the opening heavens, and the descending
Spirit as it forms a visible appearance, and rests upon him whom God
would have revealed to Israel. At this moment, the Almighty Father
spoke from heaven, in the audience of the people, announcing: “This is
my Son, the beloved, in whom I am well pleased.”




CAN NOT A MAN KNOW THAT HE IS A CHRISTIAN?


The grand question to be solved, in this generation, is, whether men
can follow the Lord, the only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of
lords, as their only Leader, receive his truth as their only guide, his
faith as their only faith, his religion as their only religion, and be
simply his disciples and no more. Is there such a thing in this world
as christianity? All the conflicting parties around us admit that there
is. Can we determine what it is? If we can not, no man knows whether
he is a christian or not. If we can determine what christianity is,
then, why not adopt it, and nothing else? Can we determine what the
gospel is? If we can not, then, no man knows whether he is a believer
or not, and knows not whether he will be saved or lost. If we can
determine what the gospel is then, why in the name of reason not preach
the gospel and nothing else? If we can not determine what the church
of Christ is, then no man can determine whether he is in the church of
Christ or not. If we can determine what the church of Christ is, there
can be no excuse for forming any other church, or belonging to any
other.

If we can not determine what christianity is, we can not determine who
is near to it, or far from it. If we can not determine what the gospel
is, we can not decide who comes near to it, or swerves far from it. If
the right way can not be known, no man can tell who is near the truth
and who is far from it. If we can not tell which the way to heaven is,
we can not tell who is near and who is far from it. The world is lost.
We are enveloped in impenetrable darkness. The light of heaven is blown
out. Hell has triumphed. All is thrown into chaos. An eternal confusion
spreads a universal reign. Doubt, uncertainty and gloom extend over
the whole habitable earth. The purpose of God has failed, and the
malignant purpose of hell has triumphed. The hope of all nations is
lost. Our world is ruined!—Black, fearful and awful despair prevail
everywhere among men. Is this the condition of our world? Tell us,
all you who think that the man is a bigot, a simpleton and pretender,
who says he can know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent—that he can know the truth that makes man free—that he can know
the gospel—that he can know christianity—that he can know that he is
a christian—that he can know the true church; tell us, all you who
despise this man for claiming that he can know all this, if you say
you cannot know these things, how do you know whether you are right or
wrong, in the way to heaven or hell? How can you tell, if you know not
these things, whether you are near right, or far from it? How can you
tell anything about it?




EXALTED POSITION OF JESUS.


This glorious person is the soul of the Bible, the center of the whole
spiritual system, the attraction for all nations, the ruler, not only
among the saints on earth, but also the armies of heaven. God gave
him honor and glory, the apostle says, when he proclaimed him his
Son in the holy mountain. He walks at the head of the army of God,
the true Israel, and among the inhabitants of the earth, proclaiming
with all authority, both in heaven and on earth, “I am the way, the
truth and the life; no man cometh to the Father but by me.” “I am the
resurrection and the life”—“I am he who was dead and am alive, and
behold I live forever and ever”—“I have the keys of hell and of death;
I can open, and no man can shut; I can shut, and no man can open”—“I
am the bright and the morning star, the root and the offspring of
David”—“I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men to me.” “If any man
would be my disciple, let him take up his cross and follow me.” Such
are a few of the many expressions setting forth the exalted position of
the Christian’s King and the Christian’s Lord. When he was coronated
in heaven, crowned Lord of all, the Almighty Father swore that he
should reign till all his enemies should be put under his feet—that
to him every knee should bow, and every tongue should confess. Lift
up your hearts, all you saints, and behold your King! He is the head
of the church. Set your affections on him, follow him, and consecrate
yourselves to him forever more.




PUBLIC OPINION—INFANT DAMNATION.

                       ST. LOUIS, MO., May 18th, 1874.

   _To the Editor of the Globe_:

      I will give a reward of fifty dollars to any one who will
    give the name of a Presbyterian minister, who is a member
    of a Presbytery, under the jurisdiction of the General
    Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, of the United States
    of America, who has, at any time, preached the doctrine of
    infant damnation; and I will give fifty dollars additional
    reward, to any one who can point out any article in the
    Confession of Faith or Catechism of this Church, teaching
    this horrid doctrine. As infant damnation has been charged
    upon Presbyterians in an editorial, of recent date, in the
    _Globe_, the above reward is offered for the proof. That
    the elect are incapable of sin, is also stated in the same
    editorial, to be a doctrine of the Presbyterian Church. This
    also is untrue.

                                             W. H. AUGHEY.


We publish the above to show where the _pressure comes_, and not that
we expect any “fifty dollars reward,” for such men as the writer of
this, always have a loop-hole through which to escape, but we will see
whether the Presbyterian ministry believe “this horrid doctrine.” If
they do not believe the Confession of Faith, they are sailing under
_false colors_ and their profession is a sham. If they do believe
their Confession of Faith, we leave the reader to judge whether they
believe “this horrid doctrine.” Let us hear the Confession: “God from
all eternity did, by the most wise and holy counsel of his own will,
freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass; yet so as
thereby neither is God the Author of sin, nor is violence offered to
the will of the creature, nor is the liberty of contingency of second
causes taken away, but rather established.” _Con., page 18, God’s
Eternal Decree, chap. iii._

The reader will see nothing about infant damnation in that. Very well;
let us see what is in it. This is in it—that God did foreordain
unchangeably whatever comes to pass. There is more than this in it—he
did this “from all eternity.” Now let us hear the Confession tell what
one of these decrees is: “By the decree of God, for the manifestation
of his glory, some men and angels are predestinated unto everlasting
life, and others foreordained to everlasting death.” _Con. page 18._
When was this done? “From all eternity.” What was it done for? “For
the manifestation of his glory.” What was done? “Some men and angels
are predestinated unto everlasting life, and others foreordained unto
everlasting death.” That makes a plain case of it.

Let us hear the Confession again: “These angels and men thus
predestinated and foreordained are particularly and unchangeably
designed, and their number is so certain and definite that it can not
be either increased or diminished.” _Con. page 19._ This decree of
predestination and foreordination is _particularly_ and _unchangeably
designed_, and the number thus particularly and unchangeably designed
can not be _increased_ or _diminished_. But it will be said that this
is not said of _infants_, but of “angels and men.” So it is. But _when_
was this decreed? “From all eternity.” These _men_ “foreordained to
everlasting death” were thus “particularly and definitely designed”
“from all eternity.” We may not be able to explain precisely the
meaning of the words “from all eternity,” but they evidently mean
before they were created. Before they were born, then, some men
were foreordained to everlasting death. When they were born they
were _infants_; yes, _infants_ “particularly and unchangeably
_designed_” to everlasting death. Those of these infants foreordained,
“particularly and unchangeably designed to everlasting death,” who die
in _infancy are lost_. Here, then, in the Confession of Faith, which
Presbyterian ministers profess to believe, is the doctrine of _infant
damnation_—yes, “the horrid doctrine,” whether they believe it or not.

But then infant damnation is no worse than the damnation of adults who
are foreordained to everlasting death, particularly and unchangeably
designed to everlasting death, the number so definite that it can be
neither increased nor diminished.

Let us hear the Confession again: “Those of mankind that are
predestinated unto life, God, before the foundation of the world was
laid, according to his eternal and immutable purpose and the secret
counsel and good pleasure of his will, hath chosen in Christ, unto
everlasting glory, out of his mere free grace and love, without any
foresight of faith or good works, or perseverance in either of them,
or any other thing in the creature as conditions or causes moving him
thereto; and all to the praise of his glorious grace.” _Con., page 21._

In view of this, where is the difference whether infants or adults? The
decree of God—his design—settled the matter before they were born,
and made it so definite, that the number can neither be increased nor
diminished, and that, too, without any foresight of faith or good works
in the creature. The immutable _decree_ and _design_ of God has settled
the matter, and that, too, before time began. The elect can never be
lost, and the non-elect can never be saved, no matter whether infants
or adults. To unchangeably foreordain an infant to everlasting death,
is no worse than to foreordain a man to everlasting death—_design_ him
to it before he was created. But we must, since the account is opened,
administer yet another item or two on this matter. “Calvin’s Institutes
of the Christian Religion,” is a standard work among Presbyterians,
and used as a text-book in their theological schools. Let us hear from
this work, Vol. I. page 166: “Hence appears the perverseness of their
disposition to murmur, because they intentionally suppress the cause of
condemnation, while they are constrained to acknowledge it themselves,
hoping to excuse themselves by charging it upon God. But, though I ever
so often admit God to be the Author of it, which is perfectly correct,
yet this does not abolish the guilt impressed upon their consciences.”

Calvin here says, to confess that God is the Author of sin, which is
the cause of condemnation, “is perfectly correct.” Let us hear him
again: “I confess, indeed, that all the descendants of Adam fell, by
the Divine will, into that miserable condition in which they are now
involved; and this is what I asserted from the beginning, that we must
always return at last to the sovereign determination of God’s will,
the cause of which is hidden in himself,” Inst., page 166. Here Calvin
says, “Adam fell by the Divine will.” Let us hear him once more: “If
God simply foresaw the fates of men, and did not also dispose and
fix them, by his determination, there would be room to agitate the
question, whether his providence or foresight rendered them at all
necessary. But since he foresaw future events only in consequence of
his decree that they should happen, it is useless to contend about
foreknowledge, while it is evident that all things come to pass rather
by ordination and decree.” Inst., page 171.

Here it is argued that God foreknows “only in consequence of his
decree.” But we must hear this great master in the Presbyterian Israel
again: “I inquire again how it came to pass that the fall of Adam,
independent of any remedy, should involve so many nations, with their
infant children, in eternal death, but because such was the will of
God?” Inst., page 170. Is there any infant damnation in this? But
he says, “independent of any remedy.” He does so say, but _for the
non-elect there is no remedy_. They and _their infant children_ are
involved in eternal death, and that “because such was the will of God.”
In these passages we have it clearly taught that God is the Author of
sin; that not only Adam, but many nations, _with their infant children,
are involved in eternal death_, and that, too, _according to the will
of God_, because he _willed, designed—decreed it_.

See one more item from the Confession, chap. v. sec. 4: “The almighty
power, unsearchable wisdom and infinite wisdom and goodness of God, so
far manifest themselves in his providence that it extendeth itself to
the first fall, and all other sins of angels and men, and that not by
a bare permission, but such as hath joined with it a most wise and
powerful bounding, and otherwise ordering and governing of them, in a
manifest dispensation to his own holy ends.” It is seen from this that
the Confession teaches that even the providence of God extends not
only to the first fall, but to _all other sins of angels of men_, and
that not _by a bare permission_, but such as has joined with it a most
wise and _powerful bounding_, and otherwise _ordering and governing of
them_, in a manifest dispensation to his own holy ends.

Let us hear the Larger Catechism, page 195: “They who have never heard
the gospel, know not Jesus Christ, and believe not in him, can not be
saved, be they never so diligent to frame their lives according to
the light of nature or the laws of that religion which they possess;
neither is there salvation in any other, but in Christ alone, who is
the Savior only of his body, the church.” What becomes of all those
who die without remedy, with _their infant children_? If Presbyterian
ministers do not believe this horrible doctrine of infant damnation,
it is because they do not believe their own Confession of Faith, and
standard works. We can supply them with plenty more of the same sort,
if there is any demand for it.




THE WARNING.


The antediluvians would not be warned by the preaching of Noah, and
suspected nothing till the flood came, and swept them all away. The
Jews in like manner would not be warned by our Lord and his apostles,
and could not be aroused from their apathy and indifference till their
devoted city was invested with armies. So shall it be at the coming
of the Son of man. Great trials are upon those who intend to maintain
truth and righteousness. May we be able to stand the coming conflict.
The love of many is growing cold, and those weary of the restraints of
Christ are coming to the surface. Let us not slumber, but watch and
strengthen the things that remain and are ready to die. Let us hold
fast and be faithful, lest the trying hour come on us unexpected. Let
us sing, and sing with the spirit and the understanding: “Nearer, my
God, to thee.” May we find grace to stand in the evil day, and having
done all to stand.




HOW THE CAUSE OF REFORMATION WAS ADVANCED.


With preachers from the farms, shops, stores, law offices, doctors’
offices, with a little learning, and many almost without it, we carried
this cause forward, and in defiance of all opposition have triumphantly
planted it in all directions in this and in many other countries. The
power was not _in the men_ but in the truth of God; the clear and
unquestionable truth, that could be made plain and reliable to all men,
and that, too, with very little learning or talent. The ground taken
was invulnerable, manifestly right. The Bible is from God, divine, and
admitted by all to be right, and there is not a reason in the world for
not taking and going by it. We have struck down all human authorities,
human names, and humanism of every sort, and restored to the people
of this generation to a wonderful degree the divine, the supreme and
absolute authority of the Bible, and are now commanding respect in a
remarkable degree, not as a _new denomination_, but as the people of
God, called out from the world and from Babylon, and planted upon the
Rock of God.

The man that runs against this cause and opposes it is not simply
running against men and opposing them, but against God, and must come
to nothing. The cause is simply right, infallibly right, and nothing
opposed to it is right. In this view we started in it, and have never
had a doubt about its correctness and supreme authority over everything
else in the name of religion. In our incipient movements every member
was a _preacher_, if not _publicly_, _privately_, and every preacher
was at work, as opportunity opened the way, in private, the social
circle, the prayer-meeting, the established and regular meeting on the
Lord’s day for the commemoration of the suffering of Jesus, anywhere
and everywhere, as a sense of propriety dictated on all occasions.
There were additions at almost every meeting, whether for prayer, or on
the Lord’s day, and frequently when there were no meetings. All were
_missionaries_, and missionaries _all the time_. Great numbers were
almost daily added to the church, of both men and women. Indeed, many
of the sectarian priests became obedient to the faith.

We had _discipline_ in the church—order, and the members were looked
after; not only the popular and rich, but the afflicted and the poor.
All were enlisted in the work, and had time to give attention to it.
The evangelists were self-sacrificing men, seeking the salvation of the
people, and preached in private dwellings, school houses, in barns,
mills, groves, anywhere and everywhere that a few people could be
found, who would hear the word of the Lord. The people crowded out to
hear, and, hearing, believed to the salvation of their souls. They were
of one heart and of one soul. The Bible was their book. “Thus saith
the Lord” was their watchword, and a man that would sneer at it would
have been regarded as a skeptic. “It is written” would be heard in the
preaching and conversations. “The chapter and verse” were demanded. It
was not the _novelty_ of the cause that gave it the victory, but the
certainty that it was right—that it was from God and of supreme
authority—that carried it to the hearts of the people. It was not
unsupportable human schemes and devices that gave it power among the
people, but the invulnerable nature of the cause itself. It was not
the polish of classical and plausible men that carried it through the
country, but the manifest authority of God in it.

Jesuits can only excel in being Jesuits; schemers can only excel in
scheming; but “the excellency of the power” that pushed this cause
through this country was not of Jesuits nor schemers, but of God; the
preaching of the cross, the wisdom of God and the power of God. We knew
nothing but Christ and him crucified, and went ahead with our plain and
unvarnished story of Calvary. God was with us.




A PHALANX OF YOUNG MEN.


A grand phalanx of younger men, with fine education, abundant talent,
and as true hearts as ever beat, are rallying to the principles, coming
to the rescue, and have set their seal that “God is true,” and that
“the word of God is not bound.” Ten of these for every one of the old
men falling are making their appearance. They are rousing up all over
the country, and new pens are coming to the rescue. God is with these
young men, dwells in them and will hold them up. They are not mercenary
men, but men of God—men of faith. We could name scores of them. They
are found in all directions. They are reading, working, preaching
the gospel and bringing sinners to the Lord. These are for the old
ground—“The Bible and the Bible alone.” Many of them are now wielding
master pens, and are master speakers. They are becoming masters of
the situation. They will walk through the progressive elements, like
Sampson carrying away the gate-posts, or pulling down the pillars of
the house. While others will become “offended because of the word,”
these will love the word, and all the hallowed principles involved,
more and more, and stand true till the Lord comes. They will hear them
ringing out the old watchwords, “It is written,” “Thus saith the Lord,”
etc., etc. They will find a formidable array of these—a wall of them
that can never be broken down.

They will find that the great masses of the followers of Christ have
never been perverted, have never departed from their principles, and
have not the least idea of ever doing so, but intend to stand by them
till the last. These are the great stamina of the cause. A few city
people, who read but little, have studied but little, and are governed
by _sound_ and _show_, do not control in these matters, nor a few _rich
men_. The great body of the numbers who are scattered abroad, hear
good gospel preaching, take the papers, read them, and read the Bible,
_decide the course_, tell the story. These are not led away by a few
glittering words, by sound, nor by clerical pretensions. You need not
read to them your dreamy philosophy, metaphysical speculations,
distinctions where there are no differences, prosing through your long
articles of twenty to thirty pages; they will not read all this, nor
will they believe without reading. They are plain and practical people,
and must known what they are doing. These know the gospel and love it.
They know the right way of the Lord and will not walk in any other way.

We work in faith, rest in hope, with the strong and blessed assurance
that this cause will live and go on triumphantly when our part of it
shall be finished. What we are concerned with, is how to do our part,
that may still remain, to the best purpose.




BODIES RESURRECTED, NOT SPIRITS.


There is nothing in the Bible about the _resurrection of souls or
spirits_. The resurrection has to do with _bodies_, not _souls_ nor
_spirits_. It was the body of Jesus that rose from the dead. It was
bodies that came forth after Jesus rose and were seen of many. Mortal
bodies shall be quickened. The resurrection has nothing to do with the
spirit in the way of _raising_ it or making it _alive_. If man becomes
extinct at death there is nothing to raise from the dead. Other beings
might be created, but the words _resurrection_ and _creation_ are not
of the same meaning. The _creation_ of Adam was not the same as
_raising_ Lazarus from the dead. We use the two words, or find them
used in the Bible, _create_ and _resurrection_, to express two distinct
ideas. If man becomes extinct at death there remains no man to raise
from the dead. Other persons might be created, and there would be no
identity to lose, for they would not be _identical_, but _others_. We
need plain Bible truth; the matters of the Bible, and not theories
about the _pre-existence_ of spirits or the transmigration of _souls_.
The plain truth of the Bible will _save us_; idle speculations will
ruin us for this world and the world to come. Let us study and preach
the clear truth of divine revelation and enforce it on our race. It is
the only hope for all nations, kindreds, tongues and peoples of the
earth.




ANOINTING WITH OIL.


Touching the “anointing with oil in the name of the Lord,” we think no
_literal_ “anointing with oil” is enjoined. The _praying for him_, in
the Christian dispensation, answers to the “anointing with oil,” in the
old institution. It is simply a figurative allusion to the anointing,
and not the actual use of oil. The praying for the sick, in the name of
the Lord, _is the anointing_.

The Lord raises sick people up, in numerous instances, without any
miracle. He may do this now, in answer to prayer, when consistent with
his will. It matters nothing that we can not tell _how_ he does it. He
_can do it_. This is enough.




GIVING UP PRINCIPLES.


There is nothing more important for individuals or bodies of people
than clearly defined and well settled principles. To stand the test,
and be of any importance to the world, the principles of an individual
or a body of people, must be correct, and of vital importance. They
should also be clearly defined, well understood, and constantly kept
in view. It is then not only safe, but of the highest importance to
adhere to them with the most determined pertinacity, fixed purpose
and inflexible firmness. When principles are of the character we have
described, it is dangerous to swerve, shrink or depart from them, in
the least degree. Adherence—the most strict, rigid and determined
adherence—to correct, clearly defined and settled principles, of
a vital character, is indispensable to permanence, stability and
happiness. If the principles thus defined are divine, departure from
them is _apostasy_.

We are not speaking of _subtle principles_, requiring the utmost
stretch of intelligence or learning to understand, or even to perceive
them, when clearly set forth. There may he principles of this kind,
correct ones, too, but we think, _never practical_. That which is
practical and vital, is never so subtle as to require the utmost
stretch of intelligence, either to set it forth or understand it. The
Bible has its deep things, profound and wonderful, requiring the utmost
stretch of human intelligence to set them forth, or understand them;
or, it may be, deeper than human intelligence can fully fathom, but
they are not the practical, and if vital in any sense, it is not vital
that we should understand them. If we could not be Christians, serve,
or please our heavenly Father, without understanding all such, it would
certainly put it out of the power of the masses, to be acceptable at
all. We know this is not so.

In precisely the same way, in nature, there are certain things that
we must know, or we can not enjoy the blessings God has in nature for
us. There are certain principles in nature that are _practical_ and
_vital_, and we must know them and act in continual reference to them,
or we will come to inevitable ruin. But they are not subtle, deep and
profound principles, requiring the utmost stretch of intelligence to
set them forth or understand them. These lie upon the surface, are the
first things we come to, and may be easily learned, and understood
sufficiently for all practical purposes. God has wisely arranged, in
both nature and grace, or in the temporal and spiritual kingdoms,
so that what we _must know_ may be easily learned, thus showing his
benevolence in both, and that both have marks of the same Authorship.
In these matters there is no excuse for being misled. In other words,
if any one is misled, he must be an _easy dupe_, a _willing victim_.

In religion, on the part of the man of faith, certain principles
are settled, and not to be opened anew, and investigated from the
foundation, every time any new phase may appear. Certain other matters
are so self-evident, that they need only to be well stated to satisfy
any ordinary mind. These are the matters that move the world, and
not the abstruse and subtle things. They are the matters that carry
conviction to the mind, settle the understanding, and leave it in a
state of satisfaction and rest. They call out the response, almost
involuntarily, _that is so_. It does not have to be proved again.

As an illustration:—In a union meeting in which we participated, many
years ago, and after the discussions had continued eight days and
nights, in which some ten parties participated, on the last evening of
the meeting, a gentleman rose and inquired if he might speak, at the
same time explaining that he was a sceptic. The chairman said that it
was no church meeting, and if he intended speaking to the point before
the meeting, he should be heard. Several expressed a desire to hear
him, and no one objected. He said he only intended to say a few words.
Pointing to those of us who contended for union on the Bible, he said:
“If the Bible is true, these men are right, for they insist on your
taking _the Bible and going by it_. If the Bible is not true, _I am
right_, and there is no show at all for the balance of you.” That is a
case that needs no argument.

Before we belonged to the church, we spent a few days in a worthy
family. The head of the family was a class leader in the M. E. Church,
a kind-hearted and good man. He was zealous, and desired to benefit
us religiously, and made sundry attempts to talk to us. We knew but
little about the matters of which he talked, and really did not desire
to say enough to discover to him how little we did know. But after
further acquaintance we inquired of him as follows: “If a man will take
the Scriptures, read them, believe them, and do what they require,
will he not be a Christian?” With somewhat of an air of surprise, he
replied: “No; he must have something more than that.” This “something
more than that” was the perplexing part. What more could there be than
the Scriptures require? _Then, if there is something more than the
Scriptures require, how did any man find it out?_ And, still further,
what is it? _If it is not required in Scripture, how does any man know
that it is required at all?_ Of course we mean on the human part, or
that which is required _of man_. When we inquire how a man is to obtain
a crop of corn, we do not mean how he is to _make soil_, how he is to
get atmosphere, sunshine, rain, etc., but how he is to perform _his
part_. If the soil has not in it the qualities to produce corn; if the
right state of atmosphere is not given, the sun does not shine, and
the rain does not come, he is not to blame. It is useless to preach
about the properties of the soil, the atmosphere, the warm sunshine,
the rain, etc., in showing a man how to grow corn. On all these matters
a man might preach philosophically, learnedly and correctly, but not
another grain of corn would grow, for all his fine talk. This is not
the _practical_ nor the _human part_. But the man must be instructed
how to put the ground in order, how to plant and cultivate, in showing
him _how_ to obtain a crop of corn, _with_ the divine blessing, but
certainly not _without it_.

_First._ We have long since settled the question about the authority of
the Bible. That is no more an open question, unless we please, for the
sake of argument, to look at it as an open question. We receive what
the Bible says _implicitly_, or because _the Bible says it_.

_Second._ Then it is _the rule_, and there is not a reason in this
world for not taking it and _going by it_. It is the rule, the final,
the absolute authority. It must be received in all things.

_Third._ Then the gospel preached by the apostles—precisely, no more,
no less, no other—must be preached by us. What they preached then or
in their time must be preached now or in our time.

_Fourth._ The gospel preached by the apostles was precisely what the
people were required to believe, in their time, and what they did
believe to the salvation of their souls. This same gospel precisely is
what the people in our time are required to believe, and what they must
believe to the salvation of their souls, or not be saved at all.

_Fifth._ The things commanded to be done in the preaching of the gospel
by the apostles were the things which they did that they might be
saved. The same things precisely which they were commanded to do, and
which they did to be saved, are the things now commanded to be done by
those who believe the gospel, that they may be saved. These things must
be done now for precisely the same purpose as they were then.

_Sixth._ If, with precisely the same faith, the same things are done,
for the same purpose, the same result will follow. No man can give a
reason against this conclusion.

_Seventh._ When persons are turned to the Lord now or have become
christians, the same instructions imparted to the first Christians
should be imparted to them, to show them how to serve God and be
finally saved. If this is not so, then no man can show how we are to be
guided to the everlasting city.

We give these as a few of the clear principles from which we can
not turn away without apostasy and utter ruin. These are vital and
fundamental matters, and no man can infringe on them or treat them with
indifference without being held in distrust. No man will turn round
and repudiate all of them at once, but those who turn away will depart
little by little, introducing a little _new_, leaving a little out, and
encroaching on these principles, first in this and then in that. Such
men will flounder and think themselves abused if we do not think they
are perfectly _sound_. But there are some things we _can not think_.
We can not think white is black, or that black is white. We can not
believe without evidence. If men desire us to think they are sound they
must give us the evidence to prove it and we will rejoice to believe
it. They can easily do this if they are sound.




MY CHURCH.


We never say _my church_. There is no being on earth who has a right
to say _my church_. The Lord says, Matt. xvi. 18: “On this rock will I
build my church.” He has a right to say “my church.” He gave himself
for the church. The church belongs to him. He sanctified and cleansed
it. This church, in Scripture, is frequently styled simply “the
church,” and in our conversation about it, in nine cases out of ten,
we can be understood sufficiently explicitly, if we say “the church.”
We read of “the church in Jerusalem,” “the church in Corinth,” “the
church in Rome,” “the church in Ephesus,” etc. We may say “the church
in Cincinnati,” “the church in Covington,” “the church in Louisville,”
“the church in Indianapolis,” etc. It is called in Scripture “the
body,” “the body of Christ,” “the church of God,” “the church of the
living God,” “the kingdom of God,” “the kingdom of heaven,” “the
kingdom of God’s dear Son,” etc. These latter designations refer to
“the whole family” in the aggregate. This body, or building, or temple,
is the one of which Solomon’s temple was only a type. According to
Scripture, _there is no other church but this_. The Spirit of God is
in this. The life of Christ is in it. God dwells in it. In it is life.
Out of it there is no life. It does not belong to the members, but
they _belong to it_. It does not _belong to the preachers_, but _the
preachers belong to it_.

We repeat, there is no other church but this according to Scripture.
This church originated in Jerusalem more than eighteen hundred years
ago. It was established in about one week after our Lord ascended into
heaven. The King was coronated and crowned Lord of all. The great High
Priest had entered the true holy place, not with the blood of slain
beasts, but with his own blood, to make one offering in the end of the
ages to purge us forever from our sins. The Spirit of God descended,
inspired the apostles, and the church was established. That is the
true church, according to Scripture, and there is no other church
that has one particle of divine authority in it. The Romish Church
was born hundreds of years too late. There is not a trace of a Pope
in Scripture, except in prophecy, referring to him as the man of sin
and son of perdition, nor in any other writing for centuries after
the founding of the true church. Nor is there a reference to a Roman
Catholic. There really was not one in the world, much less a Romish
Church. For the first three centuries there was no church but one, “the
church of the living God,” in existence. All others have come into
existence since then, and have not one spark of authority.

Does the reader say, “You are not in that church yourself?” We are not
discussing that question; but if we are not in it the loss will be as
great to us as to any one else not in it.

Speaking of this church, or building, Paul says: “I, as a wise
master-builder, have laid the foundation, and other foundation can no
man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.” No man of any
intelligence thinks there is but one kingdom of God, or but one body of
Christ. If we are in that we are in Christ, in the Father and in the
Son. To be out of the one body, or one kingdom, is to be out of Christ,
out of the Father and of the Son. There is no union with the Father and
with the Son, only in the body or in the kingdom.

We have no time to pursue this matter at present, but can easily,
when we have time, amplify and explain to any extent, showing that
the principles now only briefly sketched, pervade the Scriptures
throughout. It means something to be in the kingdom of God, as it does
to be “in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit,” “in Christ,” “in the Father and the Son.” It is to be in a
state of justification, or acceptance with God.




THE BIBLE AND BIBLE MEN.


We have identified our fortune—_our all_—for this world and that
which is to come, for time and eternity, with the Bible. It is the only
revelation from God, the only guide for a sinful world. Christ, who is
the only Light of the world, is seen and apprehended through the Bible,
and in no other way. All claims to revelation, separate from the Bible,
are mere empty pretences, idle and unfounded delusions and impostures,
deserving to be exposed and banished from the earth. They, as a general
thing, are wicked and malicious inventions, aimed to subvert and
thwart the merciful and benevolent purposes of the Bible. The Bible
is the only book from God; the only book that can be defended; the
only book upon which all the pure and holy can unite. Those who adhere
to the Bible, are happy while they live, and happy in death. It is
emphatically _the book_ for man. We are for it, now and forever, and
against all that is against it, or subversive of it, either directly or
indirectly. We are for no half way work, no compromise nor equivocal
ground. Let every man be for the Bible, or against it; on the Lord’s
side, or against him; for christianity, or nothing; for heaven, or
hell. We want no man who stands in doubt. If a man can not define his
position, so that all can tell which side he is on, we have no use for
him. We count no man whose position is doubtful. All men whose position
is doubtful, are really on the enemy’s side, and would surrender any
post we have, if the opportunity would offer. We are not to be gulled
by these, nor induced to depend on them. We would greatly prefer that
they would stand where they belong, so that all would know where to
find them.

We have identified ourself with Bible men. Their cause is our cause,
and their God is our God. Their work is our work. With them we are
enlisted in a mighty effort to circulate the Bible as far among the
nations of the earth as possible. We are proud to stand among the men
of the Bible, to be enrolled with them, and in the enjoyment of their
fellowship. The prospect before these is brighter now than ever before;
their work is going on more triumphantly, and success is more certain,
than at any former time.




BAPTISM OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.


Since this practice of praying for the baptism of the Spirit is
continued with such pertinacity, we have concluded to make a few
remarks upon it. For the sake of making our remarks the more easily
apprehended, we will arrange them numerically, as follows:

_First._ The baptism of the Holy Spirit was a miracle. It does not
exist in our day, for miracles are not done now, not designed to be,
nor of any use if done. Miracles can not be done but by the will of
God, nor can they be suspended, but by his will. He did them when they
were needed, and suspended them when they were not needed. No man
can allege that miracles ought to have been continued in the church,
without alleging that the all-wise God ought to have done what he has
not done. This is absurd.

_Second._ The baptism of the Spirit was _seen_. Nothing of the kind
occurs now that is _seen_. Therefore, there is now no baptism of the
Spirit.

_Third._ The baptism of the Spirit was _heard_. Nothing of this kind is
heard now. Therefore, there is no baptism of the Holy Spirit now.

_Fourth._ Cloven, or divided tongues, like as of fire, sat upon those
baptized with the Spirit. Nothing of this kind sat upon those claiming
to have been baptized with the Holy Spirit now. Therefore, none have
been baptized with the Holy Spirit in our day.

_Fifth._ Those baptized with the Holy Spirit, spoke with tongues. None
claiming to be baptized with the Holy Spirit now, speak with tongues.
Therefore, none now are baptized with the Holy Spirit.

_Sixth._ Those baptized with the Holy Spirit prophesied. None claiming
to be baptized with the Holy Spirit now prophesy. Therefore, none are
baptized with the Holy Spirit, now.

_Seventh._ It is wrong to pray for the baptism of the Holy Spirit,
because it is a gift that does not belong to us. Simon, the sorcerer,
asked for a gift that did not belong to him, on account of which
the Apostle said, “Thou art in the gall of bitterness and bond of
iniquity,” and instructed him to “pray God, if perhaps the thought of
his heart might be forgiven him.”

_Eighth._ It is wrong to claim to have the baptism of the Spirit,
because the claim is as false and delusive, as to claim to be an
Apostle. It is as shallow, empty and unfounded as the claims of Mormons.




SMALL IMPROPRIETIES AND ANNOYANCES.


To pour the wine, or divide it into several cups, before thanks, at the
Lord’s table. We thank the Lord for the _cup_, and not _cups_. Thanks
should invariably be given for the _one cup_, while the wine is in the
one cup.

For some one to start and push his way out through the assembly while
an invitation is pending. This is a most manifest impoliteness and
disorder.

For some one that has eat about three dinners at once, to doze and nod
in time of preaching, and in the midst of the exhortation, just when
the preacher is trying to make an impression, to stretch his limbs,
gape and crowd up to the pulpit, and get a drink to extinguish the
fires burning within him. This is ridiculous.

To see some great strapping saphead get up in the middle of a
discourse, and go stamping out, thus interrupting the whole audience.
If these could _see themselves as others see them_, they would be very
clear of showing themselves, as they frequently do.

To see a beautiful young lady sit in time of preaching, and then
stand in time of an invitation, with her mouth spread and a broad and
supercilious grin upon her face.

To see some fellow draw his watch and snap it at the preacher, as he
shuts down the case, as much as to say, “I consider it is time you
would stop.”

To see a lady sit and play with her infant, in time of preaching, laugh
at its little pranks, and try to induce others around her also to laugh
at them.

To see a lady get into a quarrel with her babe, in time of preaching;
slap it, jerk it, hold it, and thus keep it squalling for about half an
hour. If the preacher can keep the thread of his discourse, in a case
of that kind, he is a pretty good preacher.

To have some man standing near the preacher, in time of prayer, chewing
an enormous quid of tobacco, and about once in half a minute, hear a
large spoonful of the filthy spittle splash upon the floor.




ONE IMMERSION.


Certainly not, but one immersion “into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” There is but one immersion commanded
in Scripture; that one is _in water_, and “into the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” Peter said, “Can any man
forbid water that these should not be baptized, who have received
the Holy Spirit as well as we?” Here the _water_ is mentioned as the
element in which they were to be immersed, and they had already been
immersed in the Holy Spirit; and in the next verse we are informed
that “he _commanded them_ to be immersed in the name of the Lord.” The
immersion _in water_, then, is the one commanded, and the only one.

The immersion in Spirit is not commanded; and the command, if it
existed, to be immersed in Spirit could not _be obeyed_. Suppose the
Lord would command any one to be immersed in the Spirit, how would
he obey? No man ever was commanded to be immersed in the Spirit, nor
was any man ever commanded to immerse any one in the Spirit. Man can
not immerse in the Spirit. The immersion in water is commanded, and
is the immersion “into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit,” “into Christ,” “into one body,” the initiatory rite
into the New Institution. Immersion in the Holy Spirit never initiated
any one into any institution or anything. It was never commanded.
No man ever administered it. The Lord was the only administrator of
the baptism of the Spirit. It was a _promise_. It was a miracle. It
imparted miraculous power. It never occurred except on Pentecost, and
at the house of Cornelius. On Pentecost the subjects of it were in
Christ before it occurred, and at the house of Cornelius they were not
in Christ after it occurred till they were immersed in water. In both
instances they spake with tongues and prophesied.

When Paul wrote the letter to the church in Ephesus there remained
but “one immersion,” the one of the last commission, connected with
salvation, the remission of sin, or induction “into the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” This is Paul’s “one
immersion.” It is not “one pouring,” “one sprinkling,” or “_three_
immersions,” but “one immersion.” _Three_ immersions has not one scrap
of authority in the commission or anywhere else. In the same sentence
where the apostle has “one body, one Spirit, one hope, one faith,” he
has “one immersion,” and it would be in no more direct violation of his
language to talk of _three_ bodies, _three_ Spirits, _three_ hopes,
_three_ faiths, than of “_three_ immersions.” There is no method by
which the language can be so tortured as to get _three_ immersions
out of the words, “immersing them into the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” Such a thing was never thought of
till the dispute about the Trinity sprung up. This dispute originated
it. There is not a trace of trine immersion till more than a hundred
years after the apostles were gone; till the shallow nonsense of infant
sin, infant regeneration, infant immersion and infant damnation were
introduced. Here, and not in the Bible, the friends of trine immersion
go to find it, and here they find it among those who taught that
infants were _guilty_ of original sin and liable to eternal damnation;
that infants must be regenerated; that the stain of Adam’s sin must be
washed away; that this can not be done except in baptism, to prepare
them for heaven. They practiced no infant sprinkling, but infant
immersion, and, in time, trine immersion, or immersed them three times.
We think some of the Greeks do this to the present day.




INNOVATIONS IN THE CHURCH OF CHRIST.


In reading the history of the church, one is overwhelmed to see how
innovations have crept in and eat the vitals out of the church. At
every period of the church, when there was any vitality in it, any
spirituality or devotion to God, there has been a constant effort on
the part of the enemy, through some well-meaning, but worldly minded
professors of religion, to work things into the church, or to work
something out of it, in the nature of the case calculated to corrupt
and destroy it. We must be awake to these wily manœuverings and guard
against them, or they will ruin the great work so well begun and so
successfully carried on in our time. The insidious, wily and stealthy
machinations of the Grecian and Gnostic philosophers, did an immense
work in corrupting the primitive church. Many of these did this, too,
with the best intentions in the world. They thought it would be a
grand acquisition to the Christian religion, an accomplishment and
refinement, to append to it philosophy, and require every preacher
to be a philosopher. These were constantly edging into the pure
religion of Christ their fine philosophical notions, pagan customs and
ceremonies, and destroying the church whenever they did it. On the
other hand, learned Judaizers were foisting Judaism into the church at
every opportunity. Between Judaizers on the one hand, and Gnostic
philosophers on the other, they amalgamated Christianity, Judaism and
Paganism, and made Romanism. It was easy to obtain the idea of infant
membership from Judaism, the idea of image worship from Paganism, and
the idea of one true church from Christianity, and thus incorporate a
system with a membership based in the flesh, making all the infants
members, without any regeneration, under pagan idolatry, in worshipping
images, and at the same time, with the idea that they are the true
church.




THE BIBLE GROUND.


For fifty years, we, as christians, have stood on the Bible alone,
as a rule of faith and practice. Till recently, no difficulty was
experienced in reducing it to practice. For forty years after the
effort was first made in this country, to return to original ground,
to the apostolic faith and practice, and restore the ancient order
of things; submit to the law of the Lord in all things; we found no
difficulty of consequence. But on the other hand we realized our
vantage ground, answered all the cavils of creed-mongers, fought our
way through, built up churches on Christ, set them in order under the
law of God, and thus were happy in the Lord. No people in this country
have ever been as happy and prosperous. All worked well. We silenced
all opposition.

But more recently, subtle schemes are on foot to invent an excuse for
something like the traditions of the elders among the Jews, substituted
for the law of God, the unwritten traditions of Rome, that has assumed
the place of the law of God, or the doctrines and commandments of
men, in our time, embodied in human creeds. One man finds a “law of
conscience,” another “a law of love,” another thinks we are not under
law, but under grace, but does not notice that Paul’s law, that we are
not under, is the law of Moses, and, that Paul’s grace, that we are
under, embraces the “law of Christ;” the “perfect law of liberty,” the
“law of the Spirit of life.” Another man finds a law of expediences,
more extended than the Jewish Talmud, or the unwritten traditions
of Rome. He soon has more opinions than faith, more expedients than
commandments of God, more charity than law or gospel, more love
for the pious unimmersed than for immersed believers, more charity
than hope. His gospel consists largely of tuning-forks, note-books,
hymn-books, choirs, organs, concerts, festivals, church fairs. He is
great on themes not in the Bible; the unwritten word; the traditions
of the fathers. These are dead weights on the body. They are enemies
within, sensual, not having the Spirit. We must meet them with the same
arguments that cut our way through sectarianism forty years ago.

We must rouse the spirit of the glorious pioneer men who fought the
early battles, cleared away sectarian rubbish, built up churches all
over the land and set them in order, and never stop till there is an
end to all the subtleties and sophistries, and all the insidious devices
now subverting “the right way of the Lord” and spreading dissension
among the children of God. We must stop all the loopholes being
invented for the introduction of _humanisms_, and _innovations_ of all
sorts, put away from among us the corrupt, the enemies of the cause,
and the worldly, and inculcate the pure teaching of the New Testament
among all, and live nearer to it than ever.

We met all this twaddle about a printed hymn-book, a meeting-house,
etc., not provided for by divine legislation, before we were in the
Church one year, from sectarians, and answered and exploded it. Now we
have men among us that talk of _progress_, _learning_ and an _advanced
age_, who have _advanced back_, and are trying to build an excuse
of the same matters for human legislation. They want to supply the
deficiency in the law of God by human law. With them there is no church
government in the law of God, and, therefore, we must make one. After
we have governed the churches by the law of God, fifty years, they have
advanced to the discovery that there is no church government in the
law of God. What do they propose? To make a church government. There
is a shorter road than this to sectarianism, and one that will be much
less trouble, and that is, to go back at once to some sect that has
set aside the law of God, and made one of its own, and adopted it.
They have made as good human laws as we can make, and better, for they
are old and experienced hands, and we would be but new and bungling
beginners. The efforts we have seen are mere _abortions_.




THE WORK OF THE DISCIPLES.


Our heart is enlarged and our spirit is stirred within us, when we look
at the great opening before us. The Lord has not raised us up, put into
our hands such immense power, and made us such a great people, without
an object. He has a great work for the Reformers of the nineteenth
century. We, as a people, are set for the defence of the gospel. We
occupy the only ground upon which man can stand and successfully do
battle with unbelievers, with schismatics of every sort, and maintain
the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. We are the only people
who occupy the proper ground for the evangelization and salvation of
the world. We have cut ourselves loose from every thing but Christ.
We present him to the world and defend him, both in his divinity and
humanity, as the ineffably glorious person in whom dwells the fullness
of the Godhead bodily. We believe in him, in all he ever said or did,
in his religion, beginning, middle and ending, and nothing else. We
will defend him and all he ever said and did. We will defend his word,
his doctrine, the whole of it. Our work is not to defend our views, our
doctrines, or ourselves, but to defend our Master and his doctrine. Our
work is pre-eminently the following:

_First._ To convert the world to Christ, put men under him as their
Leader, Savior and everlasting trust, to follow him for evermore.

_Second._ To collect from Babylon—spiritual Babylon—the wandering,
bewildered and confused children of God, bring them back to their one
shepherd, one fold, and unite them in one body under Christ, their only
living head, that their name may be one, that they may be one, as he
and his Father are one.

_Third._ To defend the faith once delivered to the saints, maintain it
and spread it throughout the world.

_Fourth._ To inculcate piety, humanity, works of righteousness—in one
word, implicit submission to Jesus the Lord in all things.

This is our work, and this, the Lord being our helper, _we will do_.
We are pledged to Jesus, the Christ, to do this, for his glory and
our good, and, by the grace of God, we will do it. We are not our
own; we are the Lord’s. The work we are in is not our own; it is the
Lord’s. The Lord our Righteousness is our King. It is his will—his
bidding that we do this work. _He has commanded and the work must be
done._ Brethren, see to it that the armor is in order, that it is on,
properly adjusted, and every man at his post. Keep your eyes upon our
Commander-in-Chief. Whatever he requires do it. No matter where he
calls you to go, go at his bidding. He will bring us off conquerors,
and more than conquerors. Go not in your own strength, nor in your own
name, and rely not upon your own wisdom. Go in the strength, in the
name and wisdom of the Lord. “O, Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that
trusteth in thee!”




NOT TO KEEP COMPANY.

      “But now I have written unto you not to keep company,
    if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
    covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an
    extortioner; with such an one no not to eat.”—_I. Cor. v. 11._

      “Let every man examine himself and so let him eat.”
                                                —_I. Cor. xi. 28._


The passage evidently has reference to common associating—in visits,
ordinary, eating and the like. Such a man should not be in the church
at all, to say nothing about communing. Christians should not visit and
receive visits from such persons, or associate with them, but make them
feel keenly the smart of being thus low and corrupt.

The remark of the apostle, “Let a man examine himself, and so let him
eat,” is misapplied almost invariably every time it is quoted. It
certainly has no reference to examining to determine whether a man is
worthy to commune or not, for he says, “Let a man examine himself, and
_so let him eat_.” The examination was to _precede_ the eating, and not
to decide whether he should eat or not. The matter of trouble among
the Corinthians was not to determine _who_ shall eat, but _how to eat
worthily_. They were not to do this by coming together and eating a
pagan feast, not discerning the Lord’s death and blood, by partaking of
the loaf and wine, as the Lord appointed.

It is not the work of the administrator to tell who are communicants,
when administering, any more than he should tell who should sing, pray,
or give thanks. The communion was delivered to the church, and we are
communicants by virtue of being in the church. If any are walking
disorderly they should be dealt with, and not allowed to continue in
disorder, but forbidden to commune. The whole church should be kept in
order and all worship, not at the Lord’s table only, but in all parts
of the worship. The question is about _who are members of the church_,
and not about _who shall commune_. All the members should commune, all
_christians_, and there should be no others in the church.




EXTENT OF ONE MAN’S INFLUENCE.


Every preacher that becomes secularized, and ceases to employ his
energies in behalf of the poor, of mercy, of righteousness, of God, is
an immense loss to the world. There is no calculating or estimating
the difference in the condition of the world, in the day of judgment,
all growing out of the indolence or indifference of one man, though he
might see that he was effecting but little in his operations. Let any
man of reflection select a preacher of but humble abilities, who was
operating zealously in the great cause of truth only twenty years ago,
and trace the effects which a finite being can clearly see have grown
out of his labors, and he will be astonished to see how different the
present state of society would have been, had he relaxed his energies.
But, let his influence extend twenty years more, and where will be
its boundaries? Let it extend one hundred years and who could compute
it? But all this may be but a drop to the ocean of the vast train of
influences that would all have been lost by one man failing to act
his part. With this before us, is it strange that God should hold him
highly accountable?

But this is not the worst case. Let a man of talent, influence and
energy, fall from his station, and become an apostate and enemy, let
the cause be made to bleed and suffer from his want of reputation,
while he hurls back his javelins with all the malice and fury of the
Prince of the bottomless pit; and then, compute the change made in the
condition of the church and the world? No one, short of the Infinite
Being Himself, can compute the vast number that will be seriously
injured, in one century, by such a miserable being. Who, then, can tell
the difference his conduct can make in the condition of the world, at
the adjudication of all things? Let preachers, then, remember that they
are laborers together, and that no one can be lost without an injury to
all.




PULPITS.


We have, in our own mind, long since repudiated pulpits entirely, as a
useless, and worse than useless appendage. No work done, that we know
of, with the idea of usefulness, more completely misses its aim than
that of erecting pulpits in which for men to stand to preach the gospel
of Christ. We have, for a long time, utterly refused to go into many of
the castles we find around the country. In many houses the preacher is
hoisted high in a pulpit, from twenty to thirty feet from the nearest
person to him, and many of his hearers fifty and sixty feet off. This
is all as irrational as it can he. If there had been a special study
how to defeat the preacher, no better method than this could have been
invented.

In a large house, there should be a platform some fifteen feet square
and sixteen inches high, with a small table, the height of a common
table, for a Bible and hymn book, which the preacher could set in front
of him, if he desire it, or if not, set back against the wall. There
should also be a few chairs on or about the platform for speakers,
where there are several, or for persons hard of hearing. The speaker
can then advance forward near enough to the people to address them
effectively, and they can see him from head to foot. The floor of the
house should rise some twelve inches in twenty feet. If the house is
crowded, persons can then be seated all round the speaker, leaving
him simply room to stand. There should be two brilliant lights back
of him, near the wall, elevated a little above his head, and some ten
feet apart, so as to shine down each side of him into the book before
him. If the speaker desire to stand back near the wall, he can then
do so; or if he prefers, as we certainly do, to stand on the front of
the platform, he can have the privilege, and have room to walk about a
little, which is both a relief to the speaker and audience.

If the house is small, the platform should not be more than ten feet
square and eight inches high.




WHY INFIDELS OPPOSE THE BIBLE.


Neither Joseph Barker, nor any other man on the continent can give one
good reason for his hatred of the Bible, or desire to ridicule it.
Suppose it were all he says of it; superstition or what not; why is he
so enraged at it? What is it that exasperates him so? What is it that
puts such men to so much trouble? We suppose the stories of witches,
ghosts, etc., the signs of the zodiac, the moon, etc., etc., are
superstitions, but they do not trouble us, and we do not think it worth
while to war upon them. Why do not modern sceptics put the Scriptures
down on the same list with these, give them the go-by, and be at no
more trouble about them? Ah, why not? Simply because they can not.
They have within them spirits that can not rest. The Bible is a book
they can not let alone. It will not let them alone. It follows them by
day, and thunders in their ears at night. It is before them when they
rise up and when they lie down. It is before them in public and in
private. It alarms them with the terrible announcement that the dead
shall be raised, that the world shall be judged in righteousness, and
that the Lord shall render to every man according as his work shall
be. It annoys them with terrible threatenings, fearful punishments and
righteous retributions. It follows them with the only impartial history
the world ever had, spreading out alike the good and the bad, and
showing up the entire history of man.

Why do they not let the Bible alone? If it is only a fable, a legend,
or mere fiction, why trouble about it? “_Let it alone!_” says the
sceptic, “how can I let it alone, when it constantly tells me of every
sin I ever committed, describes even the thoughts of my heart, and
exposes every wicked desire I ever had? I can not let a book alone that
describes and publishes me to the world as a sinner.” What of all that,
if you do not believe it? There is the trouble. The apprehension that
_it may be true_, after all, hangs about men. They may rant, ridicule,
defy, scoff and laugh, but the fearful apprehension still rises,
thundering, “_It may be true, after all_.” There is no getting rid of
the fearful apprehensions, the wonderful forebodings, the consciousness
that all scepticism might be a mistake, after all. They know they have
nothing settled, nothing established, no fixed principles, no certain
knowledge. They know that they are acquiring no substantial knowledge.
Their work has not been to settle any thing, to fix any thing. They are
drifting about, floating in an uncertain current, not knowing whither
they are going. With them, all is in doubt, uncertainty, and obscurity.
They are completely unsettled, wandering in the dark, and without a
resting place. They are poor and miserable, blind and naked. They have
no encouragement, no support, and no promise, and nothing to promise
anybody else. Their pursuit is an empty chase, without any promise or
hope. There is not a more vain and empty bubble in this world, than
that pursued by these men. They are working without an object. They
know not what they are aiming at. Their work is not to prove any thing,
to settle any thing, or establish any thing; but to unsettle, confuse
and throw into doubt. What have they done for the world? What do they
propose to do for man? Nothing, only to pull down religion, do away
with the church, and put the Bible out of the world! They appear to
think that the principal thing now required to do, for the happiness of
the world, is to rid it of all religion. But where is the evidence that
they are doing any good? Where have they made the people happy? Where
have they done any good? What good are they now doing? None under the
shining sun.




MIRACLES.


What is a miracle? A miracle is not, as Hume defined it, “something
_contrary to the laws of nature_,” but something above the laws of
nature, or something that the laws of nature, in their legitimate and
ordinary operations, could not produce. For instance, the laws of
nature, in their legitimate and ordinary operations, from parents, can
produce offspring, and bring them to manhood and womanhood. But the
laws of nature, in their legitimate course of operation, never produced
a man and a woman, without parents, or never brought into existence
a man and a woman, at sufficient maturity to care for themselves and
live, without parents. No law of nature, in its legitimate and ordinary
course of operation, brought Adam and Eve into existence, at maturity,
and without parents. In other words, no law or laws of nature, in their
legitimate and ordinary operation, ever began the human race. In the
plainest terms, no law of nature ever produced a human being without
parents. In other words, it is not a miracle for children to come from
parents, but it was a miracle to create the first human pair. All who
admit that the human race ever had a beginning, must admit that it
began by miracle. It is not a miracle for an oak to produce an acorn,
nor for an acorn to produce an oak; but it is a miracle to produce an
oak without an acorn, and equally a miracle to produce an acorn
without an oak. The laws of nature, in the legitimate and ordinary
course of their operation, never produced an acorn without an oak,
or an oak without an acorn. The first acorn, or the first oak, was,
unquestionably, a miracle. The first man was a miracle. The second man,
the Lord from heaven, was a miracle. Isaac, the child of promise, and
the only son of Abraham, as Jesus was the child of promise, and the
only begotten of the Father, was a miracle. To sum all up, and express
it in one sentence, everything,—every species of animal, insect and
vegetable, began by miracle. The laws of nature create nothing, give us
no new species or kind, but simply propagate and perpetuate that which
was given by miracle at first. By the established laws of nature, the
human race have been propagated and perpetuated, but the human race had
its commencement in miracle.

The laws of nature never raised a man from the dead, instantaneously
gave hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, or sight to the blind. No
laws of nature can heal a leper in an instant, multiply “five loaves
and a few small fishes,” till the amount will be sufficient to feed
five thousand persons, leaving “twelve baskets full of fragments,”
or enable men to speak in some fifteen or seventeen languages, never
studied or learned in the ordinary way. A miracle may suspend laws of
nature for the time being, do something above them, or something that
they never perform; but to be a miracle at all, something must be
done above all human art, device or ability, and something which we
know the laws of nature, in their legitimate course, and ordinary
operation, never perform. When anything of this kind occurs, we
know that it could not have taken place without foreign and direct
interposition. This is a miracle; it is above and superior to all human
art or device; above and superior to any thing ever done by the laws of
nature, as well as different from anything they ever do.




“AFFIRMATIVE GOSPEL.”


We heard an illusion to the fanciful idea that some have conceived
of preaching an “affirmative gospel,” or, as some have expressed it,
“preaching the gospel _affirmatively_,” or, as we suppose, to come a
little nearer their idea, merely to preach, maintain and defend the
truth _affirmatively_, and let the _negative_ alone; or still, if
possible, to be more fully understood, to preach _truth_ and not preach
against what is _not truth_; to preach what _is to be done_ and not
what _is not to be done_. Look at the following Psalm I.:

    1. “Happy is the man that walks _not_ in the counsel
        of the ungodly.”
    2. “_Nor_ stands in the way of sinners.”
    3. “_Nor_ sits in the seat of the scornful.”


These three items are _negative_—things that the man whom the Lord
pronounces _happy, does not_. This is not leaving the negative part
out, but inserting it first, and pronounces the man happy that does not
these things.

In contrast, the Psalmist of Israel proceeds to give us the following,
which is affirmative:

    1. “His delight is in the law of the Lord.”
    2. “In his law he meditates day and night.”

The Lord gives the following guarantee to those who do not say the
negative part, but do the affirmative:

“He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither, and
whatever he does shall prosper.”

What an awful contrast with this is the ungodly:

“The ungodly are not so; but are like the chaff which the wind drives
away. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor
sinners in the congregations of the righteous.”

To this the Lord adds the following conclusion:

“The Lord knows the way of the righteous,” or _approves_ it, “but the
way of the ungodly shall perish.”

The negative is to be preached and taught in all that pertains to
preaching and teaching as zealously and faithfully as the affirmative,
and is to be regarded equally as much of divine authority. The first
commandment the Lord ever gave to a human being was negative. It was in
these words: “You may not eat of it.” This was negative—what must not
be done. The Bible abounds with this negative teaching, setting forth
what may not be done. Look at the following list, gathered from I. Cor.
xiii. 4-8, setting forth affirmatively and negatively, or what love
_will and will not_ do. First look at the affirmative side, or what
love will do:

    1. It suffers long.
    2. It is kind.
    3. It rejoices in the truth.
    4. It bears all things.
    5. It believes all things.
    6. It hopes all things.
    7. Endures all things.

This is the affirmative side, or what love _will do_; but the divine
authority does not stop at that, but tells us what love _will not do_.
See the following:

    1. It is not envious.
    2. Vaunts not itself.
    3. Is not puffed up.
    4. Does not behave itself unseemingly.
    5. Seeks not her own.
    6. Is not easily provoked.
    7. Thinks no evil.
    8. Rejoices not in iniquity.
    9. Never fails.

The negative is longer than the affirmative in this enumeration.

The man with his affirmative gospel is like the man with his two oars,
faith and works, to his skiff. He pulled one alone for a time, and run
round and round one way, and then pulled the other, and run round and
round the other way, and then seized both and pulled them at the same
time, when his skiff moved straight ahead beautifully. We must take the
whole of the divine teaching, the affirmative and negative; what we are
to believe, and what we are not to believe; what we are to do, and what
we are not to do. We are to show not only what is truth, but what is
not truth; what is of divine authority, but what is not of divine
authority.

Had some of our affirmative gospel men been in the place of Paul, when
he came to Athens, they would have made no attack on the altar with
the inscription: “TO THE UNKNOWN GOD,” but would have gone on
with their affirmative gospel. Paul was not of that type of preacher,
but brought their view of the unknown God into direct contrast with
the revelation of the true God—the Jehovah. He admits that theirs was
to them an “unknown God,”—“God who made the world, and all things
therein”—“Lord of heaven and earth,” and who “dwells not in temples
made with men’s hands,” and “is not worshipped with men’s hands, as
though he needs anything, seeing that he gives to all life, and breath,
and all things, and has made of one blood all nations of men to dwell
on all the face of the earth, and has determined before the times
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should seek
the Lord, if haply they might feel after him, and find him, though he
be not far from every one of us.”

Not content with this attack on their altar, and the inscription on it,
he proceeds to quote and turn their own poets against them: “Certain
of your own poets have said, ‘For we are also his offspring.’” Hear
him as he proceeds, and see how he wades into their ignorance and
superstition, and, above all, how utterly exclusive he is: “For as much
then, as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the
Godhead is like gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s
device.”

Now for the charitable part of his discourse: “And the times of this
ignorance God winked at; but now commandeth all men everywhere to
repent.” “The times of this ignorance” was before the gospel came, and
the “now,” brought in contrast with it, is since the gospel has come.
Seeing that the light has come, men are inexcusable to be in ignorance.

He proceeds to give a reason for the commandment, “to all men
everywhere to repent,” in the following words: “Because he has
appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in righteousness
by that man whom he has ordained.” But he knew that some man might
call that in question, when he closed up with the following: “Whereof
he has given assurance to all men in that he has raised him from the
dead.” That is, he has given assurance to all men, by the resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead, that he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained. The logic runs thus:
As he raised Christ from the dead, he will judge the world; and as he
will judge the world, all men, everywhere, are commanded to repent, in
view of the judgment.

The inscriptions to the unknown God must be set aside, with all the
doctrines and commandments of men; the traditions of Jewish rabbis
and Romish priests, with all the unauthorized lumber of Protestants,
and the devotees to each and all of them, must be shown that they are
unauthorized, and the man who shuns to do this, only does half work, or
rather, only half does his work, and will be responsible to the great
Shepherd and Bishop of souls.




HOUSEHOLD BAPTISMS.


It is claimed that whole households were baptized, and that these must
have included infants; as, for instance, the following:

1. Lydia and her house. All that is said of Lydia is found in two
verses, Acts xvi. 14, 15, and the passage contains not one word about
an infant, or a child of any sort. It is stated that “she was baptized
and her household.” But it is not stated that she was a married woman,
that she had any children, much less that she had any infants; and,
therefore, there is nothing here about any infant baptism.

2. The next household mentioned is that of the Jailor, Acts xvi. 33.
“And they—Paul and Silas—spoke unto him the word of the Lord, and
to all that were in his house. And he took them the same hour of the
night, and washed their stripes, and was baptized, he and all his
straightway. And when they had brought them into his house, he set meat
before them, and rejoiced, believing in God, with all his house.” Here
are two things stated of these that can not be said of infants. They
spoke unto him—the Jailor—the word of the Lord, and _to all that
were in his house_. The Jailor rejoiced, believing in God with all
his house. Here it is asserted of the household that they rejoiced,
believing in God. The word of the Lord was spoken to them, they
rejoiced and believed in God. This can not be said of infants.

3. The next case of a household, which we shall mention, is that of
Cornelius, Acts xi. 14. Here, however, is conclusive evidence that
there were no infants, for the angel said, “Send men to Joppa, and call
for Simon, whose surname is Peter; who shall tell thee words whereby
thou and all thy house shall be saved.” Infants are not _told words
whereby they are saved_. Those who practice infant baptism do not tell
them words whereby they may be saved, and do not believe they are saved
in or by baptism.

4. There is but one other household mentioned in the New Testament,
in connection with baptism. That is “the household of Stephanas.” I.
Cor. i. 16. In the same letter we find one thing affirmed of this same
household that can not be affirmed of infants. “They have _addicted
themselves_ to the ministry of the saints.” I. Cor. xvi. 15. This is a
thing infants can not do.

There were, then, no infants in these households, and nothing
particularly strange about that. The writer has baptized many
households and never baptized an infant.




KNOWING AND NOT DOING.


“That servant who knew his Lord’s will, and prepared not himself,
neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.”
See Luke xii. 47. From this language there is no escape. If the men of
whom we speak, say, they are not servants, then they will be condemned
for refusing to be his servants. There can be no middle ground, no
neutral ground. “He who is not for us is against us,” says the Lord.
We are not simply to do some benevolent deeds favorable to the Lord,
or to his cause, but we must be on his side, belong to him, be his;
identified with him; one with him, so that his cause is our cause, and
his will is our will. But to the mystery again: How can it be, that a
man can love the Savior, his people and cause, so as to defend them,
give his money to aid them, have confidence in them, and be pleased
with their work; but decide to stand, in relation with their enemies,
in the same state with them, and not in relation with the Lord and with
his people; in the same state with them?

What a fearful thing it is to be _against the Lord_, and to encounter
his terrible sentence: “Shall be beaten with many stripes.” Why should
a man stand in such a condition a single day? We see not how a man
could rest for an hour with such a responsibility on his soul! Why
should any man not be willing? nay, more, why should he not _seek_ to
place himself under the guidance of Him who is so wise that he can not
err, and so good that he will do all things well? What a blessedness
for man, that he can have infallible wisdom to guide him, and almighty
power to save him! How can it be possible for any well disposed man
to stand aloof from the Lord and from his divine arrangement for our
happiness, and trust to his own wisdom and his own strength, when
he could have the wisdom and power of God pledged for his security?
Why not come to the Lord; let his kind hand lead, and his gracious
providence guide in the way of life everlasting.

There were old men, too old to be on the muster roll, and boys too
young, the history informs us, who fought in the battle of Bunker
Hill, in the American Revolution. These received much praise for their
good will to the cause and the service they rendered: but they did not
belong to the army and received _no pay_. In the same way, we fear,
many of these good friends that defend the cause and even pay their
money to support it, will lose their reward, because they have never
_enlisted_. _They do not belong to the army._

Many such men have noble wives striving to serve the Lord, to train
their children in the way of righteousness and bring them to God. These
are dearer to them than life. Can they stand out in the ranks of the
enemy, and see their companions who gave them their hearts and hands in
their better days, struggling to save their precious children, and not
stand by their side, aiding and encouraging them? What a responsibility
there is here! They know their Lord’s will, and _do it not_ and _will
be beaten with many stripes_!

The Lord suffered and died for these. He hung on the ignominious
cross for them, as well as for us all, and poured out his warm
heart’s-blood to cleanse them from sin. All this appeals to them. All
the exhortations of saints, their prayers, songs, tears and solicitudes
appeal to them, by all the tender mercies of God and the infinite
compassion, to come to the Savior and live. If they resist all this,
turn their ear away from it, and, in the midst of all these entreaties,
go down to ruin, what an everlasting source of regret it will be to
look back and see what was done for them, but all in vain! “Turn you,
turn you,” says the prophet, “and live.” “You would not come to me that
you might have life,” says the Lord. “He is not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.” “The Spirit says,
Come, and the bride says, Come, and whoever will, let him take of the
water of life freely.”




THE BIBLE VS. HUMAN CREEDS.


It is admitted on all hands, by all Protestants, that we should receive
nothing more than is contained in the Holy Scriptures.

It is also admitted, that we should receive nothing less than is
contained in the Scriptures.

It is admitted, that the Holy Scriptures must not be altered, but must
be received precisely as God gave them to the world.

It is acknowledged that the Christian Scriptures constitute a “perfect
law of liberty.”

All acknowledge that this perfect law of liberty was given by the
infallible wisdom of God, and by his undeniable authority.

Now, the precise opposite of this is true of every human creed on
earth. For instance, it is admitted—

That we may receive more than is contained in any human creed in the
world.

It is admitted, that we may receive less, or that we are not bound to
receive everything in any one of them.

It is universally admitted that they may be altered and amended.

It is admitted, that no creed but the Bible, constitutes a “perfect law
of liberty,” hence, those who use other creeds are frequently altering
or amending them.

It is admitted, that no creed but the Bible, was given by the
infallible wisdom of God.

These are undeniable truths, admitted by all Protestants, as must be
seen by the most common observer. Now we ask any man in his right mind,
how it can be, that it is _safe_ to receive a creed, not containing
all that a christian is bound to receive, containing also some things
that may be rejected, one that may be altered, one admitted not to be
a “perfect law,” and one not given by the wisdom and authority of God;
and yet _unsafe_, to receive as our only creed that Book, containing
all that a Christian dare receive, no less than he must receive, one
that dare not be altered, that is “the perfect law of liberty,” and was
given by the wisdom and authority of God?




GLORYING IN THE CROSS OF CHRIST.


The Apostle Paul says, “God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of Christ.” Why glory in the cross?—or, why not glory in his
miracles, in his feeding five thousand, his calming the sea, raising
the dead, opening the eyes of the blind, or giving hearing to the
deaf?—or, why not glory in his own resurrection, his ascension,
coronation, and being crowned Lord of all? Because it was not at any of
these points Peter denied him; it was not here that he was condemned;
it was not here that he suffered—that he was put to shame—that he was
mocked, derided and despised. But Paul looks at him when he was on
trial, when Peter denied him, when he was condemned; when he was
delivered into the hands of enemies, despised and degraded; when he was
nailed to the cross, crowned with thorns, and buffeted; when all his
friends had forsaken him; when all the angels had withdrawn, and the
Almighty Father had turned his face away—had forsaken him—and he was
in his blood—in the agonies of death, with the sins of the world upon
him; we say, Paul looked upon him here, and gloried in him. It was not
the cross that he gloried in, literally. The expression is metonymical.
The cross stands for Him who hung upon the cross. “God forbid that I
should glory, save in him who hung upon the cross.” We are not to glory
in men; neither in Paul, Apollos, nor Cephas, but in Christ.




THE PARDONING POWER IS ONLY IN GOD.


In precisely the same way, the appointment in the case of Naaman, in
itself, had no virtue to cure leprosy. If another leper had gone to the
place the next day, and dipped himself, he would not have been healed.
Naaman did not go home praising the waters of Jordan, nor exulting in
his dipping, nor his faith, but he said: “Behold, now I know that there
is no God in all the earth, but in Israel.” II. Kings v. 15. The Lord
purposely selected an appointment that had not in it, in itself, any
curative efficacy, that the man might know the cure came directly from
God, and might believe and put his trust in the God of Israel. The same
is true of the appointment for the Israelites, bitten of the fiery
serpent. The Lord wisely selected something that all men would know had
no efficacy, in itself, to heal the bite of the serpent, that the glory
might be given to God and not to the brazen serpent. It is no question
about whether the Lord _could_ have saved the Israelites in some other
way. No one doubts that he _could_. But the question, in this case, is
simply about what _he did_. The people did not heal themselves. Their
faith did not heal them. Their prayers did not heal them. Their looking
did not heal them. The brazen serpent did not heal them. _God healed
them._ When did he do it? When they obeyed him. Where did he do it? In
his own appointment.

The faith of the army of Joshua did not throw down the walls of
Jericho. There is nothing in faith, in itself, to do a work of this
kind. The marching round Jericho, did not throw down the walls, nor
have any tendency to throw them down, if they had continued to march
round till this time. The blowing of the trumpet did not throw down
the walls. Nor did the shout of the army. God broke down these massive
walls. When did he do it? When they obeyed him. Where did he do it?
In his appointment. The work was just as much of God, as divine and
miraculous, done in this appointment, as if it had been done without
any appointment at all. The appointment was precisely such an one, as
to direct the heart of the people to God, as the author of the victory.
But had they refused to march round the walls, shout and blow the
trumpet, though they might have prayed till now, the Lord would not
have answered them nor saved them. In all these cases, they might
have prayed for saving power till they breathed the last breath, and
no saving power would have come. The saving power was promised, but
promised in certain appointments—not because the Lord _could not_, but
because he _would not_ save in any other way, only as he had appointed.

The same is true of saving men in our time. We have no dispute about
what the Lord _can_ do. The only question we have is about what the
Lord _will_ do. The Lord will do precisely what he has promised, and
no man in the world can produce one particle of evidence that he will
do anything else, to save any man. If the Lord had said, “He that
believeth and prays, and is prayed for, shall be saved,” every one that
prays and is prayed for, would be saved. But such, it is admitted on
all hands, is not the fact. Many pray, and are prayed for, who, it is
admitted, are not saved or pardoned. The Lord’s appointment is, “He
that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved. Repent and be baptized
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. Why tarriest
thou? arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord.” Here is the Lord’s appointment, and he who comes
here, has the promise of the Lord that he shall be saved, or pardoned.
This appointment is like those we have been looking at. It is evident
to all, there is no virtue or merit in faith, in itself, to save a man.
It is equally evident that there is no merit or virtue in repentance,
in itself, to save any one. It must be equally evident to all, that
there can be no virtue, merit, or efficacy in baptism, in itself, to
save or pardon. It is God that pardons. Who does he pardon? Those who
obey him. When does he pardon them? When they obey from the heart, that
form of doctrine delivered to them. “Being _then_ made free from sin,
they have their fruit unto holiness and the end everlasting life.”
Where does he pardon them? In his appointments.




THE ACTION OF BAPTISM.


Referring to the position of the disciples on the action of baptism, a
correspondent says: “That, in regard to the sacrament of baptism, the
whole christian world have been in the dark, from the earliest history
of the church until within three hundred years, and much the greater
part are still behind!” He adds, “Not deceived, be it remembered, about
some things not essential to the ordinance, but _in regard to the very
nature of it_. And what is yet more singular, denominations possessing
much the greater share of learning are most in the dark!” He proceeds,
“Nay, even the christian fathers, who were, some of them, Greeks, and
men of learning, and who certainly should have known something about
their own language, were in serious error upon this very subject!”

All this is said, by our worthy friend, in reference to our position,
that nothing but immersion is baptism. It contains several items, and
to give them all possible conspicuity we notice them separately.

_First._ His first trouble is about the whole christian world being
in the dark, if our position is true. This expression, “the whole
christian world,” must be simmered down a little. We strike out of
it, then, all the christians of the first two centuries, as not in
the dark, for they held and practiced nothing but immersion for
baptism. This is sufficient, if we could say no more. But we add to
this all Baptists of modern times, who have not been in the dark on
this point. No fact is better authenticated than that for the first
thirteen centuries immersion was invariably practiced by all professed
christians, except, after the third century, in cases of extreme
weakness, where they thought immersion could not be endured, they
decided that affusion would do; but these could never hold office in
the church. Even the Episcopalian church, in the time of Mr. Wesley,
almost invariably immersed. Now sum up all these, and then decide how
large the number in the dark, and you will find that the sprinklers are
a mere drop in the bucket.

_Second._ The above shows that they have not possessed much the greater
share of learning, but much the smaller share of learning.

_Third._ The christian fathers, so called, are not to be entered in
that list. They were on the other side, and practiced immersion and
nothing else. The remark of the Cyprian shows that he is defending
something new and in doubt; hence his remark that “it is of equal
validity with the laver of salvation.” There was no doubt about what he
calls “the laver of salvation,” but there was doubt about sprinkling.
The one needed argument and the perversion of the passage in Ezekiel to
support it; the other was universally acknowledged.

We admit that the evidence is abundant “that pouring and sprinkling
were used” from the beginning of the fourth century not only to the
rise of the Anabaptists, but till now; but that pouring and sprinkling
were held in doubt, in general, and utterly repudiated by many,
is equally abundantly proved. The discovery that _baptizo_ means
_immerse_, and nothing else, could not have been made by any of the
fathers, for at that time no one denied that such was its meaning. In
the few instances where sprinkling or pouring was used, it was not on
the ground that _baptizo_ meant pour or sprinkle, but on the ground
that pouring or sprinkling would do in extreme cases of weakness where
they deemed the persons unable to endure immersion. No man can produce
one scrap of authority to show that any man at that early period, or
for many long centuries after, ever attempted to defend pouring or
sprinkling on the ground that _baptizo_ meant pour or sprinkle. Those
who practiced sprinkling or pouring generally in the early ages, did
not think they were doing what the Lord commanded, or what the apostles
practiced, but something else that _would do_. Luther, Calvin, Wesley
and Clarke, admitted that the ancient practice was immersion, but
they thought sprinkling or pouring _would do_. This was the ground of
argument for many long centuries. The idea of trying to prove that any
person was ever sprinkled or poured upon, for baptism, in the time of
the apostles, is a mere modern invention, and the idea that _baptizo_
means sprinkle or pour, is of equal modern date. These are new grounds
altogether, taken by modern men, who have been driven from the old
ground. It will not do in our time to admit—as all the ancients
did—that the apostles immersed—that immersion was the ancient
practice—that _baptizo_ means _immerse_, and nothing else, but that
“this rite has been _changed somewhat_,” and that _something else will
do as well_. This is too barefaced for our time, and the opposition
have changed their ground, and are now trying to make us believe that
their practice is sustained by the meaning of _baptizo_ and the ancient
practice.




SHORTER CATECHISM FOR UNIVERSALIANS.


During our discussion in Decatur, Ill., we presented the following,
substantially, as the “Shorter Catechism” for Universalians to test
their pretences to a belief in the Scriptures:

1. Phil. iii. 18, 19, Paul, speaking of the enemies of the cross of
Christ, says, “Whose end is destruction.” Can a man of sense believe
that the end of a man is destruction, and at the same time believe that
his salvation? The _end_ of a man will certainly be his last state, and
if that is destruction, his end can not be salvation.

2. Mark iii. 29, the Lord says, he who shall blaspheme against the Holy
Spirit, “hath never forgiveness.” Can a man of sense believe that a man
who “hath _never forgiveness_,” shall be saved? To save a man without
forgiveness, would be to save him _in his sins_.

3. John iii. 36, the Lord says, “He that believeth not the Son, shall
not see life, but the wrath of God abideth on him.” Can a man of sense
believe that those who believe not the Son, shall _not see life_, and
yet believe that they shall _see life_?

4. Rev. xxii. 19, the Scriptures say of certain persons, that “God
shall take away their part out of the book of life, and out of the holy
city, and from the things which are written in this book.” Can a man of
sense believe that a man whose “_part is taken out of the book of life,
and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in this
book_,” can be saved?

5. Heb. xii. 15, the Scriptures speak of men “failing of the grace of
God.” Can a man of sense believe that men may “fail of the grace of
God,” and be saved? What! saved without the grace of God?

6. John viii. 21, the Lord said to certain persons, “Ye shall die in
your sins; whither I go ye can not come.” Can a sensible man believe
that men shall “die in their sins,” and that whither the Lord went they
could not come, and still believe that all will be saved? Do not refer
to what the Lord said to his disciples, for he said more than this to
them. He said to his disciples, “Whither I go, thou canst not follow me
now; but thou shalt follow me afterward.” John xiii. 36. This he did
not say to the Jews. But he did say to the Jews, “Ye shalt die in
your sins: whither I go ye can not come.” Is that true? It is. Then
Universalism is not true.

7. Heb. x. 26, 27, Paul says, “If we sin wilfully after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice
for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery
indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.” Can men of sense
believe that a man for whom “there remaineth no more sacrifice for
sins,” but for whom their remains “a certain fearful looking for of
judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries,”
will be saved?

8. John v. 29, the Lord declares that “they who have done evil
shall come forth to the resurrection of damnation.” Can a man of
sense believe that those who have done evil can “come forth to the
resurrection of damnation,” and yet all men be saved?

9. Rev. xx. 13-15, we find an account of the dead standing before
God and being “judged every man according to their works,” and the
declaration is made that “whosoever was not found written in the book
of life, was cast into the lake of fire.” Can a man of sense believe
that the dead shall be raised and judged according to their works, and
the wicked, or those whose names are not written in the book of life,
shall be cast into the lake of fire, and yet all men be saved?

10. Gal. v. 2, Paul testifies to certain men, “Christ shall profit you
nothing.” Can a man of sense believe that those shall be saved whom
Christ shall profit nothing?

11. Heb. vi., Paul declares of certain persons, that it is impossible
to renew them again to repentance. Can a man of sense believe that
those can be saved whom it is impossible to renew again to repentance?

12. Heb. ix. 27, Paul says, “It is appointed unto men once to die,
but after this the judgment.” Can a man of sense believe that “it is
appointed unto men once to die, but _after this the judgment_,” and not
believe that God will judge men after death?

13. Luke xvi. 22, 23, we read of a “certain rich man,” that “the rich
man died, and was buried; and in hell he lifted up his eyes, being in
torments.” Can a man of sense believe that a man after he died and was
buried, was “in torments,” and believe that there are no torments after
death?

14. Matt. xxv., the Lord says of the wicked, “These shall go away
into everlasting punishment; but the righteous into life eternal.” Be
it observed, these righteous are in the life of a christian already,
or before they go into _life eternal_, and the wicked are in all the
hell there is for them in this world already. But here at the time
the righteous enter _eternal life_, the wicked enter _everlasting
punishment_. The same Greek word _aionion_, in the same sentence,
expresses the duration of the _life of the righteous and the punishment
of the wicked_. Can a man of sense believe that the Lord used _aionion_
in a limited sense in one place and an unlimited sense in the other?

15. Luke xiii. 23, we are informed that a man inquired of our Lord,
“Are there few that be saved?” The Lord did not answer his silly
question, but said to him, “Strive to enter in at the straight gate;
for many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in and shall not be able.”
Can a man of sense believe this statement, that they shall not be able
to enter, and still believe that all shall enter? Do not begin to think
of entering the church here now, for we know that all who seek to enter
the church are able.

16. Ez. xiii. 22, the Lord says, “With lies ye have made the heart
of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the
hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, by
promising him life.” Can a man of sense believe that he strengthens
the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising him life, and still believe that he is doing good in
preaching that all men shall have life?

When our Universalist friends get so that they can answer these
questions and explain the difficulties involved clearly and
satisfactorily, the people may become satisfied that they _are not
sceptics_.




POPULAR AMUSEMENTS.

      Remarks upon a communication complaining of the increasing
    prevalence of _revelry_, under the plea of “innocent
    amusements.” Published in the _A. C. Review_, for July, 1860.


We have no doubt that many professors of religion are greatly sinning,
as well as disgracing and dishonoring their profession, in the manner
above described. But there is one trouble in writing or publishing
any thing for that class. They are beyond the reach of writers. They
subscribe for no religious publications, pay for none, and read none.
They read nothing, unless it be some silly love tale, book of fashion,
or mere novel. They can only be reached at all through older, wiser,
and better heads, and then only occasionally, and but slightly. In most
instances, the slightest reference to their inconsistent lives of folly
and vanity, is regarded as a mortal offence. We were threatened, not
long since, with being held _personally responsible_ for alluding to
the mischief done by dancing masters, in a public discourse. It turned
out that one was present, and, as if to publish himself as a live
dancing master, distinguish himself and render himself as notorious as
possible, immediately after the allusion to men of his calling, he cast
his eye around the house, and saw all eyes upon him, when he bounced
from his seat and went stamping out of the house, as if he intended
trying the strength of the floor, every time he set down his foot.
His _profession_ was too sacred to be alluded to without his being
insulted. Some of the people, we learned, called him _Professor_——!
Talk of preaching for such men! of writing to reform them! They would
not hear an angel from heaven, unless he would wink at their dancing.
They would not hear one who would rise from the dead, unless he would
wink at their sin. If they could, they would lead our fair daughters
to ruin, chuckle over the feat achieved, and dance on the graves of
heart-broken fathers and mothers. They are leeches upon society,
sucking the very life’s blood from the veins of better people, who
suffer themselves to be gulled by them, and, at the same time, grinning
like a weasel while cutting the throat of a chicken, and sucking its
blood.

The entire clan of amusement manufacturers, from the poor music
grinder on the street, up to Barnum, are pulling down, discouraging
and destroying the good built up by the hard toiling and struggles of
good people. It is useless to talk of their being gentlemen, polite,
or moral; their work is to pull down, to ruin, to destroy, and to
sink men and women in hell. Their work is against every prayer, every
exhortation and sermon; every Sunday school, church and gospel mission.
We may preach and pray, toil and struggle in tears, with our hearts
aching and bleeding, trying to save men, and so long as we countenance
worthless and silly amusements, we shall not be successful in saving
men. Not only so, but if we allow those who are determined to run their
length in all these amusements, to hang upon us, they will sink us all.




ACTIVITY IN THE MINISTRY.


The preacher’s life should be one of activity and industry, one of
enterprise and diligence. The preacher can not be a _gentleman of
leisure_. This is not his profession. He can not afford an hour or two
every morning in primping, turning himself first this way and then that
before a glass, smoothing down his hair, stroking his mustache and
fitting on his attire. He can not afford another half-hour sucking an
enormous cigar and filling a filthy spittoon, a thing that ought to be
tolerated in no parlor, or genteel society. He should be a man of no
idle habits, such as lounging upon cushions, loafing on the streets, at
the corners, in shops, stores or places of business, or idleness. He
should rise early, unless prevented from getting to rest sufficiently
early, by preaching at night, dress himself out and out for the day
in fifteen minutes, and spend at least five hours in his books. This
should be a regular work, an every day work. Five hours only brings him
to about ten o’clock in the morning, about the proper time to see sick
persons, the poor, or any whom it may be his duty to visit. Three hours
can now be devoted in this way. This brings him to one o’clock. Allow
him two hours to take refreshment and rest himself. Now it is three
o’clock, a good hour for him again to be among the people, where he may
frequently spend two hours profitably.

If the preacher is a man of enterprise, he can have an engagement for
a sermon, a lecture, a meeting for prayer, or something of the kind
almost every night, either in the church, or some place in a short
distance in the community, where he may be waking up some interest
among the people. It is the business of the preacher to seek an
opportunity for something of this kind, and have some work all the time
going on round him, arresting the attention of the people, rousing them
from their slumbers, setting them to thinking and working.

It is useless to stand and preach in one pulpit and wait for the people
to come there, thus depending upon that wholly for saving men. We must
go beyond that, find every nook and corner where a few people can be
collected and preach the word to them, exhort them, persuade them and
plead with them to turn to the Lord. The preacher must make it an every
day work to preach. We must get in the way of preaching from house
to house and from place to place, thus filling the whole land with
the doctrine of the cross. We must be men of activity, perseverance
and zeal, not waiting for “calls,” but penetrating the land from its
center to its circumference. We must go into the field and do the
work of the Lord, and the Lord will open the way and take care of us.
We are anxious to see an army of zealous, powerful and enterprising
young men, willing to go out into the world and convince the world of
their ability and usefulness, by saving men, building up churches and
extending the cause. In this way, they will soon make an opening for
themselves and secure a permanent field of operation. How much more
noble and manly this, than looking round for a rich church, raised up
to hand by the labors of other men, where a young man can sit down with
a fat salary and merely live upon the labors of those who have gone
before him.




SUMMARY OF ARGUMENTS ON THE ACTION OF BAPTISM.


It is a fact that our Lord was baptized of John _in_ Jordan. Is it then
more probable that he was sprinkled of John _in_ Jordan, than that he
was immersed of John _in_ Jordan?

It is a fact that after the Lord was baptized “he went up straightway
_out of the water_.” Is it more probable that “he went up straightway
out of the water,” in going from sprinkling, than from immersion?

It is a fact that the people were baptized of John in the river of
Jordan. Is it more probable that they were sprinkled of John, in the
river of Jordan, than that they were immersed in the river of Jordan?

It is a fact that “John was baptizing in Enon, near Salim, because
there was much water there.” Is it more probable that he sprinkled in a
place, because there was _much water_ there, than that he immersed in a
place because there was _much water_ there?

It is a fact that Philip and the eunuch, both went down into the water,
and he baptized him. Is it more probable that they both went down into
the water to sprinkle, than that they both went down into the water to
immerse?

It is a fact, mentioned by Paul, as a result of baptizing, that the
_body is washed_. Is it more probable that the _body is washed_ in
sprinkling, than that the body is washed in immersing?

It is a fact, stated by Paul, that “we are _buried with him in
baptism_.” Is it more probable that we are buried with him in
sprinkling, than that we are buried with him in immersion?

It is a fact, stated by Paul, that we are _buried with him by baptism_.
Is it more probable that we are buried with him by sprinkling, than
that we are buried with him by immersion?

We have now presented eight questions on the probabilities of the case.
Now for the possibilities of the case:

It is a fact that the Lord was baptized in _Jordan_, and it is a fact
that he went up straightway out of the _water_. This shows that when he
was _in Jordan_, he _was in the water_, or he could not have gone “_out
of the water_.” As a question of fact and possibility, could the Lord
have been _sprinkled in the water_?

It is a fact, stated by Paul, that in baptizing, or, as a result of
it, the “body is washed.” As a question of possibility, can the body
be washed, or, as a question of fact, is the body washed at all, when
sprinkling is performed in the usual way?

It is a fact, stated by the Apostles, that “we are buried with him
in baptism.” As a question of fact, is this done in sprinkling? As a
question of possibility, _can persons be buried in sprinkling_?

It is a fact, stated in Scripture, that “we are buried with him by
baptism.” As a question of fact, are persons buried by sprinkling? As a
question of possibility, _can persons be buried by sprinkling_?




“A MIGHTY GOOD FOUNDATION.”


Some years ago, our Bro. Burnet resided some eight miles in the
country. We were in Mt. Healthy, a short distance from his residence,
and took an omnibus for the city. In a few minutes the omnibus stopped
in front of the residence of Bro. Burnet, with two respectable looking
gentlemen in it, one sitting facing the residence and the other with
his back towards it. The one facing the residence said, “Here is where
Mr. Burnet resides.” The other replied, “Who is he?” “A celebrated
Campbellite preacher,” was the answer. “What do the Campbellites
hold?” inquired the other. “That the Bible is their foundation—their
only creed,” was the reply. “They have a mighty good foundation—a
very good creed,” answered the other. “Yes,” was the reply; and here
the conversation ended. The same must be the response of every honest
believer in the Bible. It is certainly a good foundation—a good creed.
If there is any good doctrine, or _teaching_, as the word doctrine
means, in the world, it is in the Bible, and the man who takes the
Bible, finds it in his book. If there is any sure foundation for all
our hopes beyond this life, it is found in the Bible. If there is any
sure lamp to the path of weary and dying pilgrims in this world, it is
the Bible. All other books are nothing compared with the Bible. It is
_the book_ of all books, _the authority_ of all authorities, the only
sure and infallible guide from this world of sin to the land of rest.




A HARD QUESTION FOR PREACHERS.


The Lord said once to a preacher, “Simon, lovest thou me more than
these?” This question has been variously expounded. It has had at least
the following three interpretations given to it:

    1. “Lovest thou me more than these other disciples love me?”
    2. “Lovest thou me more than thou lovest these other disciples?”
    3. “Lovest thou me more than thou lovest these fisheries?”

1. The Archbishop of Cincinnati had the honor—if it be any—of giving
the people the first of these, in the debate with Mr. Campbell. He
thinks the Lord meant, “Simon, lovest thou me more than these other
disciples love me?” He thinks Peter did love his Lord more than
the other disciples did, and this is one of his mighty arguments
to prove that Peter was the first Pope. But how Peter could answer
such a question as that, unless, indeed, he was already the Pope,
and _infallible_, we can not conceive. Certainly the Lord did not
expect Peter to know whether he loved his Master better than the
other disciples loved him, unless he was infallible. The Lord himself
could have answered that question, but certainly no man could. Such a
question was not only, in the very nature of the case, one that no man
could answer, but one that could have no practical bearing nor use.
Not only so, but the answer of the Lord was inappropriate, if he had
intended Peter to be Pope. He commanded him, “Feed my sheep.” This was
the last thing he would have commanded him if he had intended him to be
Pope. In that case he would have commanded him, “_Fleece_ my sheep,”
and not “_feed_ my sheep.” The business of Popes has ever been to
_fleece_ the sheep, and not to _feed_ them.

2. The question, “Lovest thou me more than thou lovest these other
disciples?” though Peter might have been able to answer it, would
certainly have been one of but little importance. Not only so, but the
language is scarcely capable of this import, and, therefore, it is not
probable that such was the intention of it.

3. The sum of the question was, “Lovest thou me more than these
fisheries?” Or, to express it more fully and liberally, “Lovest thou me
more than thou lovest these fisheries?” The state of the case was, that
the Lord had _called them to be preachers_. They had from the beginning
been under a mistaken notion. Their idea was, that Jesus was to be a
king in an earthly kingdom. This, they supposed, would all take place
in his lifetime, on this earth. It never entered into their minds
that Jesus would die before his reign commenced. It specially never
entered into their minds that he would die by crucifixion. When he was
crucified and actually dead, they thought he was defeated, that his
enemies had triumphed, that all was lost and their mission at an end.
In this view, Simon Peter said, “I go a fishing.” Another disciple
replied, “I go along.” This was utterly giving all up for lost. Poor
men; like most preachers, who quit their proper work of preaching the
gospel, and turn aside to some secular avocation, they did not prosper.
“_They toiled all night and caught nothing._” What a caution to
preachers who turn aside from their work! The Lord appears to them and
inquires of them, “Children, have you any meat?” They reply, “We have
none.” He commands them, “Cast your net on the right side of the ship.”
They cast the net and take the most astonishing draught of fish they
ever saw. He caused their business to prosper beyond anything they had
ever experienced. Their prospects in this avocation were now brighter
than ever before. They are now in the midst of an excitement of
prosperity, intensely engaged with their nets and fish. Every thing is
purposely made as attractive and fascinating as it can be. While it is
all before their eyes, in its most exciting, fascinating and attractive
form, the Lord tries them, puts them to the test: “Lovest thou me more
than these?” probably at the same moment, pointing his finger to the
nets and fish. Peter replied, “Lord thou knowest that I love thee.” The
Lord commands, “Feed my sheep.” That is, “If you love me more than
these fisheries,” and are willing to forsake these and do my work,
“Feed my sheep.” This question, “Lovest thou me more than these?” is
one of so much importance that it is repeated three times over, and the
Lord says to them, “I will make you fishers of men.” This remark he had
made to them when he first called them from their fisheries. After this
last charge, “Feed my sheep,” “Feed my lambs,” we have no account of
their ever fishing any more.

We find that there are many preachers in our time to whom the Lord
puts the question, “Lovest thou me more than these?” Not, however
these _fisheries_, but these _lands_, cattle, horses, mules, bank
stocks, railroad stocks, houses, barns, mills, shops, stores, offices,
politics, wives, children, fathers or mothers. He is very exacting and
speaks very decidedly. “If you love these more than me, _you can not
be my disciples_.” This is most fearful language. What is the test?
The test is simply this, if we love the Lord more than these, we will
follow him and do his work. If we love the Lord less than these, we
will forsake the Lord’s work and follow these. This is a matter that
preaching brethren ought to put to their consciences. Can men who have
the ability to preach Christ, who have tried it and know they can
succeed, and whom the Lord has blessed in their efforts, turn from this
great work to the pursuits of the world, at will, with impunity? We
do not believe they can. It is a fearful thing for them to do so. We
know men of great ability—men who can shake up society from its center
to its circumference, if they will try, whose talents are measurably
buried, or what is the same thing, devoted to the world. These will
certainly give a most strict account.




MAN’S ACCOUNTABILITY.


Every sane man _can_ and _does believe_ and _decide_ that _he will do
this_, and that _he will not do that_, every day of his life. Hence our
Lord, when he wept over Jerusalem, cried, “O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! how
oft would I have gathered your children as a hen gathers her brood,
but _ye would not_.” In this view of the subject, the man of God could
say, “_Choose_ ye this day whom ye will serve.” In the same spirit, the
Lord says, “If any man _will_ come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross daily and follow me.” To the same amount, the apostle
Paul says, “To whomsoever _you yield yourselves_ servants to obey,
his servants ye are.” In the same Spirit, the New Testament closes,
saying, “Whoever _will_, let him come.” This justifies the Lord in
saying, “He is not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance.” This all being so, the Lord, in referring to the
last judgment, refers to the wickedness of man, as the ground of their
condemnation. He says, _they who have done evil_, shall come forth to
the resurrection of damnation. They who _do his commandments_, shall
enter by the gates into the city, and have a right to the tree of life.
The Lord says, “Because I have called and ye refused; I have stretched
out my hand and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear cometh; when your fear cometh as
desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when distress
and anguish cometh upon you. Then shall they call upon me, but I will
not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for
that they hated knowledge, and did not _choose_ the fear of the Lord.
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled
with their own devices. For the turning away of the simple shall slay
them. But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.” Prov. i. 24-33. This, my friends, is the
wisdom of God. It will stand when all human reasoning will go for
nothing.




THE NEW AND THE OLD.


We do not desire to prevent discussion and investigation, or to deprive
brethren of great inventive genius from exercising their extraordinary
powers, nor to deprive men of the pleasure of making discoveries; but
we are not favorable to allowing every man the privilege of taking
out a patent right for everything that may be new _to him_; because
it may not only be old with others, but _useless_, or even an old
and oft exploded error. What we need now is, not so much men to make
discoveries and invent something _new_, as men to push the _old_, the
well-tried, and that which is known to be valuable. We do not desire,
on the one hand, to be everlastingly hearing some new thing, nor, on
the other hand, prohibited from hearing any thing new. We do not desire
to be ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth, nor to be never learning; but to have our eyes open to anything
profitable, that may be advanced, and continue in the faithful practice
of what we know. But the main work is to push the truth through the
world which we already have. Nothing is more sickening and disgusting,
than for some mere boys, who have hardly read a half-dozen volumes, to
start out under a pretence of discovering _new_ truth, “going on to
perfection,” explaining the inner and outer man, the inner light, inner
consciousness, conscience, the will, new modes of revelation, the
manner of the Spirit’s work, etc., etc. We have had a perfect surfeit
of all this kind of thing.

       *       *       *       *       *

We do not need proud and vain young men to invent something new and
glorify themselves, but humble and devoted young men, who will be
content to “preach the word,” “contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the saints,” and persevere in pushing the gospel through
the world. We have no faith in these young _sap heads_ who are trying
to render themselves famous by pointing out to the world the errors of
Alexander Campbell. It is true that it is not absolutely impossible
that even a very young man should discover some important new truth, or
an old one, that had, for a time, been neglected and covered up, but it
is not at all probable; and certain it is, that it is not the province
of young men to spend a large share of their time in trying to present
something new. We claim not to have comprehended all truth, so as to
render it impossible for any thing more to be discovered; but the main
work is to impress the truth we have upon the rising generation, and
bring as many as possible under its influence. We want humble, working,
and pious men, to spread the principles of the gospel through the world.




“MY KINGDOM IS NOT OF THIS WORLD.”


No people can or ought to prosper that will not respect the wisdom of
God as set forth in both the teaching and example of our Lord and his
apostles. We can not make ourselves, as a great, rapidly increasing and
prospering body, an exception to this rule. If we desire and intend
to prosper in the great and good work of uniting saints, building up
the church and saving men, we must confine ourselves strictly to the
gospel—to the things of the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus
Christ—determined to know nothing but Christ and him crucified—to
glory in nothing but the cross of Christ. Our mission, as a religious
body, as a christian ministry, and as christian writers, is not of this
world. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds. “We wrestle not against flesh
and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against the
rulers of the darkness of this world, against wicked spirits in the
heavenly regions.” Our King commanded one of his men, when he drew a
sword, and commencing battle with it, struck off the ear of the servant
Malchus, to _put up the sword_, adding that they who take the sword
_shall perish by the sword_. The apostle Paul fits out the christian
soldier and equips him for his work. The following are the habiliments
for the warfare: The loins are to be girt about with _truth_, the
breast-plate of _righteousness_ is to be put on, the feet are to be
shod with a _preparation of the gospel_. The shield of _faith_ is to be
taken, the helmet of _salvation_ and the sword of the _Spirit_, which
is the _word of God_. Here is the christian armor—our preparation
for war. There is nothing carnal about it—no preparation to war
against flesh and blood. We must hold fast to this armor—the heavenly
armor—and use it with skill, resorting to no other, and we shall see
the tall sons of men in thousands fall before us and join the army.




POLICY IN PREACHING.


Public men must be prudent, judicious and noble in their bearing,
presenting the truth in the love of it. Men must not miscalculate their
influence, their power, and time for presenting things. Preachers
must know _when_ and _where_ things are to be said and done. Many men
drive their audiences away, by their repulsive course, and think it
the opposition of the people to the truth, that drives them away. We
speak plainly on all the great issues between ourselves and the parties
around us, in the pulpit, and yet seldom give offense, and never fail
to have a good hearing from the parties around us, and seldom fail to
gain some of them to the truth. And, what is better, when they are
gained, _they are gained indeed_—not by persuading them that there
is but little difference between us, but by making them both _see and
feel_ the difference, _and convincing them of the truth_. Any thing
short of this is of no account.

Some men are for using a little Jesuitism. They would preach on
common ground matters till they draw their hearers on and gain their
attention. But we have nothing to do with any such policy. There is
a vast amount of the most important and plain truth in the gospel,
that the parties around us know comparatively nothing about, and
consequently have no objection to it. They will hear it and be pleased
with it. The main matter is to develop fully and largely, in the
simplest style possible, with heart and solicitude for the happiness
and salvation of the people, the whole scheme of redemption from the
beginning, as if the people knew nothing at all about it. This must
be done with power, and not in a prosing, indifferent and unfeeling
manner. It will find way to honest hearts, in almost any community in
this country.




THE CAUSE OF CHRIST IS ABOVE PARTISAN POLITICS.


We have done a noble work, and that work is not to be foiled, defeated
and destroyed by men who know not our Master and love not his cause.
We have been raised up by the Lord to be a mighty community. God has a
mission for us, a great mission, and we are not to be defeated in it.
That mission must be done. The Lord has put into our hands facilities
for doing this great work, and he requires it at our hands. That work
is simply to restore his own pure religion to the people of this
generation, and build up the church as it was at the beginning. We
have ascertained that the Lord laid but one foundation, reared but one
building upon it, had but one temple, one body, one family, but one
church. This one body had but one head, but one leader, and we are to
keep our eye on him, follow him, love him and serve him for ever. We
can not turn aside to the strifes of the world, from our legitimate
work. We have preached union among the children of God, struggled
for it and prayed for it long and ardently, and we now appreciate
its value more than ever, since we feel its power and influence in
time of trouble. An influence that can bind us _in one body_, in _one
fellowship_, in the midst of such commotions and excitements, is not of
this world. It is not an earthly influence, but above the earth. It is
from God. We know each other as the children of God, the disciples of
Christ, as christians, and not as political partisans. We know not a
man because he belongs to this political party, or that; not because he
lives on the one side of a geographical line, or the other; not because
he holds to this political creed or that; but we know him because he is
a child of God, an heir of the same inheritance, and redeemed by the
same blood of the Covenant. The bond that binds us together is not an
earthly bond, and it is not limited by time. It is the _love_ of God.
It is not limited to this world, but shall last co-existent with the
years of God. It shall live and be fresh and vigorous when all worldly
schemes and policies and their advocates, shall be forgotten. Those who
enjoy it shall also live beyond all the turmoil of political strife,
beyond all the struggles and trials that beset our faith in this life.
May we not live in vain, but do good in our day and generation. Mercy
and peace upon the Israel of God.




“COME OUT OF BABYLON.”


The Lord calls to his people wherever they may be scattered in Babylon,
saying, “Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that you receive not of her plagues.” We live emphatically
in the time for extending this cry, and we must extend it. The warning
to those in danger, is a most righteous and benevolent warning, and
those who hear it shall praise God forever, that it has reached their
hearts, and induced them to abandon the devoted city. There is no
escape for one soul, only by fleeing to the Lord, and that can only be
done by abandoning all human laws, and adhering to the law of the Lord.
“See that ye refuse not him that speaketh; for if they escaped not who
refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we
turn away from him that speaketh from heaven; whose voice then shook
the earth; but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake
not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once more,
signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things
that are made, that those things that can not be shaken, may remain.
Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which can not be moved, let us have
grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear.” Thanks to Heaven, there is a kingdom that can not be moved.
“Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven; but, _he that doeth the will_ of my Father who is
in heaven.” “He,” says the Lord, “who hears these sayings of mine, and
does them, I will liken him to a wise man.” “He who hears these sayings
of mine, and does them not, I will liken him to a foolish man.” Our
work is to try and call the attention of all nations to the sayings of
our Lord, and induce them to hear him. They must hear him, or be lost
for ever.

Come out of Babylon, O you saints of the Lord, wherever you are, and
commit yourselves to the hands of the Lord. “Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that you receive
not of her plagues.” Hear the holy John describe her destruction: “A
mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea, saying, Thus with violence shall that great city, Babylon, be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Rejoice over her, thou
heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God hath avenged you
on her.” “After these things, I heard a great voice of much people in
heaven, saying, Alleluia: Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power,
unto the Lord, our God; for true and righteous are his judgments; for
he hath judged the great whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.
And again, they said, Alleluia, and her smoke rose up forever and ever.
And the four and twenty elders, and the four living creatures fell down
and worshipped him that sat upon the throne, saying, Amen; Alleluia!
And a voice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great. And I heard as it
were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia; for the Lord
God omnipotent reigneth. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor
to him, for the marriage of the Lamb has come and his wife hath made
herself ready.”

Wonderful things are before us, and let us be in readiness for their
approach. When Paul was leaving the disciples, expecting to meet them
no more in the flesh, he said, “I commend you to God and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build you up and give you an inheritance
among all them that are sanctified.” This same word, another Apostle
says, is able to save your souls, and the Lord says, “The words which
I speak to you shall judge you in the last day.” His word lives and
abides forever and ever. If we were making our dying request, and that
to the dearest friends we have on earth, we would request them to
abandon all human authorities and hold on to the word of the Lord for
ever.




PREACH “FIRST PRINCIPLES.”


There is no telling the evils that have arisen in some old
congregations, from preachers assuming that their audiences knew all
about what are usually called first principles, and not preaching
them. In this way, they never get their audiences to understand the
principles of the gospel at all. They preach to their half-sleeping
audiences, not _hearers_, some little, exhortatory sermon, of
twenty-five or thirty minutes, and not a syllable is recollected two
days. The people are thankful that the sermon was short, and the
preacher thankful that “service” is over. In this way the gospel has
literally been shut out of some churches, and year after year passes
without any thing like a clear development of the gospel, and neither
the church nor the regular hearers understand the gospel, or know the
difference between the gospel and something else. This also gives rise
to textuary preaching and preaching a sermon “to develop a single
thought.” We heard of one preacher who delivered a sermon on the
text, “And there shall be no night there.” The wording was soft as a
summer breeze and as harmless as a butterfly. Now, we must say that
we abominate this as mere trash. We want good, sound, solid and manly
preaching, containing principles and practical instruction, that will
make an audience _think_ and _feel_, and _that to some purpose_. Let us
advocate the cause, maintain and defend it, with zeal, earnestness and
power. Unfold the great principles of the faith, spread them out and
let the world see them, and see at the same time that we intend they
shall prevail. The principles are self-evidently right, and there is
no reason why any man should be ashamed of them, or afraid to advocate
them. They can be carried through the world, and we have the men and
ability, and, the Lord helping us, we shall spread them throughout the
land.




DEVELOPING THE TALENTS OF THE YOUNG.


We must make an effort to bring out our young people. If they are
brought into the church, and not employed any way, not induced to do
anything, nor in any way made useful, one half of them will be led off
into the world again. A bishop who understands this matter, will engage
not simply the attention of the young, but their ability, whatever it
may be, and bring it out. We fell in company with a bishop of this kind
a few evenings since, on the cars, who informed us, if our memory is
not at fault, that out of about forty male members in his congregation,
in Illinois, all but some three took some part in the public worship,
by way of reading, prayer, or exhortation. We have recently heard of
several churches of this sort. These can worship without a preacher,
can “draw out an audience,” and will, in a short time, send out
preachers. Bishops who thus bring forward their young men, are bishops
indeed. They do not imagine that their work is to sing, pray, preach,
break the loaf, rule, and do every thing, and that the duty of the
audience is simply to obey them. It is the work of a Christian bishop
to develop and bring out the talent in the congregation, and apply it
to the work of the Lord. Here is where our preachers are to come from.
The church must furnish the preachers of Christ. No other institution
will ever do it. We need not look to our colleges to make preachers.
They will never do it. We need the colleges as much as any of our
brethren have ever thought; but not to make preachers, but _to educate
our young men who want to preach or do anything else_.




WHAT A PREACHER MUST BE.


He must be earnest. Men who preach the gospel of Christ must be
earnest. They must not trifle with the gospel and the souls of men.
The theme is too vast, the responsibility too great and the issues
too momentous to be treated in a careless, indifferent and prosing
manner. The idea of a man speaking of questions of life and death,
eternal happiness and eternal misery, the glories to be revealed at
the appearing and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the terrible
destruction that shall be the destiny to all who obey not the gospel,
in a cold, dull and unfeeling manner, is preposterous. These are the
most awful, momentous and sublime themes that ever dwelt upon the lips
of men; and let him who speaks of them, remember that he is pleading in
a case of life and death. Let him speak with earnestness, spirit and
power.

He must be a man of perseverance. A man who can not preach a week
without any success, and not become discouraged, had better go home.
He is not the man. It is nothing strange to preach a dozen or fifteen
discourses without success. Let him preach again. If he still has
no success, let him humble himself before the Lord, in most fervent
prayer, and make another effort. If he shall still fail in one place,
go to another, and try again. Remember Noah, who preached one hundred
and twenty years, without an addition, and preach on and pray on. Trust
in the Lord, and work on.

He must be a man that can not be discouraged. He must be determined
that he will listen to no discouraging tales. When met by some
faint-hearted, sickly, and half-believing brother, who doles out his
story about the troubles among the brethren, the opposition to be
encountered, and how “hard a place it is,” where he is operating, he
must pay no attention to it, but rise above it, and bear it in mind
that there are good and honest-hearted souls in every community, who
will receive and obey the gospel, if it is faithfully presented. Keep
these in your mind, preaching brother, and try to save them, and you
will succeed in a vast majority of cases. Inspire your audience with
courage and confidence, especially the brethren. Allow no whining,
complaining, and saying, “We can’t do anything,” and believe nothing
of the kind. You _can do something_, and you must tell the people so,
and _keep on_ till you do it. You must not work in doubt, but in strong
confidence that you have the truth—that you are advocating the cause
of righteousness—that God is in it, will be with you, never leave you
nor forsake you—that you can, by the help of the Lord, make the cause
prosper, and will do it.




THEORY AND PRACTICE.


It is one thing for a man to _say_ he is for the Bible, the whole Bible
and nothing but the Bible, and it is quite another thing to _learn_
and _practice_ some of the first and clearest lessons of the Bible.
The only authority there is in the Bible for preaching the gospel at
all, requires that it be preached in all the world—to every creature.
Yet, strange to say, the first thing many seem to think of, and the
only thing, is the mere vicinity where they reside. They are frequently
few, weak and uninfluential; can get no preacher to their vicinity; or
if they do get one once in a great while, they entertain him with an
account of their weakness and inability to pay, make him sacrifice more
to preach for them than they all sacrifice to support him. In other
words, if they ought to give him thirty dollars, by a hard stretch they
raise fifteen dollars, and send him off fifteen dollars minus what he
ought to have had. After thus disheartening him, breaking him down and
starving him, or especially his wife and children, they comment upon
the old adage, “charity begins at home.”

Declaim against foreign missions, and prepare to give the State Board
twenty-five dollars if the Board will send them one hundred dollars
worth of preaching. After they treat a preacher in this way a few
times, he is compelled from absolute necessity to abandon them. Thus,
isolated, forsaken and helpless, they take no publications, know
nothing of what is going on, pine away and die. This shows the utter
fallacy of little, weak and helpless congregations keeping themselves
isolated. They should act with their brethren, report themselves, be
known in all their efforts, and send in their contributions, no matter
how small. The ground of complaint here is, however, more on the part
of preachers than any place else. In all our preaching, we should
inculcate a missionary spirit, the importance of acting in harmony,
unitedly and with energy in all our undertakings to evangelize the
world.




THE CONVERTING POWER.


Men are talking of justification by _faith alone_; but the main trouble
is, that they have no faith. They have no confidence in the gospel,
the power of God. They have no confidence in preaching the cross
of Christ, the power and wisdom of God. They have no confidence in
preaching Christ to save the world. They never preach Christ with any
animation—any spirit or power. They have deserted God’s ordained power
to save men, and are dealing out their insipid theories of spiritual
influence, their views and philosophies, which have nothing in them to
save, if they were all true. Preaching theories of the Word or of the
Spirit, of the mode of the Divine existence, or of anything else, has
no power to convert or save any one. All the preaching of Calvinism
or Arminianism, of Trinitarianism or Unitarianism, of Necessity or
Freedom, or all the other theories ever preached, whether true or
false, never saved one soul of our poor fallen race. But the preaching
of the gospel, preaching Christ, the cross of Christ, is the ordained
work for the Christian ministry. This is unequivocally the power God
has authorized them to exercise in saving sinners. We know it will save
sinners, from the following three reasons:

1. The Holy Spirit declares it to be “the power of God, to every one
that believes.”

2. The apostles and first ministers of Christ preached it to the
salvation of thousands in a single day, and millions in a few years.

3. We are preaching the gospel almost every day of our life, and find
it bringing sinners to Christ. We have all faith in the gospel, the
ancient gospel, preached in its purity and simplicity, as the only
means of saving man. It will save men. It is the power of God to save
men. We realize this more and more every year. The blessing of the
Lord is attending every man who has faith in Christ, in his word, and
preaches the gospel honestly.

But we know that those brethren who oppose us in this, are wrong, for
the following reasons:

1. The Lord never said that their theories upon any subject, were the
power of God unto salvation to anybody, either Jew or Greek.

2. The apostles never preached in their style.

3. They convert nobody when they do preach.

4. The church dies under their preaching in every instance.

Brethren, have all confidence in the gospel of your salvation; preach
it, advocate it, propagate it; perpetuate and hand it down to the
future generations. We have all confidence in it; expect to lean upon
it while living and when dying. “We commend you to God and to the
word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an
inheritance among all them who are sanctified,” said an old saint, when
leaving a church, and when assuring the disciples that they should see
his face no more. The gospel will live; and, those who have confidence
in it, love it, preach it, and practice it, will live co-existent with
the years of God.




IMPERFECT MEDIUM FOR A PERFECT REVELATION.


Human language, perfect or imperfect, is the only medium through which
a revelation to man ever was or ever can be made. We do not claim
for the _medium_ that it is perfect, but the _revelation itself_ is
perfect. The imperfection of language and instability form the occasion
for new translations and revisions. Revelation, when first given to
man, was perfect and the language employed to convey it to the mind
of man answered the purpose. In the providence of God, the original
languages through which revelation was made died, and consequently
ceased to change. But, in the very nature of things, a living language
is always changing. The circumstance, however, that language is
an imperfect vehicle through which to convey divine things, is no
objection to the divine things thus conveyed to us. It maybe a reason
why our knowledge of revelation will never be perfect in this life;
but certainly no reason why revelation itself shall be considered
imperfect. It may be alleged that revelation to man is more difficult
on account of the imperfection and instability of language; but the
same difficulty lies in the way of every kind of communications to men.

The true state of the case is, that the medium of language is
sufficiently perfect and entirely adequate for all the purposes of
a revelation to mankind. The communication from God to man found in
the Bible is sufficiently clear and intelligible for all the purposes
of its original design. The man who will make an honest effort, can
understand the will of God concerning him—can discriminate between
good and evil, right and wrong, the way to hell and the way to heaven.
But the man who will not make an honest effort, would not be a
Christian if one would rise from the dead before his eyes. If he had
seen the Lord in person he would have found occasion for caviling. The
seed of the kingdom must fall into a _good_ and _honest_ heart.

It is useless to fall out with the medium through which revelation has
come to man. The best medium in existence was employed, the very one
through which we communicate man with man, and the one with which man
is more familiar than any other—the medium of _language_.




OVERLOOKING HUMBLE BUT GOOD MEN.


We have lately been reflecting upon an opportunity for doing great
good perfectly within our reach, to which many are paying but little
attention. Who among our brethren are thinking how many humble,
unassuming and comparatively obscure men we have, who are actually
doing a great work, and not only doing it at their own charges, but
doing it without thanks or even credit from their brethren? While we
are paying much attention to a few men of popularity, influence and
fame, we are overlooking a large number of the best, truest, most
self-sacrificing men the Lord has given us. These, too, are the men who
are doing the main body of the work, and they are the main supports
of the cause. They are men of good sense, piety and devotion; men
of excellent character, an honor to the cause and a credit to the
brotherhood, who are penetrating the private neighborhoods, preaching
in private houses, school houses, barns, shops, and open groves,
and bringing thousands to the fold every year; and in the place of
the brethren making any arrangement to support them, or even saying
anything to encourage them, they are saying discouraging things of
them, such as that “they can’t preach”—“they are little preachers,”
etc., etc.

Now, we desire to hear of some old church, where wealth abounds,
instead of monopolizing money and talent in preaching in their midst,
where probably they can do but little good, making arrangements outside
to sustain some good man, such as we have described, to visit those
by-ways all through the land, where most numbers may be converted and
the work of the Lord greatly extended. We have the men to do this
work, good men, men in whom we have all confidence, who desire to
do this work, and are doing it measurably without charge. These men
do not desire large wages for their work. Indeed, they have shown,
in many instances, that they will work on, pay or no pay. But they
could do vastly more if they were supported. Now, the idea of our
fixing our eye upon a few talented men, paying them large salaries,
and wholly neglecting these, is manifestly wrong. It is sinful. We
saw six or eight preachers such as we allude to, together in Mexico,
Missouri,—and we find them in every community, and we vouch for the
fact, that more than one-half of all the accessions reported are from
men of this description.

We live in a time when humble men and good men are overlooked; when
working men are forgotten and neglected; and we desire to make a plea
in behalf of these. They are the men who are willing to go into all
the highways and by-places—to preach in the private house, the school
house, the barn, the shop or the grove. A large proportion of all the
work that has been done is the result of the sacrifices, labors and
toils of this class of men. They are the men that will now do the work,
do it well, and with less expense than any others. There are hundreds
of men of this description that have never received one hundred dollars
in a year for all their hard labor. We have in our mind several of
this class, who have brought into the fold large numbers every year,
and have received for their labor comparatively nothing. Will not the
brethren make arrangements to do something for these brethren? They are
willing to go among the poor, the destitute, and preach to them the
unsearchable riches of Christ.

If those who have means to expend for the cause, will look to this
class of men and to their work and aid them, they will do one hundred
per cent. more with their means than is generally the case. These will
go where another class of men will not go, and do a work that another
class of men will not do, and yet a work every way as important to
the conversion of the world. Send these men all through the land, and
convert the country, and then we can easily convert the city. We have
a large number of this class of men who can be employed for two, three
and four hundred dollars a year, to preach a great portion of their
time, and they are the only men who can and will penetrate all the
nooks and corners of the land. The Lord help us to appreciate these
good men, and see that they are aided in their labors of love and work
of faith.




SUGGESTIONS TO A YOUNG SCEPTIC.


      A young gentleman had called for the reconciliation of
    certain points in the New Testament narratives, which, to
    his mind, seemed incongruous. After noting each of the
    points separately, in the _A. C. Review_, for May, 1859, the
    editor added:


But, my dear sir, the reconciling what to you may be apparent
discrepancies, is no reason for your becoming a Christian; nor should
you think me unable to reconcile them, or should I really be unable to
reconcile them, or should all men be unable to reconcile them, that
would still be no reason why you or any man should reject Christ. The
inability to reconcile these matters may arise from our ignorance and
not from the fact that they are irreconcilable. It would not be a
reason for rejecting the gospel, if the statements of these witnesses
were really in themselves irreconcilable or inaccurate. The inaccuracy
might easily have found its way into their testimony, in translating,
transcribing, or interpolation, and Christ still be divine. The
whole matter rests _upon Christ_, and not upon the congruity or the
incongruity of the sacred narratives, unless their consistency can be
so impaired as to destroy their testimony concerning Christ. The matter
is not whether you can reconcile all the statements of Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John, whether you can show their consistency and understand
them throughout, but whether you believe in Christ or not, whether you
will receive him or not. Can you say, sir, that you are pondering in
your mind whether to regard Jesus as _divine_ or an _imposter_? This
is the question for you to fix your eye upon. You have not time now to
study the whole Bible and decide upon a sentence at a time, whether you
believe it or not. It would take you a long time to become a Christian
in that way. You should not go to the Bible for that purpose, but go
there to learn all about Christ, the purity of his life, his wonderful
teachings, his miracles, his perfect knowledge of what is in man, the
fulfillment of all the prophecies in him, with an eye simply upon
the question—is he the Christ, the Son of God? You can shape your
inquiries in different forms, though constantly bearing upon the same
question, by inquiring as follows: Was Jesus perfect in his life? If
he was, he was more than man, for no mere man ever was perfect. Were
his teachings perfect? If they were, they were not of man, for no mere
man ever gave the world perfect teachings. All merely human teachings,
in all the world, and in all ages, have been imperfect, and, it is a
miracle in itself, for a perfect being to appear among men, in human
form, or a perfect system of teaching to be presented by him to man. He
emphatically _spake as never man spake_.

Can it be possible that you, my dear sir, are vacillating in your mind
whether Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God? Can you doubt whether
he was the friend of man? whether he loved man? whether you would be
infallibly safe under his guidance? Can you doubt whether he was good?
whether his teaching was good? whether it was safe? You must feel
conscious that he is the Christ, the Son of God—the friend of man—that
he loved man—that he went about doing good—that you are infallibly safe
in following him—that his teaching is good—that it is divine. You would
not now deny him for the world. Your eternal all is in him. If the
worst things infidels have ever said of him were true, it is better and
safer to follow him, than them; for they admit that he was better than
they, and his teaching better than their own. As you value your soul,
follow him.




DIALOGUE ABOUT THE PREACHER.


The following dialogue between Dr. Pietus and Dr. Fastidious, occurred
in a social company, in a parlor, and, thinking it might be profitable
to some brethren, and even churches, we have concluded to publish it
entire, without recommending or condemning it; therefore, we let it
speak for itself:

DR. FASTIDIOUS.—I have, for some time, desired an opportunity to say a
few words, though confidentially to you, Dr. Pietus, touching our
preacher. I think he is not a suitable man, for such a prominent place
as this. You know that we frequently have men of distinction here.
Besides, our city is one of prominence, and we ought to have a man of
distinction.

DR. PIETUS.—I think our preacher is a good man, Doctor, a sound man, and
a man of great moral worth. I thought he gave us one of the best
exhortations at the prayer-meeting, on last Wednesday night, I ever
heard. Did you not think so?

DR. F.—I was not there. He is so uninteresting that I but rarely go to
hear him. I know that he is a good man, and sound enough. But then, he
is a very _common_ man, and not sufficiently showy and eloquent for us.
We need a first-class preacher in a city like this; a man who can draw
out an audience.

DR. P.—I never think of such a thing as a preacher to _draw Christians
out to meeting_. The Lord draws me out to meeting. He has promised
to be there, and I have never found his promise to fail. I am never
disappointed, for I go to meeting believing that he will be there,
and I always find him. But those who only go because they love some
preacher, frequently get disappointed; for the preacher being a
fallible creature, often fails to attend. But I do think our preacher
is a good preacher. I do not know where we could get a better man.

DR. F.—We need a man of distinction and notoriety, who will attract
attention, and draw out an audience. I would then go out and try to do
something. But, I have no faith in doing anything, till we have a more
attractive preacher.

DR. P.—My dear sir, we will never get a preacher who can draw
out an audience, unless _we draw too_. As much depends upon a church
in drawing out an audience as the preacher. No preacher can draw out
an audience unless the church does its part. We must do our part as a
church, or no preacher in the world can do us any good. I still think
our present preacher has done about as much for us, as any man could
have done under the circumstances. It is not a different kind of
preacher we need, but a _different kind of a church_. We need members
that will attend the public worship, sing, pray, exhort, and stand
at their post. In one word, we need a church that will stand by the
preacher, encourage, sustain him, and hold up his hands.

DR. F.—I never saw such a man as you are. You can be satisfied with any
kind of preaching. I never saw you present when any man preached, when
you did not appear satisfied, no matter how bungling he was.

DR. P.—I think but little about preachers, have fewer favorites, and
more rarely speak in praise or complaint of preachers, than almost any
man you can find. I am not thinking of the _messenger_, but of the
_message_.

DR. F.—I can not bear a prosing, stammering and dry preacher. I have
not heard our preacher present anything _new_ in three months. I like
to _learn something_ when I go to hear preaching.

DR. P.—When were you at meeting last? I do not recollect seeing you for
some three months in the meeting house.

DR. F.—I have been pressed with—I have not been very well—the preaching
has not suited me, and there are many in the church that should have
been excluded long since.

DR. P.—No wonder you have heard nothing _new_ from our brother; for
you have not heard him at all. If his preaching had been the best in
the world, it would have done you no good, while you did not hear it.
I will tell you, my dear brother, how to make preaching better to us:
Read the Scriptures every day; pray night and morning; talk to every
one you meet _about religion_, and your heart will be full of the
theme. You will then like to hear any man who can preach at all. Attend
all the meetings, participate in the songs, prayers, exhortations and
all the other parts of public worship, and you will then be interested
in all that you hear from good men.

DR. F.—Your notions of preaching will not do. Our city is one of
intelligence. This community, you must recollect, is highly enlightened,
and we must have a man here that keeps pace with the age. We frequently
have statesmen, lawyers, physicians and men of the first rank in
attendance, and it is useless to think of interesting these with any
_common_ talents. We must have a man of taste, refinement, and highly
accomplished.

DR. P.—When did our Lord ever try to arrest the attention of the elite
of this world by _show_, by mere human _polish_ and _flourish_? Never,
never, Doctor, as you certainly know. Are you not aware, my dear sir,
that the wisdom of God is not in this vain and worldly thing that you
speak of? Sensible people, those truly enlightened and great, can
understand the gospel, appreciate and receive it, when it is simplified
and made appreciable to the masses of the people. Not only so, doctor,
but the class you aim to please, though enlightened in the things of
the world, and accomplished, they are more unenlightened in the things
of the kingdom of God, than many that you never think of pleasing. I
am for a preacher that will try to please the Lord, whether he pleases
your distinguished men or not.

DR. F.—We have had some of the best speakers in the world here, and the
truth is, the people here know what good talent is, and they will not
be satisfied with ordinary men. The people here have been well taught.
No man can attract attention here unless he is a superior man.

DR. P.—That the people here have heard some men of good preaching
talent, is true; but that they are well-read and well taught in
christianity, is far from true. That they understand Jesus or the
apostles well, is far from true. Many perfectly country places and
rural districts contain far more gospel light than may be found in
the bounds of our congregation. We presume that we are wise, while
many plain men from the country are astonished when they converse with
us, that we are so ignorant. To be plain with you, my dear brother,
I know of no place where there is, at this time, more need of plain,
old-fashioned, New Testament preaching than here. It is not worldly
show that we need; we have that now in abundance. We need the simple
teachings of Jesus, solemnly and affectionately impressed upon our
hearts, by some good man who loves us and will try to save us. In the
place of being inflated with the conceit that we are well taught, far
advanced and highly elevated in christian attainments, so that no man
except one of the most exalted accomplishments can teach us, we should
be sensible of what is the true state of the case, viz: That almost
any plain and good man who preaches among us, can teach us many useful
lessons that we do not know.

DR. F.—I can not agree with you. I have had my face burn more than once,
in listening to some ignorant brother, blundering and trying to preach,
who evidently did not understand his mother tongue, and that, too, in
the presence of some distinguished persons. I can never countenance
such a state of things.

DR. P.—Doctor, I had rather hear some good man, who can not speak his
mother tongue correctly, tell the plain story of the cross of Christ,
in the love of Jesus, and in the spirit and power of a holy man of God,
a thousand times, than to listen to one of your _showy men_, who can
preach a beautiful sermon without any Jesus, Holy Spirit, love of God,
or anything else, but _the man himself_ in it. I desire preaching that
will convert men to Jesus—to christianity and not to men. The converts
will then love Jesus, meet and worship him and do those things that are
pleasing in his sight. We do not want a man here to _worship him_, but
to preach Jesus to us and teach us to worship Him.

DR. F.—With your views of the subject, we shall never do any good. We
shall never draw out an audience, nor accomplish anything. I am in
favor of procuring a man at a salary of $2,000 or $2,500, that will
command the respect of our city. Then we shall do some good. I am
willing to give liberally when such an arrangement can be made, but
I do not think our preacher is doing any good, and shall not give
anything for his support.

DR. P.—I am sorry to hear you speak so. Nothing, in my estimation could
be more disastrous to us. This would consume about all we could
possibly raise, so that we could not raise a dollar for missions, for
colleges, the poor or anything only to pay a man to preach _to us_. At
this rate our large congregation would only just be able to support
itself and bear its own weight! Who is to convert the world at this
rate! If we can not do anything more than sustain ourselves who are to
support missions, build colleges and take care of the poor? If you had
such a preacher as you want, he would have to do everything himself,
or you would not be satisfied. Not a brother in the church would ever
pray, exhort, or do anything that would call forth a gift, or develop
any talents that might be among our numbers. Hence in all these city
churches where some great man is the center of attraction, they rarely
ever bring forward any young preachers, or develop any new talent. They
simply monopolize talent brought out and developed some place else. I
am in favor of preachers of ability, not only in our city churches, but
as far as possible, in all the churches. But the way must be opened
among us for the development of talent in the church. Our pride must
not despise incipient efforts—plain and humble men, nor human weakness.
It is in all men more or less, though not always developed in the same
form.

DR. F.—I think if we had such a preacher as I wish, we would draw out
an audience, convert many people and greatly extend the cause in one
year.

DR. P.—No, Doctor, that would not be the case. The preacher we have is
just as good as any man we can get. He is a man of unquestionable
talents and piety and if we stand by him, aid him and encourage him,
thus showing to the world that we respect him, those without will also
respect him and he will succeed. If we had the most gifted man on
the continent and the members of the church would treat him as they
have done our present preacher he would do nothing. By our absenting
ourselves, we virtually say, what you have in so many words said, that
_our preacher can do no good here_. When the members of the church thus
speak and act, neither a man nor an angel can do any thing; and, if I
were the preacher, I would not stay a moment with brethren who would
thus treat me. I would go where I could be appreciated. Doctor, come to
meeting and let us make one good effort and see if we can not bring our
church out. Let us produce a change in the church, and then probably
our preacher will do well enough. I think we need a change in the
church more than in the preacher, or preaching.




“THE LOVE OF CHRIST CONSTRAINS.”


The preachers who love Christ better than partyism, will preach Christ,
will call the people to Christ, and induce them to love him, and love
all that do love him. They will inquire _his_ will, and do it. They
will exchange the love of party for the love of Christ, and find it
so much higher, holier, purer and happier, that they will ignore all
party feuds, wrangling and strifes, and maintain simply “the faith once
delivered to the saints.” No doctrinal corrections, or corrections in
ordinances, or in organization and government, will ever amount to
anything, or save a people, who have not the _love of Christ_. We may
be told that we may be mistaken, that they do love Christ. We cannot
be mistaken in this, for the Lord says, “From the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks. A man full of the love of Christ, will speak
of Christ. The theme of his heart will dwell upon his tongue. Where
Christ has promised to be, they will be with him.” “Where two or three
are met together in my name, there,” says the Lord, “_I will be_.” How
many go to these places where Jesus has promised to be? How many go to
the Lord’s table, to remember his dying love? How many of the preachers
will sit down together, as loving disciples, and meditate upon his
dying love, his great suffering, as he bore our sins on the accursed
tree?

When we have lost friends, we go to the grave, and think of them, try
to bring them up in our memories. We talk with our friends about them,
and about seeing them and meeting them in another state. How often do
the professors of religion, in our times, think of the grave of Jesus,
his resurrection, his coronation? How often do they commemorate his
sufferings, and meditate upon his great love to us? His name is almost
set aside, his sufferings almost forgotten, his love, even his dying
love, scarcely mentioned! Yet the word of the Lord, when translated
into English, thunders in our ears!—“If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, he will be accursed when the Lord comes.” We shall hear
these words, and be judged by them, in a day when we shall feel their
force. Jesus is the “one Lord,” the one object of love, the one head
and king. Shall we make an effort to rescue the people from party
influence, and win their hearts and affections from all the frivolous
objects upon which they are placed in partyism, and place them upon Him
who is the express image of the invisible God, the brightness of the
Father’s glory, and in whom all the fullness of the godhead dwells
bodily? Who, with the love of Christ in his own breast, can fail to see
that the work now for good men, is to call the attention of all men to
Christ, to his word, his cause, his church, his salvation, his way,
that they may love him supremely, and be his for evermore?




CONCLUSION OF THE YEAR.


Dear Reader, we are now about closing another year. This number
completes our weekly visits for another year. The time appears short
since we made the first visit this year, still, fifty-two weeks have
run their course. Another year has fled, and is now numbered with the
years before the flood. The good deeds of the righteous are entered on
the records of eternity, to come up to their everlasting honor in the
day when the righteous judge shall award to every man according to his
works. Not only so, but all the crimes, the transgressions, and acts of
disobedience of every variety, in a long catalogue, have gone up and
been registered in the book of remembrance before the Lord. What a list
must that be! What a spectacle must this world be, with all its dark
crimes and acts of rebellion against the Majesty of heaven and earth, to
the eye of the omniscient One! Every den of drunkenness, debauchery,
profanity, lying and gambling, lies spread open to the All-seeing
eye. Not an oath falls without his notice, not a fraud, a deception,
cheat, lie, or crime of any sort escapes Omniscience. All, all sins,
transgressions and misdemeanors of every sort are treasured up and kept
in store for the day of final account.

What adds to the solemnity of the matter is, that no amends can be
made in acts of the past. There they stand irrevocably, so far as we
are concerned. The Lord may wash away every stain in his own precious
blood, where persons come to him in a proper manner. But even this
does not amend for the past. It takes away our guilt, and is a means
of saving us. But the wrongs done remain wrong and will so remain for
ever. Repentance changes not the wrong done. In the same way, the
good neglected, during the year now closing, will so remain for ever.
We can do good, it is true, the coming year; but that we could have
done, and that it would have been our duty to have done, if we had
done good all last year. Opportunities for doing good never return.
Other opportunities may come, but they would have come if no previous
opportunities had been neglected. You had an opportunity this year to
have ministered to the wants of the poor widow, the orphan, the sick,
the afflicted and distressed, but these opportunities are now gone, and
gone forever. If neglected, there is no remedy; that neglect remains
forever. We may repent, obtain forgiveness and do good in time to come,
but all that good could have been done just as well had there been no
previous neglect, and would have been more liable to have been done,
for one delinquency opens the way for another and has a tendency to
induce it.

In closing the year, it is well enough for us to cast an eye back over
the ground, not to amend the year now closing, for that is impossible,
but to see where the delinquency has been, and determine that a similar
delinquency shall not be found in the work of the coming year. In
this way, we may profit by looking over the past. What, then has been
entered to our account on the records of eternity? What have we done as
a great religious body? What have we done as individual congregations,
or communities? What have we done as families? What have we done as
individuals? What have we done as teachers in the Sunday schools? What
have we done as preachers of the gospel? What have we done as religious
editors? Now is the time to review and see how the account stands
before the Lord. If the Lord should call on us for our annual report,






The recent bi-centenary of Franklin's birth, which coincided with the
revival of interest in balloons, makes this a timely topic, especially
since Franklin's descriptions of the first balloon ascensions are
almost unknown and do not appear among his philosophical papers. The
five letters which I have the honor to present were written to Sir
Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society of London, in 1783, when
Franklin was Minister to the Court of France and, with the collateral
documents, they give perhaps the most complete and accurate account
of the beginning of aerial navigation, enlivened with the humor and
speculation characteristic of the writer. It is certainly remarkable
that Franklin, in the midst of diplomatic and social duties, could have
found time to investigate personally this new invention of which he at
once appreciated the possibilities.

The documents which I publish are copies of Franklin's letters, made
on thin paper in a copying press (probably the rotary machine invented
by Franklin), and all but one bear his signature in ink. They have
corrections in the author's hand-writing and, except for a few words,
are quite legible. They were purchased by me from Dodd, Mead & Co.,
in December, 1905, and previously had belonged to G. M. Williamson,
of Grandview-on-the-Hudson, to whom they had come from Vienna. None
of the letters appear in Sparks' edition of Franklin's Works, and
while all but one are included in the collections compiled by Bigelow
and Smyth, there are numerous inaccuracies, some of which will be
specified hereafter. Drafts of three of the letters are deposited in
the University of Pennsylvania, but the existence of one letter and the
whereabouts of another were unknown to the late Mr. Smyth, the editor
of the last and most complete edition of Franklin's Works,[1] who made
careful search for the original documents. Although the American owners
of these copies did not allow them to be transcribed, Mr. Smyth states
that he printed one letter from my copy, and he noted how the other
copies differed from the drafts in the University of Pennsylvania. In
general it may be said that, whereas Bigelow gives the text without
paragraphs, capital letters or the old spelling,[2] Smyth follows the
originals more closely. In view of the historic and scientific interest
of these letters, they are now printed exactly according to the
press-copies. The letter dated November 30, appears never to have been
printed and whereas Smyth reproduced the letter of November 21 from the
University of Pennsylvania draft, this or another draft (or possibly
this copy) was in the possession of the French aeronaut, Gaston
Tissandier, about 1887.[3]

  [1] The Writings of Benjamin Franklin, collected and edited by
  Albert Henry Smyth, Volume IX, New York, 1906.

  [2] Complete Works of Benjamin Franklin, compiled and edited by
  John Bigelow, Volume VIII, New York, 1888.

  [3] Histoire des Ballons, Paris, 1887, Volume I, page 29.


(THE FIRST HYDROGEN BALLOON.)

PASSY, Aug. 30, 1783.

Sir,

On Wednesday, the 27th Instant the new aerostatic Experiment, invented
by Mess^rs. Montgolfier, of Annonay, was repeated by M. Charles,
Professor of experimental Philosophy at Paris.

A hollow Globe 12 feet Diameter was formed of what is called in England
Oiled Silk, here _Taffetas gommé_, the Silk being impregnated with a
Solution of Gum elastic in Lintseed Oil, as is said. The Parts were
sewed together while wet with the Gum, and some of it was afterwards
passed over the Seams, to render it as tight as possible.

It was afterwards filled with the inflammable Air that is produced by
pouring Oil of Vitriol upon Filings of Iron, when it was found to have
a tendency upwards so strong as to be capable of lifting a Weight of 39
Pounds, exclusive of its own Weight which was 25 lbs. and the Weight of
the Air contain'd.

It was brought early in the morning to the _Champ de Mars_, a Field in
which Reviews are sometimes made, lying between the Military School and
the River. There it was held down by a Cord till 5 in the afternoon,
when it was to be let loose. Care was taken before the Hour to replace
what Portion had been lost, of the inflammable Air, or of its Force, by
injecting more.

It is supposed that not less than 50,000 People were assembled to see
the Experiment. The Champ de Mars being surrounded by Multitudes, and
vast Numbers on the opposite Side of the River.

At 5 aClock Notice was given to the Spectators by the Firing of two
Cannon, that the Cord was about to be cut. And presently the Globe was
seen to rise, and that as fast as a Body of 12 feet Diameter, with a
force only of 39 Pounds, could be suppos'd to move the resisting Air
out of its Way. There was some Wind, but not very strong. A little
Rain had wet it, so that it shone, and made an agreeable Appearance.
It diminished in Apparent Magnitude as it rose, till it enter'd the
Clouds, when it seem'd to me scarce bigger than an Orange, and soon
after became invisible, the Clouds concealing it.

The Multitude separated, all well satisfied and delighted with the
Success of the Experiment, and amusing one another with discourses of
the various uses it may possibly be apply'd to, among which many were
very extravagant. But possibly it may pave the Way to some Discoveries
in Natural Philosophy of which at present we have no Conception.

A Note secur'd from the Weather had been affix'd to the Globe,
signifying the Time & Place of its Departure, and praying those who
might happen to find it, to send an account of its State to certain
Persons at Paris. No News was heard of it till the next Day, when
Information was receiv'd, that it fell a little after 6 aClock,
at Gonesse, a Place about 4 Leagues Distance, and that it was rent
open, and some say had Ice in it. It is suppos'd to have burst by the
Elasticity of the contain'd Air when no longer compress'd by so heavy
an Atmosphere.

One of 38 feet Diameter is preparing by Mr. Montgolfier himself, at the
Expence of the Academy, which is to go up in a few Days. I am told it
is constructed of Linen & Paper, and is to be filled with a different
Air, not yet made Public, but cheaper than that produc'd by the Oil of
Vitriol, of which 200 Paris Pints were consum'd in filling the other.

It is said that for some Days after its being filled, the Ball was
found to lose an eighth Part of its Force of Levity in 24 Hours;
Whether this was from Imperfection in the Tightness of the Ball, or a
Change in the Nature of the Air, Experiments may easily discover.

I thought it my Duty, Sir, to send an early Account of this
extraordinary Fact, to the Society which does me the honour to reckon
me among its Members; and I will endeavour to make it more perfect, as
I receive farther Information.

  With great Respect, I am, Sir,
  Your most obedient
  and most humble Servant
  B. FRANKLIN

SIR JOSEPH BANKS, Bar^t.

P. S. Since writing the above, I am favour'd with your kind Letter
of the 25th. I am much obliged to you for the Care you have taken to
forward the Transactions, as well as to the Council for so readily
ordering them on Application. Please to accept and present my Thanks.

I just now learn, that some observers say, the Ball was 150 Seconds
in rising, from the Cutting of the Cord till hid in the Clouds;
that its height was then about 500 Toises, but, being moved out of
the Perpendicular by the Wind, it had made a Slant so as to form a
Triangle, whose Base on the Earth was about 200 Toises. It is said
the Country People who saw it fall were frightned, conceiv'd from its
bounding a little, when it touched the Ground, that there was some
living Animal in it, and attack'd it with Stones and Knives, so that it
was much mangled; but it is now brought to Town and will be repaired.

The great one of M. Montgolfier, is to go up, as is said, from
Versailles, in about 8 or 10 Days; It is not a Globe but of a different
Form, more convenient for penetrating the Air. It contains 50,000
cubic Feet, and is supposed to have Force of Levity equal to 1500
pounds weight. A Philosopher here, M. Pilatre du Rozier has seriously
apply'd to the Academy for leave to go up with it, in order to make
some Experiments. He was complimented on his Zeal and Courage for
the Promotion of Science, but advis'd to wait till the management of
these Balls was made by Experience more certain & safe. They say the
filling of it in M. Montgolfier's Way will not cost more than half
a Crown. One is talk'd of to be 110 feet Diameter. Several Gentlemen
have ordered small ones to be made for their Amusement. One has ordered
four of 15 feet Diameter each; I know not with what Purpose; But such
is the present Enthusiasm for promoting and improving this Discovery,
that probably we shall soon make considerable Progress in the art of
constructing and using the Machines.

Among the Pleasanteries Conversation produces on this Subject, some
suppose Flying to be now invented, and that since Men may be supported
in the Air, nothing is wanted but some light handy Instruments to
give and direct Motion. Some think Progressive Motion on the Earth
may be advanc'd by it, and that a Running Footman or a Horse slung and
suspended under such a Globe so as to have no more of Weight pressing
the Earth with their Feet, than Perhaps 8 or 10 Pounds, might with a
fair Wind run in a straight Line across Countries as fast as that Wind,
and over Hedges, Ditches & even Waters. It has been even fancied that
in time People will keep such Globes anchored in the Air, to which by
Pullies they may draw up Game to be preserved in the Cool & Water to be
frozen when Ice is wanted. And that to get Money, it will be contrived
to give People an extensive View of the Country, by running them up in
an Elbow Chair a Mile high for a Guinea &c. &c.

B. F.


(A HOT AIR BALLOON CARRYING ANIMALS.)

PASSY, Oct. 8, 1783.

Sir,

The Publick were promised a printed particular Account of the Rise
& Progress of the Balloon Invention, to be published about the End
of last month. I waited for it to send it to you, expecting it would
be more satisfactory than anything I could write; but it does not
appear. We have only at present the enclosed Pamphlet, which does
not answer the expectation given us. I send you with it some prints.
That of the Balloon raised at Versailles is said to be an exact
representation. I was not present, but am told it was filled in about
ten minutes by means of burning Straw. Some say water was thrown into
the flame, others that it was Spirits of Sal Volatile. It was supposed
to have risen about 200 Toises: But did not continue long at that
height, was carried horizontally by the Wind, and descended gently
as the Air within grew cooler. So vast a Bulk when it began to rise
so majestically in the Air struck the spectators with surprise and
Admiration. The Basket contained a sheep, a duck, and a Cock, who,
except the Cock, received no hurt by the fall.

The Duke de Crillon made a feast last week in the Bois de Boulogne,
just by my habitation, on occasion of the Birth of two Spanish Princes;
after the Fireworks we had a Balloon of about 5 feet Diameter filled
with permanent inflammable Air. It was dismissed about One aClock in
the Morning. It carried under it a large Lanthorn with inscriptions on
its sides. The Night was quite calm and clear, so that it went right
up. The appearance of the light diminished gradually till it appeared
no bigger than one of the Stars, and in about twenty minutes I lost
sight of it entirely. It fell the next Day on the other side of the
same Wood near the Village Boulogne, about half after twelve, having
been suspended in the Air eleven hours and a half. It lodged in a tree,
and was torn in getting it down; so that it cannot be ascertained
whether it burst when above, or not, tho' that is supposed. Smaller
Repetitions of the Experiment are making every day in all quarters.
Some of the larger Balloons that have been up are preparing to be sent
up again in a few Days; but I do not hear of any material improvements
yet made either in the mechanical or Chemical parts of the Operation.
Most is expected from the new one undertaken upon subscription by
Messieurs Charles and Robert, who are Men of Science and mechanic
Dexterity. It is to carry up a Man. I send you enclosed the Proposals,
which it is said are already subscribed to by a considerable number
and likely to be carried into execution. If I am well at the Time, I
purpose to be present, being a subscriber myself, and shall send you an
exact Account of Particulars.

  With great esteem and respect, for yourself and the Society;
  I have the honour to be,
  Sir,
  Your most obedient
  & most humble Servant,
  B. FRANKLIN

SIR JOSEPH BANKS, Bar^t.


(THE FIRST AERIAL VOYAGE BY MAN.)

PASSY, Nov^r 21st, 1783

Dear Sir,

I received your friendly Letter of the 7th Inst. I am glad my Letters
respecting the Aerostatic Experiment were not unacceptable. But as more
perfect Accounts of the Construction and Management of that Machine
have been and will be published before your Transactions, and from
which Extracts may be made that will be more particular and therefore
more satisfactory, I think it best not to print those Letters. I say
this in answer to your Question; for I did not indeed write them with
a view of their being inserted. Mr. Faujas de St. Fond acquainted me
yesterday that a Book on the Subject which has been long expected, will
be publish'd in a few Days, and I shall send you one of them. Enclosed
is a Copy of the _Procès verbal_ taken of the Experiment made yesterday
in the Garden of the Queen's Palace la Muette where the Dauphin now
resides which being near my House I was present. This Paper was drawn
up hastily, and may in some Places appear to you obscure; therefore I
shall add a few explanatory Observations.

This Balloon was larger than that which went up from Versailles and
carried the Sheep, &c. Its bottom was open, and in the middle of the
Opening was fixed a kind of Basket Grate in which Faggots and Sheaves
of Straw were burnt. The Air rarified in passing thro' this Flame rose
in the Balloon, swell'd out its sides, and fill'd it.

The Persons who were plac'd in the Gallery made of Wicker, and attached
to the Outside near the Bottom, had each of them a Port thro' which
they could pass Sheaves of Straw into the Grate to keep up the Flame,
& thereby keep the Balloon full. When it went over our Heads, we could
see the Fire which was very considerable. As the Flame slackens, the
rarified Air cools and condenses, the Bulk of the Balloon diminishes
and it begins to descend. If those in the Gallery see it likely to
descend in an improper Place, they can by throwing on more Straw,
& renewing the Flame, make it rise again, and the Wind carries it
farther.

_La Machine poussée par le Vent s'est dirigée sur une des Allées du
Jardin._ That is against the Trees of one of the Walks. The Gallery
hitched among the top Boughs of those Trees which had been cut and were
stiff while the Body of the Balloon lean'd beyond and seemed likely to
overset. I was then in great Pain for the Men, thinking them in danger
of being thrown out, or burnt for I expected that the Balloon being no
longer upright the Flame would have laid hold of the inside that leaned
over it. But by means of some Cords that were still attach'd to it, it
was soon brought upright again, made to descend, & carried back to its
place. It was however much damaged.

_Planant sur l'Horizon._ When they were as high as they chose to be,
they made less Flame and suffered the Machine to drive Horizontally
with the Wind, of which however they felt very little, as they went
with it, and as fast. They say they had a charming View of Paris &
its Environs, the Course of the River, &c but that they were once
lost, not knowing what Part they were over, till they saw the Dome of
the Invalids, which rectified their Ideas. Probably while they were
employed in keeping up the Fire, the Machine might turn, and by that
means they were _desorientés_ as the French call it.

There was a vast Concourse of Gentry in the Garden, who had great
Pleasure in seeing the Adventurers go off so chearfully, & applauded
them by clapping &c. but there was at the same time a good deal of
Anxiety for their Safety. Multitudes in Paris saw the Balloon passing;
but did not know there were Men with it, it being then so high that
they could not see them.

_Développant du Gaz._ That is, in plain English, _burning more straw_;
for tho' there is a little Mystery made, concerning the kind of Air
with which the Balloon is filled, I conceive it to be nothing more than
hot Smoke or common Air rarify'd, tho' in this I may be mistaken.

_Aiant encor dans leur Galerie les deux tiers de leur
Approvisionement._ That is their Provision of Straw; of which they
carried up a great Quantity. It was well that in the hurry of so
hazardous an Experiment, the Flame did not happen by any accidental
Mismanagement to lay hold of this Straw; tho' each had a Bucket of
Water by him, by Way of Precaution.

One of these courageous Philosophers, the Marquis d'Arlandes, did me
the honour to call upon me in the Evening after the Experiment, with
Mr. Montgolfier the very ingenious Inventor. I was happy to see him
safe. He informed me that they lit gently without the least Shock, and
the Balloon was very little damaged.

This Method of filling the Balloon with hot Air is cheap and
expeditious, and it is supposed may be sufficient for certain purposes,
such as elevating an Engineer to take a View of an Enemy's Army, Works,
&c. conveying Intelligence into, or out of a besieged Town, giving
Signals to distant Places, or the like.

The other Method of filling a Balloon with permanently elastic
inflammable Air, and then closing it is a tedious Operation, and
very expensive; Yet we are to have one of that kind sent up in a few
Days. It is a Globe of 26 feet diameter. The Gores that compose it
are red and white Silk, so that it makes a beautiful appearance. A
very handsome triumphal Car will be suspended to it, in which Mess^rs.
Robert, two Brothers, very ingenious Men, who have made it in concert
with Mr. Charles propose to go up. There is room in this Car for a
little Table to be placed between them, on which they can write and
keep their Journal, that is take Notes of every thing they observe, the
State of their Thermometer, Barometer, Hygrometer, &c which they will
have more Leisure to do than the others, having no fire to take Care
of. They say they have a contrivance which will enable them to descend
at Pleasure. I know not what it is. But the Expence of this Machine,
Filling included, will exceed, it is said, 10,000 Livres.

This Balloon of only 26 feet diameter being filled with Air ten times
lighter than common Air, will carry up a greater Weight than the other,
which tho' vastly bigger was filled with an Air that could scarcely be
more than twice as light. Thus the great Bulk of one of these Machines,
with the short duration of its Power, & the great Expence of filling
the other will prevent the Inventions being of so much Use, as some may
expect, till Chemistry can invent a cheaper light Air producible with
more Expedition.

But the Emulation between the two Parties running high, the Improvement
in the Construction and Management of the Balloons has already made
a rapid Progress; and one cannot say how far it may go. A few Months
since the Idea of Witches riding thro' the Air upon a Broomstick, and
that of Philosophers upon a Bag of Smoke, would have appeared equally
impossible and ridiculous.

These Machines must always be subject to be driven by the Winds.
Perhaps Mechanic Art may find easy means to give them progressive
Motion in a Calm, and to slant them a little in the Wind.

I am sorry this Experiment is totally neglected in England where
mechanic Genius is so strong. I wish I could see the same Emulation
between the two Nations as I see between the two Parties here. Your
Philosophy seems to be too bashful. In this Country we are not so much
afraid of being laught at. If we do a foolish thing, we are the first
to laugh at it ourselves, and are almost as much pleased with a _Bon
Mot_ or a good _Chanson_, that ridicules well the Disappointment of
a Project, as we might have been with its Success. It does not seem
to me a good reason to decline prosecuting a new Experiment which
apparently increases the Power of Man over Matter, till we can see to
what Use that Power may be applied. When we have learnt to manage it,
we may hope some time or other to find Uses for it, as Men have done
for Magnetism and Electricity of which the first Experiments were mere
Matters of Amusement.

This Experience is by no means a trifling one. It may be attended with
important Consequences that no one can foresee. We should not suffer
Pride to prevent our progress in Science. Beings of a Rank and Nature
far superior to ours have not disdained to amuse themselves with making
and launching Balloons, otherwise we should never have enjoyed the
Light of those glorious objects that rule our Day & Night, nor have had
the Pleasure of riding round the Sun ourselves upon the Balloon we now
inhabit.

  With great and sincere Esteem, I am,
  Dear Sir,
  Your most obed^t
  & most humble Servant,
  B. FRANKLIN

Sir JOSEPH BANKS.


(POSTPONEMENT OF CHARLES' AND ROBERT'S ASCENSION.)

PASSY, Nov. 30, 1783

Dear Sir,

I did myself the honour of writing to you the Beginning of last Week,
and I sent you by the Courier, M. Faujas's Book upon the Balloons,
which I hope you have receiv'd. I did hope to have given you to day
an Account of Mr. Charles's grand Balloon, which was to have gone up
yesterday; but the filling it with inflammable Air having taken more
time than had been calculated, it is deferr'd till to-morrow. I send
you herewith a Paper in which you will see what was proposed by Mess^rs
Robert who constructed the Machine; and some other Papers relative
to the same Subject, the last of which is curious, as containing the
Journal of the first Aerial Voyage performed by Man.--I purpose being
present to-morrow at the Experiment, and shall give you an Acc^t of it
by the Wednesday's Post. With sincere & great Esteem, I have the honour
to be,

  Sir, Your most obed^t humble Serv^t
  B. FRANKLIN

Sir JOS. BANKS, Bar^t.


(THE SECOND AERIAL VOYAGE BY MAN.)

PASSY, Dec. 1, 1783.

Dear Sir,

In mine of yesterday, I promis'd to give you an Account of Mess^rs.
Charles & Robert's Experiment, which was to have been made at this Day,
and at which I intended to be present. Being a little indispos'd, & the
Air cool, and the Ground damp, I declin'd going into the Garden of the
Tuilleries where the Balloon was plac'd, not knowing how long I might
be oblig'd to wait there before it was ready to depart; and chose to
stay in my Carriage near the Statue of Louis XV. from whence I could
well see it rise, & have an extensive View of the Region of Air thro'
which, as the Wind sat, it was likely to pass. The Morning was foggy,
but about one aClock, the Air became tolerably clear, to the great
Satisfaction of the Spectators, who were infinite, Notice having been
given of the intended Experiment several Days before in the Papers,
so that all Paris was out, either about the Tuilleries, on the Quays
& Bridges, in the Fields, the Streets, at the Windows, or on the Tops
of Houses, besides the Inhabitants of all the Towns & Villages of the
Environs. Never before was a philosophical Experiment so magnificently
attended. Some Guns were fired to give Notice, that the Departure
of the great Balloon was near, and a small one was discharg'd which
went to an amazing Height, there being but little Wind to make it
deviate from its perpendicular Course, and at length the Sight of it
was lost. Means were used, I am told, to prevent the great Balloon's
rising so high as might indanger its Bursting. Several Bags of Sand
were taken on board before the Cord that held it down was cut, and
the whole Weight being then too much to be lifted, such a Quantity was
discharg'd as to permit its Rising slowly. Thus it would sooner arrive
at that Region where it would be in Equilibrio with the surrounding
Air, and by discharging more Sand afterwards, it might go higher if
desired. Between One & Two aClock, all Eyes were gratified with seeing
it rise majestically from among the Trees, and ascend gradually above
the Buildings, a most beautiful Spectacle! When it was about 200 feet
high, the brave Adventurers held out and wav'd a little white Pennant,
on both Sides their Car, to salute the Spectators, who return'd loud
Claps of Applause. The Wind was very little, so that the Object,
tho' moving to the Northward, continued long in View; and it was a
great while before the admiring People began to disperse. The Persons
embark'd were Mr. Charles, Professor of Experimental Philosophy, &
a zealous Promoter of that Science; and one of the Messieurs Robert,
the very ingenious Constructors of the Machine. When it arrived at its
height, which I suppose might be 3 or 400 Toises, it appeared to have
only horizontal Motion. I had a Pocket Glass, with which I follow'd it,
till I lost Sight, first of the Men, then of the Car, and when I last
saw the Balloon, it appear'd no bigger than a Walnut. I write this at 7
in the Evening. What became of them is not yet known here. I hope they
descended by Day-light, so as to see & avoid falling among Trees or on
Houses, and that the Experiment was completed without any mischievous
Accident which the Novelty of it & the want of Experience might well
occasion. I am the more anxious for the Event, because I am not well
inform'd of the Means provided for letting themselves gently down, and
the Loss of these very ingenious Men would not only be a Discouragement
to the Progress of the Art, but be a sensible Loss to Science and
Society.

I shall inclose one of the Tickets of Admission, on which the Globe was
represented, as originally intended, but is altered by the Pen to show
its real State when it went off. When the Tickets were engraved, the
Car was to have been hung to the Neck of the Globe, as represented by a
little Drawing I have made in the Corner A. I suppose it may have been
an Apprehension of Danger in straining too much the Balloon or tearing
the Silk, that induc'd the Constructors to throw a Net over it, fix'd
to a Hoop which went round its Middle, and to hang the Car to that
Hoop, as you see in Fig. B.

Tuesday Morning, Dec. 2. I am reliev'd from my Anxiety, by hearing
that the Adventurers descended well near l'Isle Adam, before Sunset.
This Place is near 7 Leagues from Paris. Had the Wind blown fresh, they
might have gone much farther.

If I receive any farther Particulars of Importance I shall communicate
them hereafter.

  With great Esteem, I am, Dear Sir,
  Your most obedient
  & most humble servant,
  B. FRANKLIN

P. S. Tuesday Evening.

Since writing the above, I have receiv'd the printed Paper & the
Manuscript, containing some Particulars of the Experiment, which I
enclose.--I hear farther, that the Travellers had perfect Command of
their Carriage, descending as they pleas'd by letting some of the
inflammable Air escape, and rising again by discharging some Sand;
that they descended over a Field so low as to talk with Labourers in
passing and mounted again to pass a Hill. The little Balloon falling at
Vincennes, shows that mounting higher it met with a Current of Air in a
contrary Direction: An Observation that may be of use to future aerial
Voyagers.

Sir JOSEPH BANKS, Bar^t.


(SOME PARTICULARS OF THE SECOND VOYAGE.)

Mr. Le Chevalier de Cubière qui a suivi la marche du Globe est
arrivé chez M. Charles hier à 10 heures 1/4 du Soir et a dit, Que les
Voyageurs étoient descendus lentement et volontairement à trois heures
3/4 dans les Marais de Nesle et d'Hebouville, une lieue et demie après
l'Isle Adam. Ils y ont été accueillis par Mrs. le Duc de Chartre et
Fitz James, qui après les avoir embrassés, ont signé le Procès verbal
de lieu et d'heure. Beaucoup d'habitants de la campagne et le curé de
Nesle et d'Hebouville se sont aussi trouvés à leur arrivée.

Les Voyageurs ont assuré n'avoir éprouvé que des Sensations agréables
dans leur traversée. Mr. Robert étant sorti du Char, et aidé de
quelques Paysans, se disposoit à remplacer sa Pesanteur avec de la
Terre; mais M. Charles voulant profiter du peu de Jour qui lui restoit,
pour faire encore quelques observations, impatienté de la Lenteur de
cette operation, a repris son Vol à 4 heures et 1/4, avec un excédant
de Légèreté d'environ 100 Livres par une Ascension droite et une
rapidité telle qu'en peu de tems le Globe s'est trouvé hors de vue. La
Chute du Jour l'a déterminé à redescendre une lieue et 1/2 plus loin,
aux environs de Fouroy.

La Machine n'a éprouvé aucun Accident. Elle perdoit légèrement par une
petite ouverture qui existoit dejà quelques heures avant son Depart
auprès de l'appendice, et dont le Morceau de Taffetas que l'on y avoit
appliqué au moment de l'expérience, s'étoit detaché.

       *       *       *       *       *

Le petit Ballon est tombé dans la Cour du Dongeon à Vincennes. Il a été
ramassé par des Enfans et vendu 6_d._ au nommé Bertrand. Il avoit perdu
son air inflammable par le Robinet qu'on avoit laissé ouvert exprès
pour empêcher l'explosion à trop grande hauteur. On évalue qu'il a été
50 minutes en l'air. Le Taffetas étoit roussi aux deux Extremités.


NOTES CONCERNING THE LETTERS.

_Letter of August 30._ The hand-writing is in a more flowing style than
the subsequent letters. Bigelow omits paragraph ten beginning "It is
said." Both Bigelow and Smyth give another paragraph in the Postscript,
beyond the signature "B. F." in my copy; also a note dated Sept. 2^d,
which contains calculations in French relating to the balloon. Smyth
says that these additions are not in the University of Pennsylvania
draft but that they occur in this press-copy, which is obviously a
mistake. In paragraph two of the Postscript "mov'd out," in Smyth,
should read "being moved out," and in the last line but one "upon"
should read "up in."

_Letter of October 8._ In the eighth line after the word "Balloon"
Smyth inserts "lately." Part of the valedictory and the signature are
omitted by Bigelow and Smyth, but the former gives an "Extract of the
Proposals" for the balloon of which I have no copy.

_Letter of November 21._ This should be dated Nov. 22, since the
ascension of d'Arlandes and de Rozier which, according to the
letter, took place the previous day is known to have been on the
21st. The orthography of the French words in Bigelow and Smyth does
not always agree with the copy. In paragraph three, for "Post," in
Smyth, read "Port;" in paragraph six for "Adventures," in Smyth, read
"Adventurers;" in paragraph thirteen for "By the emulation," in Smyth,
read "But the Emulation;" in paragraph fifteen for the phrase, in
Smyth and Bigelow, beginning, "I wish I could see the same emulation,"
correct to end, "between the two Nations as I see between the two
Parties here;" in paragraph sixteen, in both Bigelow and Smyth, for
"Experiment," read "Experience;" and for the unintelligible phrase in
both Bigelow and Smyth, "Beings of a frank and [sic] nature," read
"Beings of a Rank and Nature." Minor discrepancies between this and
the other press-copies and the letters as printed by Bigelow and Smyth
also occur. The signature is in pencil in this copy. A "P. S. Nov.
25th" is not in the press-copy, contrary to Smyth's statement, but
I have a press-copy of the French _Procès-Verbal_, therein referred
to, in Franklin's handwriting with his name and eight others affixed
as witnesses. Neither Bigelow nor Smyth print this document, which
was first reproduced in the book mentioned by Franklin in the first
paragraph of his letter, viz: "Description des Expériences de la
Machine Aérostatique par M. Faujas de Saint-Fond, Paris, 1783." Since
Franklin's copy of the _Procès-Verbal_ differs only in his spelling
the word "_sang-froid_" instead of "_sens-froid_," I do not print it.
However, other changes were introduced in the _Procès-Verbal_ when
reprinted in the second volume of M. Faujas' work, published in 1784.
The plate forming the frontispiece to this volume shows the balloon as
seen from Mr. Franklin's terrace at Passy.

_Letter of November 30._ This has never been published so far as I
know. "The Journal of the first Aerial Voyage," here mentioned, was
written by the Marquis d'Arlandes to M. Faujas de Saint-Fond on Nov.
28th and first printed in the _Journal de Paris_ but was republished by
Faujas de Saint-Fond in his second volume.

_Letter of December 1._ Smyth states that he reproduced this
letter from my press-copy but he omits the capital letters and the
contractions in spelling, as well as the references "A" and "B," which
are given by Bigelow with the remark that the drawings were not found.
"The Manuscript, containing some Particulars of the Experiment, which
I enclose," mentioned in the Postscript, is a two-page account in
French, in Franklin's handwriting, by an eye-witness of the voyage, M.
le Chevalier de Cubière. As this interesting document has never been
published, to my knowledge, I have given it here _literatim_ from my
press-copy.


BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

HIS AUTOBIOGRAPHY

1706-1757

Twyford, at the Bishop of St. Asaph's, [1] 1771.

Dear Son: I have ever had pleasure in obtaining any little anecdotes of
my ancestors. You may remember the inquiries I made among the remains of
my relations when you were with me in England, and the journey I
undertook for that purpose. Imagining it may be equally agreeable to [2]
you to know the circumstances of my life, many of which you are yet
unacquainted with, and expecting the enjoyment of a week's uninterrupted
leisure in my present country retirement, I sit down to write them for
you. To which I have besides some other inducements. Having emerged from
the poverty and obscurity in which I was born and bred, to a state of
affluence and some degree of reputation in the world, and having gone so
far through life with a considerable share of felicity, the conducing
means I made use of, which with the blessing of God so well succeeded,
my posterity may like to know, as they may find some of them suitable to
their own situations, and therefore fit to be imitated.

[1] The country-seat of Bishop Shipley, the good bishop, as Dr. Franklin
used to style him.--B.

[2] After the words "agreeable to" the words "some of" were interlined
and afterward effaced.--B.

That felicity, when I reflected on it, has induced me sometimes to say,
that were it offered to my choice, I should have no objection to a
repetition of the same life from its beginning, only asking the
advantages authors have in a second edition to correct some faults of
the first. So I might, besides correcting the faults, change some
sinister accidents and events of it for others more favorable. But
though this were denied, I should still accept the offer. Since such a
repetition is not to be expected, the next thing most like living one's
life over again seems to be a recollection of that life, and to make
that recollection as durable as possible by putting it down in writing.

Hereby, too, I shall indulge the inclination so natural in old men, to
be talking of themselves and their own past actions; and I shall indulge
it without being tiresome to others, who, through respect to age, might
conceive themselves obliged to give me a hearing, since this may be read
or not as any one pleases. And, lastly (I may as well confess it, since
my denial of it will be believed by nobody), perhaps I shall a good deal
gratify my own vanity. Indeed, I scarce ever heard or saw the
introductory words, "Without vanity I may say," &c., but some vain thing
immediately followed. Most people dislike vanity in others, whatever
share they have of it themselves; but I give it fair quarter wherever I
meet with it, being persuaded that it is often productive of good to the
possessor, and to others that are within his sphere of action; and
therefore, in many cases, it would not be altogether absurd if a man
were to thank God for his vanity among the other comforts of life.

And now I speak of thanking God, I desire with all humility to
acknowledge that I owe the mentioned happiness of my past life to His
kind providence, which lead me to the means I used and gave them
success. My belief of this induces me to hope, though I must not
presume, that the same goodness will still be exercised toward me, in
continuing that happiness, or enabling me to bear a fatal reverse, which
I may experience as others have done: the complexion of my future
fortune being known to Him only in whose power it is to bless to us even
our afflictions.

The notes one of my uncles (who had the same kind of curiosity in
collecting family anecdotes) once put into my hands, furnished me with
several particulars relating to our ancestors. From these notes I
learned that the family had lived in the same village, Ecton, in
Northamptonshire, for three hundred years, and how much longer he knew
not (perhaps from the time when the name of Franklin, that before was
the name of an order of people, was assumed by them as a surname when
others took surnames all over the kingdom), on a freehold of about
thirty acres, aided by the smith's business, which had continued in the
family till his time, the eldest son being always bred to that business;
a custom which he and my father followed as to their eldest sons. When I
searched the registers at Ecton, I found an account of their births,
marriages and burials from the year 1555 only, there being no registers
kept in that parish at any time preceding. By that register I perceived
that I was the youngest son of the youngest son for five generations
back. My grandfather Thomas, who was born in 1598, lived at Ecton till
he grew too old to follow business longer, when he went to live with his
son John, a dyer at Banbury, in Oxfordshire, with whom my father served
an apprenticeship. There my grandfather died and lies buried. We saw his
gravestone in 1758. His eldest son Thomas lived in the house at Ecton,
and left it with the land to his only child, a daughter, who, with her
husband, one Fisher, of Wellingborough, sold it to Mr. Isted, now lord
of the manor there. My grandfather had four sons that grew up, viz.:
Thomas, John, Benjamin and Josiah. I will give you what account I can of
them, at this distance from my papers, and if these are not lost in my
absence, you will among them find many more particulars.

Thomas was bred a smith under his father; but, being ingenious, and
encouraged in learning (as all my brothers were) by an Esquire Palmer,
then the principal gentleman in that parish, he qualified himself for
the business of scrivener; became a considerable man in the county; was
a chief mover of all public-spirited undertakings for the county or town
of Northampton, and his own village, of which many instances were
related of him; and much taken notice of and patronized by the then Lord
Halifax. He died in 1702, January 6, old style, just four years to a day
before I was born. The account we received of his life and character
from some old people at Ecton, I remember, struck you as something
extraordinary, from its similarity to what you knew of mine. "Had he
died on the same day," you said, "one might have supposed a
transmigration."

John was bred a dyer, I believe of woolens. Benjamin was bred a silk
dyer, serving an apprenticeship at London. He was an ingenious man. I
remember him well, for when I was a boy he came over to my father in
Boston, and lived in the house with us some years. He lived to a great
age. His grandson, Samuel Franklin, now lives in Boston. He left behind
him two quarto volumes, MS., of his own poetry, consisting of little
occasional pieces addressed to his friends and relations, of which the
following, sent to me, is a specimen. ¹ He had formed a short-hand of
his own, which he taught me, but, never practising it, I have now forgot
it. I was named after this uncle, there being a particular affection
between him and my father. He was very pious, a great attender of
sermons of the best preachers, which he took down in his short-hand, and
had with him many volumes of them. He was also much of a politician; too
much, perhaps, for his station. There fell lately into my hands, in
London, a collection he had made of all the principal pamphlets,
relating to public affairs, from 1641 to 1717; many of the volumes are
wanting as appears by the numbering, but there still remain eight
volumes in folio, and twenty-four in quarto and in octavo. A dealer in
old books met with them, and knowing me by my sometimes buying of him,
he brought them to me. It seems my uncle must have left them here, when
he went to America, which was about fifty years since. There are many of
his notes in the margins.

¹ Here follow in the margin the words, in brackets, "here insert it,"
but the poetry is not given. Mr. Sparks informs us (Life of Franklin,
p. 6) that these volumes had been preserved, and were in possession of
Mrs. Emmons, of Boston, great-grandmother of their author.

This obscure family of ours was early in the Reformation, and continued
Protestants through the reign of Queen Mary, when they were sometimes in
danger of trouble on account of their zeal against popery. They had got
an English Bible, and to conceal and secure it, it was fastened open
with tapes under and within the cover of a joint-stool. When my
great-great-grandfather read it to his family, he turned up the
joint-stool upon his knees, turning over the leaves then under the
tapes. One of the children stood at the door to give notice if he saw
the apparitor coming, who was an officer of the spiritual court. In that
case the stool was turned down again upon its feet, when the Bible
remained concealed under it as before. This anecdote I had from my uncle
Benjamin. The family continued all of the Church of England till about
the end of Charles the Second's reign, when some of the ministers that
had been outed for nonconformity holding conventicles in
Northamptonshire, Benjamin and Josiah adhered to them, and so continued
all their lives: the rest of the family remained with the Episcopal
Church.

Josiah, my father, married young, and carried his wife with three
children into New England, about 1682. The conventicles having been
forbidden by law, and frequently disturbed, induced some considerable
men of his acquaintance to remove to that country, and he was prevailed
with to accompany them thither, where they expected to enjoy their mode
of religion with freedom. By the same wife he had four children more
born there, and by a second wife ten more, in all seventeen; of which I
remember thirteen sitting at one time at his table, who all grew up to
be men and women, and married; I was the youngest son, and the youngest
child but two, and was born in Boston, New England. My mother, the
second wife, was Abiah Folger, daughter of Peter Folger, one of the
first settlers of New England, of whom honorable mention is made by
Cotton Mather, in his church history of that country, entitled Magnalia
Christi Americana, as "a godly, learned Englishman," if I remember the
words rightly. I have heard that he wrote sundry small occasional
pieces, but only one of them was printed, which I saw now many years
since. It was written in 1675, in the home-spun verse of that time and
people, and addressed to those then concerned in the government there.
It was in favor of liberty of conscience, and in behalf of the Baptists,
Quakers, and other sectaries that had been under persecution, ascribing
the Indian wars, and other distresses that had befallen the country, to
that persecution, as so many judgments of God to punish so heinous an
offense, and exhorting a repeal of those uncharitable laws. The whole
appeared to me as written with a good deal of decent plainness and manly
freedom. The six concluding lines I remember, though I have forgotten
the two first of the stanza; but the purport of them was, that his
censures proceeded from good-will, and, therefore, he would be known to
be the author.

   "Because to be a libeller (says he)
       I hate it with my heart;
    From Sherburne town, where now I dwell
       My name I do put here;
    Without offense your real friend,
       It is Peter Folgier."

My elder brothers were all put apprentices to different trades. I was
put to the grammar-school at eight years of age, my father intending to
devote me, as the tithe of his sons, to the service of the Church. My
early readiness in learning to read (which must have been very early, as
I do not remember when I could not read), and the opinion of all his
friends, that I should certainly make a good scholar, encouraged him in
this purpose of his. My uncle Benjamin, too, approved of it, and
proposed to give me all his short-hand volumes of sermons, I suppose as
a stock to set up with, if I would learn his character. I continued,
however, at the grammar-school not quite one year, though in that time I
had risen gradually from the middle of the class of that year to be the
head of it, and farther was removed into the next class above it, in
order to go with that into the third at the end of the year. But my
father, in the meantime, from a view of the expense of a college
education, which having so large a family he could not well afford, and
the mean living many so educated were afterwards able to obtain--reasons
that he gave to his friends in my hearing--altered his first intention,
took me from the grammar-school, and sent me to a school for writing and
arithmetic, kept by a then famous man, Mr. George Brownell, very
successful in his profession generally, and that by mild, encouraging
methods. Under him I acquired fair writing pretty soon, but I failed in
the arithmetic, and made no progress in it. At ten years old I was taken
home to assist my father in his business, which was that of a
tallow-chandler and sope-boiler; a business he was not bred to, but had
assumed on his arrival in New England, and on finding his dying trade
would not maintain his family, being in little request. Accordingly, I
was employed in cutting wick for the candles, filling the dipping mold
and the molds for cast candles, attending the shop, going of errands,
etc.

I disliked the trade, and had a strong inclination for the sea, but my
father declared against it; however, living near the water, I was much
in and about it, learnt early to swim well, and to manage boats; and
when in a boat or canoe with other boys, I was commonly allowed to
govern, especially in any case of difficulty; and upon other occasions I
was generally a leader among the boys, and sometimes led them into
scrapes, of which I will mention one instance, as it shows an early
projecting public spirit, tho' not then justly conducted.

There was a salt-marsh that bounded part of the mill-pond, on the edge
of which, at high water, we used to stand to fish for minnows. By much
trampling, we had made it a mere quagmire. My proposal was to build a
wharff there fit for us to stand upon, and I showed my comrades a large
heap of stones, which were intended for a new house near the marsh, and
which would very well suit our purpose. Accordingly, in the evening,
when the workmen were gone, I assembled a number of my play-fellows, and
working with them diligently like so many emmets, sometimes two or three
to a stone, we brought them all away and built our little wharff. The
next morning the workmen were surprised at missing the stones, which
were found in our wharff. Inquiry was made after the removers; we were
discovered and complained of; several of us were corrected by our
fathers; and though I pleaded the usefulness of the work, mine convinced
me that nothing was useful which was not honest.

I think you may like to know something of his person and character. He
had an excellent constitution of body, was of middle stature, but well
set, and very strong; he was ingenious, could draw prettily, was skilled
a little in music, and had a clear pleasing voice, so that when he
played psalm tunes on his violin and sung withal, as he sometimes did in
an evening after the business of the day was over, it was extremely
agreeable to hear. He had a mechanical genius too, and, on occasion, was
very handy in the use of other tradesmen's tools; but his great
excellence lay in a sound understanding and solid judgment in prudential
matters, both in private and publick affairs. In the latter, indeed, he
was never employed, the numerous family he had to educate and the
straitness of his circumstances keeping him close to his trade; but I
remember well his being frequently visited by leading people, who
consulted him for his opinion in affairs of the town or of the church he
belonged to, and showed a good deal of respect for his judgment and
advice: he was also much consulted by private persons about their
affairs when any difficulty occurred, and frequently chosen an
arbitrator between contending parties.

At his table he liked to have, as often as he could, some sensible
friend or neighbor to converse with, and always took care to start some
ingenious or useful topic for discourse, which might tend to improve the
minds of his children. By this means he turned our attention to what was
good, just, and prudent in the conduct of life; and little or no notice
was ever taken of what related to the victuals on the table, whether it
was well or ill dressed, in or out of season, of good or bad flavor,
preferable or inferior to this or that other thing of the kind, so that
I was bro't up in such a perfect inattention to those matters as to be
quite indifferent what kind of food was set before me, and so
unobservant of it, that to this day if I am asked I can scarce tell a
few hours after dinner what I dined upon. This has been a convenience to
me in travelling, where my companions have been sometimes very unhappy
for want of a suitable gratification of their more delicate, because
better instructed, tastes and appetites.

My mother had likewise an excellent constitution: she suckled all her
ten children. I never knew either my father or mother to have any
sickness but that of which they dy'd, he at 89, and she at 85 years of
age. They lie buried together at Boston, where I some years since placed
a marble over their grave, with this inscription:

Josiah Franklin,
and
Abiah his wife,
lie here interred.
They lived lovingly together in wedlock
fifty-five years.
Without an estate, or any gainful employment,
By constant labor and industry,
with God's blessing,
They maintained a large family
comfortably,
and brought up thirteen children
and seven grandchildren
reputably.
From this instance, reader,
Be encouraged to diligence in thy calling,
And distrust not Providence.
He was a pious and prudent man;
She, a discreet and virtuous woman.
Their youngest son,
In filial regard to their memory,
Places this stone.
J.F. born 1655, died 1744, Ætat 89.
A.F. born 1667, died 1752, ------85.

By my rambling digressions I perceive myself to be grown old. I us'd to
write more methodically. But one does not dress for private company as
for a publick ball. 'Tis perhaps only negligence.

To return: I continued thus employed in my father's business for two
years, that is, till I was twelve years old; and my brother John, who
was bred to that business, having left my father, married, and set up
for himself at Rhode Island, there was all appearance that I was
destined to supply his place, and become a tallow-chandler. But my
dislike to the trade continuing, my father was under apprehensions that
if he did not find one for me more agreeable, I should break away and
get to sea, as his son Josiah had done, to his great vexation. He
therefore sometimes took me to walk with him, and see joiners,
bricklayers, turners, braziers, etc., at their work, that he might
observe my inclination, and endeavor to fix it on some trade or other on
land. It has ever since been a pleasure to me to see good workmen handle
their tools; and it has been useful to me, having learnt so much by it
as to be able to do little jobs myself in my house when a workman could
not readily be got, and to construct little machines for my experiments,
while the intention of making the experiment was fresh and warm in my
mind. My father at last fixed upon the cutler's trade, and my uncle
Benjamin's son Samuel, who was bred to that business in London, being
about that time established in Boston, I was sent to be with him some
time on liking. But his expectations of a fee with me displeasing my
father, I was taken home again.

From a child I was fond of reading, and all the little money that came
into my hands was ever laid out in books. Pleased with the Pilgrim's
Progress, my first collection was of John Bunyan's works in separate
little volumes. I afterward sold them to enable me to buy R. Burton's
Historical Collections; they were small chapmen's books, and cheap, 40
or 50 in all. My father's little library consisted chiefly of books in
polemic divinity, most of which I read, and have since often regretted
that, at a time when I had such a thirst for knowledge, more proper
books had not fallen in my way since it was now resolved I should not be
a clergyman. Plutarch's Lives there was in which I read abundantly, and
I still think that time spent to great advantage. There was also a book
of De Foe's, called an Essay on Projects, and another of Dr. Mather's,
called Essays to do Good, which perhaps gave me a turn of thinking that
had an influence on some of the principal future events of my life.

This bookish inclination at length determined my father to make me a
printer, though he had already one son (James) of that profession. In
1717 my brother James returned from England with a press and letters to
set up his business in Boston. I liked it much better than that of my
father, but still had a hankering for the sea. To prevent the
apprehended effect of such an inclination, my father was impatient to
have me bound to my brother. I stood out some time, but at last was
persuaded, and signed the indentures when I was yet but twelve years
old. I was to serve as an apprentice till I was twenty-one years of age,
only I was to be allowed journeyman's wages during the last year. In a
little time I made great proficiency in the business, and became a
useful hand to my brother. I now had access to better books. An
acquaintance with the apprentices of booksellers enabled me sometimes to
borrow a small one, which I was careful to return soon and clean. Often
I sat up in my room reading the greatest part of the night, when the
book was borrowed in the evening and to be returned early in the
morning, lest it should be missed or wanted.

And after some time an ingenious tradesman, Mr. Matthew Adams, who had a
pretty collection of books, and who frequented our printing-house, took
notice of me, invited me to his library, and very kindly lent me such
books as I chose to read. I now took a fancy to poetry, and made some
little pieces; my brother, thinking it might turn to account, encouraged
me, and put me on composing occasional ballads. One was called The
Lighthouse Tragedy, and contained an account of the drowning of Captain
Worthilake, with his two daughters: the other was a sailor's song, on
the taking of Teach (or Blackbeard) the pirate. They were wretched
stuff, in the Grub-street-ballad style; and when they were printed he
sent me about the town to sell them. The first sold wonderfully, the
event being recent, having made a great noise. This flattered my vanity;
but my father discouraged me by ridiculing my performances, and telling
me verse-makers were generally beggars. So I escaped being a poet, most
probably a very bad one; but as prose writing had been of great use to
me in the course of my life, and was a principal means of my
advancement, I shall tell you how, in such a situation, I acquired what
little ability I have in that way.

There was another bookish lad in the town, John Collins by name, with
whom I was intimately acquainted. We sometimes disputed, and very fond
we were of argument, and very desirous of confuting one another, which
disputatious turn, by the way, is apt to become a very bad habit, making
people often extremely disagreeable in company by the contradiction that
is necessary to bring it into practice; and thence, besides souring and
spoiling the conversation, is productive of disgusts and, perhaps
enmities where you may have occasion for friendship. I had caught it by
reading my father's books of dispute about religion. Persons of good
sense, I have since observed, seldom fall into it, except lawyers,
university men, and men of all sorts that have been bred at Edinborough.

A question was once, somehow or other, started between Collins and me,
of the propriety of educating the female sex in learning, and their
abilities for study. He was of opinion that it was improper, and that
they were naturally unequal to it. I took the contrary side, perhaps a
little for dispute's sake. He was naturally more eloquent, had a ready
plenty of words; and sometimes, as I thought, bore me down more by his
fluency than by the strength of his reasons. As we parted without
settling the point, and were not to see one another again for some time,
I sat down to put my arguments in writing, which I copied fair and sent
to him. He answered, and I replied. Three or four letters of a side had
passed, when my father happened to find my papers and read them. Without
entering into the discussion, he took occasion to talk to me about the
manner of my writing; observed that, though I had the advantage of my
antagonist in correct spelling and pointing (which I ow'd to the
printing-house), I fell far short in elegance of expression, in method
and in perspicuity, of which he convinced me by several instances. I saw
the justice of his remark, and thence grew more attentive to the manner
in writing, and determined to endeavor at improvement.

About this time I met with an odd volume of the Spectator. It was the
third. I had never before seen any of them. I bought it, read it over
and over, and was much delighted with it. I thought the writing
excellent, and wished, if possible, to imitate it. With this view I took
some of the papers, and, making short hints of the sentiment in each
sentence, laid them by a few days, and then, without looking at the
book, try'd to compleat the papers again, by expressing each hinted
sentiment at length, and as fully as it had been expressed before, in
any suitable words that should come to hand. Then I compared my
Spectator with the original, discovered some of my faults, and corrected
them. But I found I wanted a stock of words, or a readiness in
recollecting and using them, which I thought I should have acquired
before that time if I had gone on making verses; since the continual
occasion for words of the same import, but of different length, to suit
the measure, or of different sound for the rhyme, would have laid me
under a constant necessity of searching for variety, and also have
tended to fix that variety in my mind, and make me master of it.
Therefore I took some of the tales and turned them into verse; and,
after a time, when I had pretty well forgotten the prose, turned them
back again. I also sometimes jumbled my collections of hints into
confusion, and after some weeks endeavored to reduce them into the best
order, before I began to form the full sentences and compleat the paper.
This was to teach me method in the arrangement of thoughts. By comparing
my work afterwards with the original, I discovered many faults and
amended them; but I sometimes had the pleasure of fancying that, in
certain particulars of small import, I had been lucky enough to improve
the method or the language, and this encouraged me to think I might
possibly in time come to be a tolerable English writer, of which I was
extremely ambitious. My time for these exercises and for reading was at
night, after work or before it began in the morning, or on Sundays, when
I contrived to be in the printing-house alone, evading as much as I
could the common attendance on public worship which my father used to
exact on me when I was under his care, and which indeed I still thought
a duty, though I could not, as it seemed to me, afford time to practise
it.

When about 16 years of age I happened to meet with a book, written by
one Tryon, recommending a vegetable diet. I determined to go into it. My
brother, being yet unmarried, did not keep house, but boarded himself
and his apprentices in another family. My refusing to eat flesh
occasioned an inconveniency, and I was frequently chid for my
singularity. I made myself acquainted with Tryon's manner of preparing
some of his dishes, such as boiling potatoes or rice, making hasty
pudding, and a few others, and then proposed to my brother, that if he
would give me, weekly, half the money he paid for my board, I would
board myself. He instantly agreed to it, and I presently found that I
could save half what he paid me. This was an additional fund for buying
books. But I had another advantage in it. My brother and the rest going
from the printing-house to their meals, I remained there alone, and,
despatching presently my light repast, which often was no more than a
bisket or a slice of bread, a handful of raisins or a tart from the
pastry-cook's, and a glass of water, had the rest of the time till their
return for study, in which I made the greater progress, from that
greater clearness of head and quicker apprehension which usually attend
temperance in eating and drinking.

And now it was that, being on some occasion made asham'd of my ignorance
in figures, which I had twice failed in learning when at school, I took
Cocker's book of Arithmetick, and went through the whole by myself with
great ease. I also read Seller's and Shermy's books of Navigation, and
became acquainted with the little geometry they contain; but never
proceeded far in that science. And I read about this time Locke On Human
Understanding, and the Art of Thinking, by Messrs. du Port Royal.

While I was intent on improving my language, I met with an English
grammar (I think it was Greenwood's), at the end of which there were two
little sketches of the arts of rhetoric and logic, the latter finishing
with a specimen of a dispute in the Socratic method; and soon after I
procur'd Xenophon's Memorable Things of Socrates, wherein there are many
instances of the same method. I was charm'd with it, adopted it, dropt
my abrupt contradiction and positive argumentation, and put on the
humble inquirer and doubter. And being then, from reading Shaftesbury
and Collins, become a real doubter in many points of our religious
doctrine, I found this method safest for myself and very embarrassing to
those against whom I used it; therefore I took a delight in it,
practis'd it continually, and grew very artful and expert in drawing
people, even of superior knowledge, into concessions, the consequences
of which they did not foresee, entangling them in difficulties out of
which they could not extricate themselves, and so obtaining victories
that neither myself nor my cause always deserved. I continu'd this
method some few years, but gradually left it, retaining only the habit
of expressing myself in terms of modest diffidence; never using, when I
advanced any thing that may possibly be disputed, the words certainly,
undoubtedly, or any others that give the air of positiveness to an
opinion; but rather say, I conceive or apprehend a thing to be so and
so; it appears to me, or I should think it so or so, for such and such
reasons; or I imagine it to be so; or it is so, if I am not mistaken.
This habit, I believe, has been of great advantage to me when I have had
occasion to inculcate my opinions, and persuade men into measures that I
have been from time to time engag'd in promoting; and, as the chief ends
of conversation are to inform or to be informed, to please or to
persuade, I wish well-meaning, sensible men would not lessen their power
of doing good by a positive, assuming manner, that seldom fails to
disgust, tends to create opposition, and to defeat every one of those
purposes for which speech was given to us, to wit, giving or receiving
information or pleasure. For, if you would inform, a positive and
dogmatical manner in advancing your sentiments may provoke contradiction
and prevent a candid attention. If you wish information and improvement
from the knowledge of others, and yet at the same time express yourself
as firmly fix'd in your present opinions, modest, sensible men, who do
not love disputation, will probably leave you undisturbed in the
possession of your error. And by such a manner, you can seldom hope to
recommend yourself in pleasing your hearers, or to persuade those whose
concurrence you desire. Pope says, judiciously:

   "Men should be taught as if you taught them not,
    And things unknown propos'd as things forgot;"

farther recommending to us

      "To speak, tho' sure, with seeming diffidence."

And he might have coupled with this line that which he has coupled with
another, I think, less properly,

      "For want of modesty is want of sense."

If you ask, Why less properly? I must repeat the lines,

      "Immodest words admit of no defense,
       For want of modesty is want of sense."

Now, is not want of sense (where a man is so unfortunate as to want it)
some apology for his want of modesty? and would not the lines stand more
justly thus?

      "Immodest words admit but this defense,
       That want of modesty is want of sense."

This, however, I should submit to better judgments.

My brother had, in 1720 or 1721, begun to print a newspaper. It was the
second that appeared in America, and was called the New England Courant.
The only one before it was the Boston News-Letter. I remember his being
dissuaded by some of his friends from the undertaking, as not likely to
succeed, one newspaper being, in their judgment, enough for America. At
this time (1771) there are not less than five-and-twenty. He went on,
however, with the undertaking, and after having worked in composing the
types and printing off the sheets, I was employed to carry the papers
thro' the streets to the customers.

He had some ingenious men among his friends, who amus'd themselves by
writing little pieces for this paper, which gain'd it credit and made it
more in demand, and these gentlemen often visited us. Hearing their
conversations, and their accounts of the approbation their papers were
received with, I was excited to try my hand among them; but, being still
a boy, and suspecting that my brother would object to printing anything
of mine in his paper if he knew it to be mine, I contrived to disguise
my hand, and, writing an anonymous paper, I put it in at night under the
door of the printing-house. It was found in the morning, and
communicated to his writing friends when they call'd in as usual. They
read it, commented on it in my hearing, and I had the exquisite pleasure
of finding it met with their approbation, and that, in their different
guesses at the author, none were named but men of some character among
us for learning and ingenuity. I suppose now that I was rather lucky in
my judges, and that perhaps they were not really so very good ones as I
then esteem'd them.

Encourag'd, however, by this, I wrote and convey'd in the same way to
the press several more papers which were equally approv'd; and I kept my
secret till my small fund of sense for such performances was pretty well
exhausted and then I discovered it, when I began to be considered a
little more by my brother's acquaintance, and in a manner that did not
quite please him, as he thought, probably with reason, that it tended to
make me too vain. And, perhaps, this might be one occasion of the
differences that we began to have about this time. Though a brother, he
considered himself as my master, and me as his apprentice, and
accordingly, expected the same services from me as he would from
another, while I thought he demean'd me too much in some he requir'd of
me, who from a brother expected more indulgence. Our disputes were often
brought before our father, and I fancy I was either generally in the
right, or else a better pleader, because the judgment was generally in
my favor. But my brother was passionate, and had often beaten me, which
I took extreamly amiss; and, thinking my apprenticeship very tedious, I
was continually wishing for some opportunity of shortening it, which at
length offered in a manner unexpected. [3]

[3] I fancy his harsh and tyrannical treatment of me might be a means of
impressing me with that aversion to arbitrary power that has stuck to me
through my whole life.

One of the pieces in our newspaper on some political point, which I have
now forgotten, gave offense to the Assembly. He was taken up, censur'd,
and imprison'd for a month, by the speaker's warrant, I suppose, because
he would not discover his author. I too was taken up and examin'd before
the council; but, tho' I did not give them any satisfaction, they
content'd themselves with admonishing me, and dismissed me, considering
me, perhaps, as an apprentice, who was bound to keep his master's
secrets.

During my brother's confinement, which I resented a good deal,
notwithstanding our private differences, I had the management of the
paper; and I made bold to give our rulers some rubs in it, which my
brother took very kindly, while others began to consider me in an
unfavorable light, as a young genius that had a turn for libelling and
satyr. My brother's discharge was accompany'd with an order of the House
(a very odd one), that "James Franklin should no longer print the paper
called the New England Courant."

There was a consultation held in our printing-house among his friends,
what he should do in this case. Some proposed to evade the order by
changing the name of the paper; but my brother, seeing inconveniences in
that, it was finally concluded on as a better way, to let it be printed
for the future under the name of Benjamin Franklin; and to avoid the
censure of the Assembly, that might fall on him as still printing it by
his apprentice, the contrivance was that my old indenture should be
return'd to me, with a full discharge on the back of it, to be shown on
occasion, but to secure to him the benefit of my service, I was to sign
new indentures for the remainder of the term, which were to be kept
private. A very flimsy scheme it was; however, it was immediately
executed, and the paper went on accordingly, under my name for several
months.

At length, a fresh difference arising between my brother and me, I took
upon me to assert my freedom, presuming that he would not venture to
produce the new indentures. It was not fair in me to take this
advantage, and this I therefore reckon one of the first errata of my
life; but the unfairness of it weighed little with me, when under the
impressions of resentment for the blows his passion too often urged him
to bestow upon me, though he was otherwise not an ill-natur'd man:
perhaps I was too saucy and provoking.

When he found I would leave him, he took care to prevent my getting
employment in any other printing-house of the town, by going round and
speaking to every master, who accordingly refus'd to give me work. I
then thought of going to New York, as the nearest place where there was
a printer; and I was rather inclin'd to leave Boston when I reflected
that I had already made myself a little obnoxious to the governing
party, and, from the arbitrary proceedings of the Assembly in my
brother's case, it was likely I might, if I stay'd, soon bring myself
into scrapes; and farther, that my indiscrete disputations about
religion began to make me pointed at with horror by good people as an
infidel or atheist. I determin'd on the point, but my father now siding
with my brother, I was sensible that, if I attempted to go openly, means
would be used to prevent me. My friend Collins, therefore, undertook to
manage a little for me. He agreed with the captain of a New York sloop
for my passage, under the notion of my being a young acquaintance of
his, that had got a naughty girl with child, whose friends would compel
me to marry her, and therefore I could not appear or come away publicly.
So I sold some of my books to raise a little money, was taken on board
privately, and as we had a fair wind, in three days I found myself in
New York, near 300 miles from home, a boy of but 17, without the least
recommendation to, or knowledge of any person in the place, and with
very little money in my pocket.

My inclinations for the sea were by this time worne out, or I might now
have gratify'd them. But, having a trade, and supposing myself a pretty
good workman, I offer'd my service to the printer in the place, old Mr.
William Bradford, who had been the first printer in Pennsylvania, but
removed from thence upon the quarrel of George Keith. He could give me
no employment, having little to do, and help enough already; but says
he, "My son at Philadelphia has lately lost his principal hand, Aquila
Rose, by death; if you go thither, I believe he may employ you."
Philadelphia was a hundred miles further; I set out, however, in a boat
for Amboy, leaving my chest and things to follow me round by sea.

In crossing the bay, we met with a squall that tore our rotten sails to
pieces, prevented our getting into the Kill, and drove us upon Long
Island. In our way, a drunken Dutchman, who was a passenger too, fell
overboard; when he was sinking, I reached through the water to his shock
pate, and drew him up, so that we got him in again. His ducking sobered
him a little, and he went to sleep, taking first out of his pocket a
book, which he desir'd I would dry for him. It proved to be my old
favorite author, Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress, in Dutch, finely printed
on good paper, with copper cuts, a dress better than I had ever seen it
wear in its own language. I have since found that it has been translated
into most of the languages of Europe, and suppose it has been more
generally read than any other book, except perhaps the Bible. Honest
John was the first that I know of who mix'd narration and dialogue; a
method of writing very engaging to the reader, who in the most
interesting parts finds himself, as it were, brought into the company
and present at the discourse. De Foe in his Cruso, his Moll Flanders,
Religious Courtship, Family Instructor, and other pieces, has imitated
it with success; and Richardson has done the same in his Pamela, etc.

When we drew near the island, we found it was at a place where there
could be no landing, there being a great surff on the stony beach. So we
dropt anchor, and swung round towards the shore. Some people came down
to the water edge and hallow'd to us, as we did to them; but the wind
was so high, and the surff so loud, that we could not hear so as to
understand each other. There were canoes on the shore, and we made
signs, and hallow'd that they should fetch us; but they either did not
understand us, or thought it impracticable, so they went away, and night
coming on, we had no remedy but to wait till the wind should abate; and,
in the meantime, the boatman and I concluded to sleep, if we could; and
so crowded into the scuttle, with the Dutchman, who was still wet, and
the spray beating over the head of our boat, leak'd thro' to us, so that
we were soon almost as wet as he. In this manner we lay all night, with
very little rest; but, the wind abating the next day, we made a shift to
reach Amboy before night, having been thirty hours on the water, without
victuals, or any drink but a bottle of filthy rum, and the water we
sail'd on being salt.

In the evening I found myself very feverish, and went in to bed; but,
having read somewhere that cold water drank plentifully was good for a
fever, I follow'd the prescription, sweat plentiful most of the night,
my fever left me, and in the morning, crossing the ferry, I proceeded on
my journey on foot, having fifty miles to Burlington, where I was told I
should find boats that would carry me the rest of the way to
Philadelphia.

It rained very hard all the day; I was thoroughly soak'd, and by noon a
good deal tired; so I stopt at a poor inn, where I staid all night,
beginning now to wish that I had never left home. I cut so miserable a
figure, too, that I found, by the questions ask'd me, I was suspected to
be some runaway servant, and in danger of being taken up on that
suspicion. However, I proceeded the next day, and got in the evening to
an inn, within eight or ten miles of Burlington, kept by one Dr. Brown.
He entered into conversation with me while I took some refreshment, and,
finding I had read a little, became very sociable and friendly. Our
acquaintance continu'd as long as he liv'd. He had been, I imagine, an
itinerant doctor, for there was no town in England, or country in
Europe, of which he could not give a very particular account. He had
some letters, and was ingenious, but much of an unbeliever, and wickedly
undertook, some years after, to travestie the Bible in doggrel verse, as
Cotton had done Virgil. By this means he set many of the facts in a very
ridiculous light, and might have hurt weak minds if his work had been
published; but it never was.

At his house I lay that night, and the next morning reach'd Burlington,
but had the mortification to find that the regular boats were gone a
little before my coming, and no other expected to go before Tuesday,
this being Saturday; wherefore I returned to an old woman in the town,
of whom I had bought gingerbread to eat on the water, and ask'd her
advice. She invited me to lodge at her house till a passage by water
should offer; and being tired with my foot travelling, I accepted the
invitation. She understanding I was a printer, would have had me stay at
that town and follow my business, being ignorant of the stock necessary
to begin with. She was very hospitable, gave me a dinner of ox-cheek
with great good will, accepting only a pot of ale in return; and I
thought myself fixed till Tuesday should come. However, walking in the
evening by the side of the river, a boat came by, which I found was
going towards Philadelphia, with several people in her. They took me in,
and, as there was no wind, we row'd all the way; and about midnight, not
having yet seen the city, some of the company were confident we must
have passed it, and would row no farther; the others knew not where we
were; so we put toward the shore, got into a creek, landed near an old
fence, with the rails of which we made a fire, the night being cold, in
October, and there we remained till daylight. Then one of the company
knew the place to be Cooper's Creek, a little above Philadelphia, which
we saw as soon as we got out of the creek, and arriv'd there about eight
or nine o'clock on the Sunday morning, and landed at the Market-street
wharf.

I have been the more particular in this description of my journey, and
shall be so of my first entry into that city, that you may in your mind
compare such unlikely beginnings with the figure I have since made
there. I was in my working dress, my best cloaths being to come round by
sea. I was dirty from my journey; my pockets were stuff'd out with
shirts and stockings, and I knew no soul nor where to look for lodging.
I was fatigued with travelling, rowing, and want of rest, I was very
hungry; and my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch dollar, and
about a shilling in copper. The latter I gave the people of the boat for
my passage, who at first refus'd it, on account of my rowing; but I
insisted on their taking it. A man being sometimes more generous when he
has but a little money than when he has plenty, perhaps thro' fear of
being thought to have but little.

Then I walked up the street, gazing about till near the market-house I
met a boy with bread. I had made many a meal on bread, and, inquiring
where he got it, I went immediately to the baker's he directed me to, in
Second-street, and ask'd for bisket, intending such as we had in Boston;
but they, it seems, were not made in Philadelphia. Then I asked for a
three-penny loaf, and was told they had none such. So not considering or
knowing the difference of money, and the greater cheapness nor the names
of his bread, I made him give me three-penny worth of any sort. He gave
me, accordingly, three great puffy rolls. I was surpriz'd at the
quantity, but took it, and, having no room in my pockets, walk'd off
with a roll under each arm, and eating the other. Thus I went up
Market-street as far as Fourth-street, passing by the door of Mr. Read,
my future wife's father; when she, standing at the door, saw me, and
thought I made, as I certainly did, a most awkward, ridiculous
appearance. Then I turned and went down Chestnut-street and part of
Walnut-street, eating my roll all the way, and, coming round, found
myself again at Market-street wharf, near the boat I came in, to which I
went for a draught of the river water; and, being filled with one of my
rolls, gave the other two to a woman and her child that came down the
river in the boat with us, and were waiting to go farther.

Thus refreshed, I walked again up the street, which by this time had
many clean-dressed people in it, who were all walking the same way. I
joined them, and thereby was led into the great meeting-house of the
Quakers near the market. I sat down among them, and, after looking round
awhile and hearing nothing said, being very drowsy thro' labor and want
of rest the preceding night, I fell fast asleep, and continued so till
the meeting broke up, when one was kind enough to rouse me. This was,
therefore, the first house I was in, or slept in, in Philadelphia.

Walking down again toward the river, and, looking in the faces of
people, I met a young Quaker man, whose countenance I lik'd, and,
accosting him, requested he would tell me where a stranger could get
lodging. We were then near the sign of the Three Mariners. "Here," says
he, "is one place that entertains strangers, but it is not a reputable
house; if thee wilt walk with me, I'll show thee a better." He brought
me to the Crooked Billet in Water-street. Here I got a dinner; and,
while I was eating it, several sly questions were asked me, as it seemed
to be suspected from my youth and appearance, that I might be some
runaway.

After dinner, my sleepiness return'd, and being shown to a bed, I lay
down without undressing, and slept till six in the evening, was call'd
to supper, went to bed again very early, and slept soundly till next
morning. Then I made myself as tidy as I could, and went to Andrew
Bradford the printer's. I found in the shop the old man his father, whom
I had seen at New York, and who, travelling on horseback, had got to
Philadelphia before me. He introduc'd me to his son, who receiv'd me
civilly, gave me a breakfast, but told me he did not at present want a
hand, being lately suppli'd with one; but there was another printer in
town, lately set up, one Keimer, who, perhaps, might employ me; if not,
I should be welcome to lodge at his house, and he would give me a little
work to do now and then till fuller business should offer.

The old gentleman said he would go with me to the new printer; and when
we found him, "Neighbor," says Bradford, "I have brought to see you a
young man of your business; perhaps you may want such a one." He ask'd
me a few questions, put a composing stick in my hand to see how I
work'd, and then said he would employ me soon, though he had just then
nothing for me to do; and, taking old Bradford, whom he had never seen
before, to be one of the town's people that had a good will for him,
enter'd into a conversation on his present undertaking and prospects;
while Bradford, not discovering that he was the other printer's father,
on Keimer's saying he expected soon to get the greatest part of the
business into his own hands, drew him on by artful questions, and
starting little doubts, to explain all his views, what interests he
reli'd on, and in what manner he intended to proceed. I, who stood by
and heard all, saw immediately that one of them was a crafty old
sophister, and the other a mere novice. Bradford left me with Keimer,
who was greatly surpris'd when I told him who the old man was.

Keimer's printing-house, I found, consisted of an old shatter'd press,
and one small, worn-out font of English which he was then using himself,
composing an Elegy on Aquila Rose, before mentioned, an ingenious young
man, of excellent character, much respected in the town, clerk of the
Assembly, and a pretty poet. Keimer made verses too, but very
indifferently. He could not be said to write them, for his manner was to
compose them in the types directly out of his head. So there being no
copy, but one pair of cases, and the Elegy likely to require all the
letter, no one could help him. I endeavor'd to put his press (which he
had not yet us'd, and of which he understood nothing) into order fit to
be work'd with; and, promising to come and print off his Elegy as soon
as he should have got it ready, I return'd to Bradford's, who gave me a
little job to do for the present, and there I lodged and dieted. A few
days after, Keimer sent for me to print off the Elegy. And now he had
got another pair of cases, and a pamphlet to reprint, on which he set me
to work.

These two printers I found poorly qualified for their business. Bradford
had not been bred to it, and was very illiterate; and Keimer, tho'
something of a scholar, was a mere compositor, knowing nothing of
presswork. He had been one of the French prophets, and could act their
enthusiastic agitations. At this time he did not profess any particular
religion, but something of all on occasion; was very ignorant of the
world, and had, as I afterward found, a good deal of the knave in his
composition. He did not like my lodging at Bradford's while I work'd
with him. He had a house, indeed, but without furniture, so he could not
lodge me; but he got me a lodging at Mr. Read's, before mentioned, who
was the owner of his house; and, my chest and clothes being come by this
time, I made rather a more respectable appearance in the eyes of Miss
Read than I had done when she first happen'd to see me eating my roll in
the street.

I began now to have some acquaintance among the young people of the
town, that were lovers of reading, with whom I spent my evenings very
pleasantly; and gaining money by my industry and frugality, I lived very
agreeably, forgetting Boston as much as I could, and not desiring that
any there should know where I resided, except my friend Collins, who was
in my secret, and kept it when I wrote to him. At length, an incident
happened that sent me back again much sooner than I had intended. I had
a brother-in-law, Robert Holmes, master of a sloop that traded between
Boston and Delaware. He being at Newcastle, forty miles below
Philadelphia, heard there of me, and wrote me a letter mentioning the
concern of my friends in Boston at my abrupt departure, assuring me of
their good will to me, and that every thing would be accommodated to my
mind if I would return, to which he exhorted me very earnestly. I wrote
an answer to his letter, thank'd him for his advice, but stated my
reasons for quitting Boston fully and in such a light as to convince him
I was not so wrong as he had apprehended.

Sir William Keith, governor of the province, was then at Newcastle, and
Captain Holmes, happening to be in company with him when my letter came
to hand, spoke to him of me, and show'd him the letter. The governor
read it, and seem'd surpris'd when he was told my age. He said I
appear'd a young man of promising parts, and therefore should be
encouraged; the printers at Philadelphia were wretched ones; and, if I
would set up there, he made no doubt I should succeed; for his part, he
would procure me the public business, and do me every other service in
his power. This my brother-in-law afterwards told me in Boston, but I
knew as yet nothing of it; when, one day, Keimer and I being at work
together near the window, we saw the governor and another gentleman
(which proved to be Colonel French, of Newcastle), finely dress'd, come
directly across the street to our house, and heard them at the door.

Keimer ran down immediately, thinking it a visit to him; but the
governor inquir'd for me, came up, and with a condescension of
politeness I had been quite unus'd to, made me many compliments, desired
to be acquainted with me, blam'd me kindly for not having made myself
known to him when I first came to the place, and would have me away with
him to the tavern, where he was going with Colonel French to taste, as
he said, some excellent Madeira. I was not a little surprised, and
Keimer star'd like a pig poison'd. I went, however, with the governor
and Colonel French to a tavern, at the corner of Third-street, and over
the Madeira he propos'd my setting up my business, laid before me the
probabilities of success, and both he and Colonel French assur'd me I
should have their interest and influence in procuring the public
business of both governments. On my doubting whether my father would
assist me in it, Sir William said he would give me a letter to him, in
which he would state the advantages, and he did not doubt of prevailing
with him. So it was concluded I should return to Boston in the first
vessel, with the governor's letter recommending me to my father. In the
mean time the intention was to be kept a secret, and I went on working
with Keimer as usual, the governor sending for me now and then to dine
with him, a very great honor I thought it, and conversing with me in the
most affable, familiar, and friendly manner imaginable.

About the end of April, 1724, a little vessel offer'd for Boston. I took
leave of Keimer as going to see my friends. The governor gave me an
ample letter, saying many flattering things of me to my father, and
strongly recommending the project of my setting up at Philadelphia as a
thing that must make my fortune. We struck on a shoal in going down the
bay, and sprung a leak; we had a blustering time at sea, and were
oblig'd to pump almost continually, at which I took my turn. We arriv'd
safe, however, at Boston in about a fortnight. I had been absent seven
months, and my friends had heard nothing of me; for my br. Holmes was
not yet return'd, and had not written about me. My unexpected appearance
surpriz'd the family; all were, however, very glad to see me, and made
me welcome, except my brother. I went to see him at his printing-house.
I was better dress'd than ever while in his service, having a genteel
new suit from head to foot, a watch, and my pockets lin'd with near five
pounds sterling in silver. He receiv'd me not very frankly, look'd me
all over, and turn'd to his work again.

The journeymen were inquisitive where I had been, what sort of a country
it was, and how I lik'd it. I prais'd it much, the happy life I led in
it, expressing strongly my intention of returning to it; and, one of
them asking what kind of money we had there, I produc'd a handful of
silver, and spread it before them, which was a kind of raree-show they
had not been us'd to, paper being the money of Boston. Then I took an
opportunity of letting them see my watch; and, lastly (my brother still
grum and sullen), I gave them a piece of eight to drink, and took my
leave. This visit of mine offended him extreamly; for, when my mother
some time after spoke to him of a reconciliation, and of her wishes to
see us on good terms together, and that we might live for the future as
brothers, he said I had insulted him in such a manner before his people
that he could never forget or forgive it. In this, however, he was
mistaken.

My father received the governor's letter with some apparent surprise,
but said little of it to me for some days, when Capt. Holmes returning
he showed it to him, ask'd him if he knew Keith, and what kind of man he
was; adding his opinion that he must be of small discretion to think of
setting a boy up in business who wanted yet three years of being at
man's estate. Holmes said what he could in favor of the project, but my
father was clear in the impropriety of it, and at last gave a flat
denial to it. Then he wrote a civil letter to Sir William, thanking him
for the patronage he had so kindly offered me, but declining to assist
me as yet in setting up, I being, in his opinion, too young to be
trusted with the management of a business so important, and for which
the preparation must be so expensive.

My friend and companion Collins, who was a clerk in the post-office,
pleas'd with the account I gave him of my new country, determined to go
thither also; and, while I waited for my father's determination, he set
out before me by land to Rhode Island, leaving his books, which were a
pretty collection of mathematicks and natural philosophy, to come with
mine and me to New York, where he propos'd to wait for me.

My father, tho' he did not approve Sir William's proposition, was yet
pleas'd that I had been able to obtain so advantageous a character from
a person of such note where I had resided, and that I had been so
industrious and careful as to equip myself so handsomely in so short a
time; therefore, seeing no prospect of an accommodation between my
brother and me, he gave his consent to my returning again to
Philadelphia, advis'd me to behave respectfully to the people there,
endeavor to obtain the general esteem, and avoid lampooning and
libeling, to which he thought I had too much inclination; telling me,
that by steady industry and a prudent parsimony I might save enough by
the time I was one-and-twenty to set me up; and that, if I came near the
matter, he would help me out with the rest. This was all I could obtain,
except some small gifts as tokens of his and my mother's love, when I
embark'd again for New York, now with their approbation and their
blessing.

The sloop putting in at Newport, Rhode Island, I visited my brother
John, who had been married and settled there some years. He received me
very affectionately, for he always lov'd me. A friend of his, one
Vernon, having some money due to him in Pensilvania, about thirty-five
pounds currency, desired I would receive it for him, and keep it till I
had his directions what to remit it in. Accordingly, he gave me an
order. This afterwards occasion'd me a good deal of uneasiness.

At Newport we took in a number of passengers for New York, among which
were two young women, companions, and a grave, sensible, matron-like
Quaker woman, with her attendants. I had shown an obliging readiness to
do her some little services, which impress'd her I suppose with a degree
of good will toward me; therefore, when she saw a daily growing
familiarity between me and the two young women, which they appear'd to
encourage, she took me aside, and said: "Young man, I am concern'd for
thee, as thou has no friend with thee, and seems not to know much of the
world, or of the snares youth is expos'd to; depend upon it, those are
very bad women; I can see it in all their actions; and if thee art not
upon thy guard, they will draw thee into some danger; they are strangers
to thee, and I advise thee, in a friendly concern for thy welfare, to
have no acquaintance with them." As I seem'd at first not to think so
ill of them as she did, she mentioned some things she had observ'd and
heard that had escap'd my notice, but now convinc'd me she was right. I
thank'd her for her kind advice, and promis'd to follow it. When we
arriv'd at New York, they told me where they liv'd, and invited me to
come and see them; but I avoided it, and it was well I did; for the next
day the captain miss'd a silver spoon and some other things, that had
been taken out of his cabbin, and, knowing that these were a couple of
strumpets, he got a warrant to search their lodgings, found the stolen
goods, and had the thieves punish'd. So, tho' we had escap'd a sunken
rock, which we scrap'd upon in the passage, I thought this escape of
rather more importance to me.

At New York I found my friend Collins, who had arriv'd there some time
before me. We had been intimate from children, and had read the same
books together; but he had the advantage of more time for reading and
studying, and a wonderful genius for mathematical learning, in which he
far outstript me. While I liv'd in Boston most of my hours of leisure
for conversation were spent with him, and he continu'd a sober as well
as an industrious lad; was much respected for his learning by several of
the clergy and other gentlemen, and seemed to promise making a good
figure in life. But, during my absence, he had acquir'd a habit of
sotting with brandy; and I found by his own account, and what I heard
from others, that he had been drunk every day since his arrival at New
York, and behav'd very oddly. He had gam'd, too, and lost his money, so
that I was oblig'd to discharge his lodgings, and defray his expenses to
and at Philadelphia, which prov'd extremely inconvenient to me.

The then governor of New York, Burnet (son of Bishop Burnet), hearing
from the captain that a young man, one of his passengers, had a great
many books, desir'd he would bring me to see him. I waited upon him
accordingly, and should have taken Collins with me but that he was not
sober. The gov'r. treated me with great civility, show'd me his library,
which was a very large one, and we had a good deal of conversation about
books and authors. This was the second governor who had done me the
honor to take notice of me; which, to a poor boy like me, was very
pleasing.

We proceeded to Philadelphia. I received on the way Vernon's money,
without which we could hardly have finish'd our journey. Collins wished
to be employ'd in some counting-house, but, whether they discover'd his
dramming by his breath, or by his behaviour, tho' he had some
recommendations, he met with no success in any application, and
continu'd lodging and boarding at the same house with me, and at my
expense. Knowing I had that money of Vernon's, he was continually
borrowing of me, still promising repayment as soon as he should be in
business. At length he had got so much of it that I was distress'd to
think what I should do in case of being call'd on to remit it.

His drinking continu'd, about which we sometimes quarrell'd; for, when a
little intoxicated, he was very fractious. Once, in a boat on the
Delaware with some other young men, he refused to row in his turn. "I
will be row'd home," says he. "We will not row you," says I. "You must,
or stay all night on the water," says he, "just as you please." The
others said, "Let us row; what signifies it?" But, my mind being soured
with his other conduct, I continu'd to refuse. So he swore he would make
me row, or throw me overboard; and coming along, stepping on the
thwarts, toward me, when he came up and struck at me, I clapped my hand
under his crutch, and, rising, pitched him head-foremost into the river.
I knew he was a good swimmer, and so was under little concern about him;
but before he could get round to lay hold of the boat, we had with a few
strokes pull'd her out of his reach; and ever when he drew near the
boat, we ask'd if he would row, striking a few strokes to slide her away
from him. He was ready to die with vexation, and obstinately would not
promise to row. However, seeing him at last beginning to tire, we lifted
him in and brought him home dripping wet in the evening. We hardly
exchang'd a civil word afterwards, and a West India captain, who had a
commission to procure a tutor for the sons of a gentleman at Barbadoes,
happening to meet with him, agreed to carry him thither. He left me
then, promising to remit me the first money he should receive in order
to discharge the debt; but I never heard of him after.

The breaking into this money of Vernon's was one of the first great
errata of my life; and this affair show'd that my father was not much
out in his judgment when he suppos'd me too young to manage business of
importance. But Sir William, on reading his letter, said he was too
prudent. There was great difference in persons; and discretion did not
always accompany years, nor was youth always without it. "And since he
will not set you up," says he, "I will do it myself. Give me an
inventory of the things necessary to be had from England, and I will
send for them. You shall repay me when you are able; I am resolv'd to
have a good printer here, and I am sure you must succeed." This was
spoken with such an appearance of cordiality, that I had not the least
doubt of his meaning what he said. I had hitherto kept the proposition
of my setting up, a secret in Philadelphia, and I still kept it. Had it
been known that I depended on the governor, probably some friend, that
knew him better, would have advis'd me not to rely on him, as I
afterwards heard it as his known character to be liberal of promises
which he never meant to keep. Yet, unsolicited as he was by me, how
could I think his generous offers insincere? I believ'd him one of the
best men in the world.

I presented him an inventory of a little print'g-house, amounting by my
computation to about one hundred pounds sterling. He lik'd it, but ask'd
me if my being on the spot in England to chuse the types, and see that
every thing was good of the kind, might not be of some advantage.
"Then," says he, "when there, you may make acquaintances, and establish
correspondences in the bookselling and stationery way." I agreed that
this might be advantageous. "Then," says he, "get yourself ready to go
with Annis;" which was the annual ship, and the only one at that time
usually passing between London and Philadelphia. But it would be some
months before Annis sail'd, so I continu'd working with Keimer, fretting
about the money Collins had got from me, and in daily apprehensions of
being call'd upon by Vernon, which, however, did not happen for some
years after.

I believe I have omitted mentioning that, in my first voyage from
Boston, being becalm'd off Block Island, our people set about catching
cod, and hauled up a great many. Hitherto I had stuck to my resolution
of not eating animal food, and on this occasion consider'd, with my
master Tryon, the taking every fish as a kind of unprovoked murder,
since none of them had, or ever could do us any injury that might
justify the slaughter. All this seemed very reasonable. But I had
formerly been a great lover of fish, and, when this came hot out of the
frying-pan, it smelt admirably well. I balanc'd some time between
principle and inclination, till I recollected that, when the fish were
opened, I saw smaller fish taken out of their stomachs; then thought I,
"If you eat one another, I don't see why we mayn't eat you." So I din'd
upon cod very heartily, and continued to eat with other people,
returning only now and then occasionally to a vegetable diet. So
convenient a thing it is to be a reasonable creature, since it enables
one to find or make a reason for everything one has a mind to do.

Keimer and I liv'd on a pretty good familiar footing, and agreed
tolerably well, for he suspected nothing of my setting up. He retained a
great deal of his old enthusiasms and lov'd argumentation. We therefore
had many disputations. I used to work him so with my Socratic method,
and had trepann'd him so often by questions apparently so distant from
any point we had in hand, and yet by degrees lead to the point, and
brought him into difficulties and contradictions, that at last he grew
ridiculously cautious, and would hardly answer me the most common
question, without asking first, "What do you intend to infer from that?"
However, it gave him so high an opinion of my abilities in the confuting
way, that he seriously proposed my being his colleague in a project he
had of setting up a new sect. He was to preach the doctrines, and I was
to confound all opponents. When he came to explain with me upon the
doctrines, I found several conundrums which I objected to, unless I
might have my way a little too, and introduce some of mine.

Keimer wore his beard at full length, because somewhere in the Mosaic
law it is said, "Thou shalt not mar the corners of thy beard." He
likewise kept the Seventh day, Sabbath; and these two points were
essentials with him. I dislik'd both; but agreed to admit them upon
condition of his adopting the doctrine of using no animal food. "I
doubt," said he, "my constitution will not bear that." I assur'd him it
would, and that he would be the better for it. He was usually a great
glutton, and I promised myself some diversion in half starving him. He
agreed to try the practice, if I would keep him company. I did so, and
we held it for three months. We had our victuals dress'd, and brought to
us regularly by a woman in the neighborhood, who had from me a list of
forty dishes to be prepar'd for us at different times, in all which
there was neither fish, flesh, nor fowl, and the whim suited me the
better at this time from the cheapness of it, not costing us above
eighteenpence sterling each per week. I have since kept several Lents
most strictly, leaving the common diet for that, and that for the
common, abruptly, without the least inconvenience, so that I think there
is little in the advice of making those changes by easy gradations. I
went on pleasantly, but poor Keimer suffered grievously, tired of the
project, long'd for the flesh-pots of Egypt, and order'd a roast pig. He
invited me and two women friends to dine with him; but, it being brought
too soon upon table, he could not resist the temptation, and ate the
whole before we came.

I had made some courtship during this time to Miss Read. I had a great
respect and affection for her, and had some reason to believe she had
the same for me; but, as I was about to take a long voyage, and we were
both very young, only a little above eighteen, it was thought most
prudent by her mother to prevent our going too far at present, as a
marriage, if it was to take place, would be more convenient after my
return, when I should be, as I expected, set up in my business. Perhaps,
too, she thought my expectations not so well founded as I imagined them
to be.

My chief acquaintances at this time were Charles Osborne, Joseph Watson,
and James Ralph, all lovers of reading. The two first were clerks to an
eminent scrivener or conveyancer in the town, Charles Brogden; the other
was clerk to a merchant. Watson was a pious, sensible young man, of
great integrity; the others rather more lax in their principles of
religion, particularly Ralph, who, as well as Collins, had been
unsettled by me, for which they both made me suffer. Osborne was
sensible, candid, frank; sincere and affectionate to his friends; but,
in literary matters, too fond of criticising. Ralph was ingenious,
genteel in his manners, and extremely eloquent; I think I never knew a
prettier talker. Both of them great admirers of poetry, and began to try
their hands in little pieces. Many pleasant walks we four had together
on Sundays into the woods, near Schuylkill, where we read to one
another, and conferr'd on what we read.

Ralph was inclin'd to pursue the study of poetry, not doubting but he
might become eminent in it, and make his fortune by it, alleging that
the best poets must, when they first began to write, make as many faults
as he did. Osborne dissuaded him, assur'd him he had no genius for
poetry, and advis'd him to think of nothing beyond the business he was
bred to; that, in the mercantile way, tho' he had no stock, he might, by
his diligence and punctuality, recommend himself to employment as a
factor, and in time acquire wherewith to trade on his own account. I
approv'd the amusing one's self with poetry now and then, so far as to
improve one's language, but no farther.

On this it was propos'd that we should each of us, at our next meeting,
produce a piece of our own composing, in order to improve by our mutual
observations, criticisms, and corrections. As language and expression
were what we had in view, we excluded all considerations of invention by
agreeing that the task should be a version of the eighteenth Psalm,
which describes the descent of a Deity. When the time of our meeting
drew nigh, Ralph called on me first, and let me know his piece was
ready. I told him I had been busy, and, having little inclination, had
done nothing. He then show'd me his piece for my opinion, and I much
approv'd it, as it appear'd to me to have great merit. "Now," says he,
"Osborne never will allow the least merit in any thing of mine, but
makes 1000 criticisms out of mere envy. He is not so jealous of you; I
wish, therefore, you would take this piece, and produce it as yours; I
will pretend not to have had time, and so produce nothing. We shall then
see what he will say to it." It was agreed, and I immediately
transcrib'd it, that it might appear in my own hand.

We met; Watson's performance was read; there were some beauties in it,
but many defects. Osborne's was read; it was much better; Ralph did it
justice; remarked some faults, but applauded the beauties. He himself
had nothing to produce. I was backward; seemed desirous of being
excused; had not had sufficient time to correct, etc.; but no excuse
could be admitted; produce I must. It was read and repeated; Watson and
Osborne gave up the contest, and join'd in applauding it. Ralph only
made some criticisms, and propos'd some amendments; but I defended my
text. Osborne was against Ralph, and told him he was no better a critic
than poet, so he dropt the argument. As they two went home together,
Osborne expressed himself still more strongly in favor of what he
thought my production; having restrain'd himself before, as he said,
lest I should think it flattery. "But who would have imagin'd," said he,
"that Franklin had been capable of such a performance; such painting,
such force, such fire! He has even improv'd the original. In his common
conversation he seems to have no choice of words; he hesitates and
blunders; and yet, good God! how he writes!" When we next met, Ralph
discovered the trick we had plaid him, and Osborne was a little laught
at.

This transaction fixed Ralph in his resolution of becoming a poet. I did
all I could to dissuade him from it, but he continued scribbling verses
till Pope cured him. He became, however, a pretty good prose writer.
More of him hereafter. But, as I may not have occasion again to mention
the other two, I shall just remark here, that Watson died in my arms a
few years after, much lamented, being the best of our set. Osborne went
to the West Indies, where he became an eminent lawyer and made money,
but died young. He and I had made a serious agreement, that the one who
happen'd first to die should, if possible, make a friendly visit to the
other, and acquaint him how he found things in that separate state. But
he never fulfill'd his promise.

The governor, seeming to like my company, had me frequently to his
house, and his setting me up was always mention'd as a fixed thing. I
was to take with me letters recommendatory to a number of his friends,
besides the letter of credit to furnish me with the necessary money for
purchasing the press and types, paper, etc. For these letters I was
appointed to call at different times, when they were to be ready, but a
future time was still named. Thus he went on till the ship, whose
departure too had been several times postponed, was on the point of
sailing. Then, when I call'd to take my leave and receive the letters,
his secretary, Dr. Bard, came out to me and said the governor was
extremely busy in writing, but would be down at Newcastle before the
ship, and there the letters would be delivered to me.

Ralph, though married, and having one child, had determined to accompany
me in this voyage. It was thought he intended to establish a
correspondence, and obtain goods to sell on commission; but I found
afterwards, that, thro' some discontent with his wife's relations, he
purposed to leave her on their hands, and never return again. Having
taken leave of my friends, and interchang'd some promises with Miss
Read, I left Philadelphia in the ship, which anchor'd at Newcastle. The
governor was there; but when I went to his lodging, the secretary came
to me from him with the civillest message in the world, that he could
not then see me, being engaged in business of the utmost importance, but
should send the letters to me on board, wish'd me heartily a good voyage
and a speedy return, etc. I returned on board a little puzzled, but
still not doubting.

Mr. Andrew Hamilton, a famous lawyer of Philadelphia, had taken passage
in the same ship for himself and son, and with Mr. Denham, a Quaker
merchant, and Messrs. Onion and Russel, masters of an iron work in
Maryland, had engag'd the great cabin; so that Ralph and I were forced
to take up with a berth in the steerage, and none on board knowing us,
were considered as ordinary persons. But Mr. Hamilton and his son (it
was James, since governor) return'd from Newcastle to Philadelphia, the
father being recall'd by a great fee to plead for a seized ship; and,
just before we sail'd, Colonel French coming on board, and showing me
great respect, I was more taken notice of, and, with my friend Ralph,
invited by the other gentlemen to come into the cabin, there being now
room. Accordingly, we remov'd thither.

Understanding that Colonel French had brought on board the governor's
despatches, I ask'd the captain for those letters that were to be under
my care. He said all were put into the bag together and he could not
then come at them; but, before we landed in England, I should have an
opportunity of picking them out; so I was satisfied for the present, and
we proceeded on our voyage. We had a sociable company in the cabin, and
lived uncommonly well, having the addition of all Mr. Hamilton's stores,
who had laid in plentifully. In this passage Mr. Denham contracted a
friendship for me that continued during his life. The voyage was
otherwise not a pleasant one, as we had a great deal of bad weather.

When we came into the Channel, the captain kept his word with me, and
gave me an opportunity of examining the bag for the governor's letters.
I found none upon which my name was put as under my care. I picked out
six or seven, that, by the handwriting, I thought might be the promised
letters, especially as one of them was directed to Basket, the king's
printer, and another to some stationer. We arriv'd in London the 24th of
December, 1724. I waited upon the stationer, who came first in my way,
delivering the letter as from Governor Keith. "I don't know such a
person," says he; but, opening the letter, "O! this is from Riddlesden.
I have lately found him to be a compleat rascal, and I will have nothing
to do with him, nor receive any letters from him." So, putting the
letter into my hand, he turn'd on his heel and left me to serve some
customer. I was surprized to find these were not the governor's letters;
and, after recollecting and comparing circumstances, I began to doubt
his sincerity. I found my friend Denham, and opened the whole affair to
him. He let me into Keith's character; told me there was not the least
probability that he had written any letters for me; that no one, who
knew him, had the smallest dependence on him; and he laught at the
notion of the governor's giving me a letter of credit, having, as he
said, no credit to give. On my expressing some concern about what I
should do, he advised me to endeavor getting some employment in the way
of my business. "Among the printers here," said he, "you will improve
yourself, and when you return to America, you will set up to greater
advantage."

We both of us happen'd to know, as well as the stationer, that
Riddlesden, the attorney, was a very knave. He had half ruin'd Miss
Read's father by persuading him to be bound for him. By this letter it
appear'd there was a secret scheme on foot to the prejudice of Hamilton
(suppos'd to be then coming over with us); and that Keith was concerned
in it with Riddlesden. Denham, who was a friend of Hamilton's thought he
ought to be acquainted with it; so, when he arriv'd in England, which
was soon after, partly from resentment and ill-will to Keith and
Riddlesden, and partly from good-will to him, I waited on him, and gave
him the letter. He thank'd me cordially, the information being of
importance to him; and from that time he became my friend, greatly to my
advantage afterwards on many occasions.

But what shall we think of a governor's playing such pitiful tricks, and
imposing so grossly on a poor ignorant boy! It was a habit he had
acquired. He wish'd to please everybody; and, having little to give, he
gave expectations. He was otherwise an ingenious, sensible man, a pretty
good writer, and a good governor for the people, tho' not for his
constituents, the proprietaries, whose instructions he sometimes
disregarded. Several of our best laws were of his planning and passed
during his administration.

Ralph and I were inseparable companions. We took lodgings together in
Little Britain at three shillings and sixpence a week--as much as we
could then afford. He found some relations, but they were poor, and
unable to assist him. He now let me know his intentions of remaining in
London, and that he never meant to return to Philadelphia. He had
brought no money with him, the whole he could muster having been
expended in paying his passage. I had fifteen pistoles; so he borrowed
occasionally of me to subsist, while he was looking out for business. He
first endeavored to get into the playhouse, believing himself qualify'd
for an actor; but Wilkes, to whom he apply'd, advis'd him candidly not
to think of that employment, as it was impossible he should succeed in
it. Then he propos'd to Roberts, a publisher in Paternoster Row, to
write for him a weekly paper like the Spectator, on certain conditions,
which Roberts did not approve. Then he endeavored to get employment as a
hackney writer, to copy for the stationers and lawyers about the Temple,
but could find no vacancy.

I immediately got into work at Palmer's, then a famous printing-house in
Bartholomew Close, and here I continu'd near a year. I was pretty
diligent, but spent with Ralph a good deal of my earnings in going to
plays and other places of amusement. We had together consumed all my
pistoles, and now just rubbed on from hand to mouth. He seem'd quite to
forget his wife and child, and I, by degrees, my engagements with Miss
Read, to whom I never wrote more than one letter, and that was to let
her know I was not likely soon to return. This was another of the great
errata of my life, which I should wish to correct if I were to live it
over again. In fact, by our expenses, I was constantly kept unable to
pay my passage.

At Palmer's I was employed in composing for the second edition of
Wollaston's "Religion of Nature." Some of his reasonings not appearing
to me well founded, I wrote a little metaphysical piece in which I made
remarks on them. It was entitled "A Dissertation on Liberty and
Necessity, Pleasure and Pain." I inscribed it to my friend Ralph; I
printed a small number. It occasion'd my being more consider'd by Mr.
Palmer as a young man of some ingenuity, tho' he seriously expostulated
with me upon the principles of my pamphlet, which to him appear'd
abominable. My printing this pamphlet was another erratum. While I
lodg'd in Little Britain, I made an acquaintance with one Wilcox, a
bookseller, whose shop was at the next door. He had an immense
collection of second-hand books. Circulating libraries were not then in
use; but we agreed that, on certain reasonable terms, which I have now
forgotten, I might take, read, and return any of his books. This I
esteem'd a great advantage, and I made as much use of it as I could.

My pamphlet by some means falling into the hands of one Lyons, a
surgeon, author of a book entitled "The Infallibility of Human
Judgment," it occasioned an acquaintance between us. He took great
notice of me, called on me often to converse on those subjects, carried
me to the Horns, a pale alehouse in ------ Lane, Cheapside, and
introduced me to Dr. Mandeville, author of the "Fable of the Bees," who
had a club there, of which he was the soul, being a most facetious,
entertaining companion. Lyons, too, introduced me to Dr. Pemberton, at
Batson's Coffee-house, who promis'd to give me an opportunity, some time
or other, of seeing Sir Isaac Newton, of which I was extreamely
desirous; but this never happened.

I had brought over a few curiosities, among which the principal was a
purse made of the asbestos, which purifies by fire. Sir Hans Sloane
heard of it, came to see me, and invited me to his house in Bloomsbury
Square, where he show'd me all his curiosities, and persuaded me to let
him add that to the number, for which he paid me handsomely.

In our house there lodg'd a young woman, a milliner, who, I think, had a
shop in the Cloisters. She had been genteelly bred, was sensible and
lively, and of most pleasing conversation. Ralph read plays to her in
the evenings, they grew intimate, she took another lodging, and he
followed her. They liv'd together some time; but, he being still out of
business, and her income not sufficient to maintain them with her child,
he took a resolution of going from London, to try for a country school,
which he thought himself well qualified to undertake, as he wrote an
excellent hand, and was a master of arithmetic and accounts. This,
however, he deemed a business below him, and confident of future better
fortune, when he should be unwilling to have it known that he once was
so meanly employed, he changed his name, and did me the honor to assume
mine; for I soon after had a letter from him, acquainting me that he was
settled in a small village (in Berkshire, I think it was, where he
taught reading and writing to ten or a dozen boys, at sixpence each per
week), recommending Mrs. T------ to my care, and desiring me to write to
him, directing for Mr. Franklin, schoolmaster, at such a place.

He continued to write frequently, sending me large specimens of an epic
poem which he was then composing, and desiring my remarks and
corrections. These I gave him from time to time, but endeavor'd rather
to discourage his proceeding. One of Young's Satires was then just
published. I copy'd and sent him a great part of it, which set in a
strong light the folly of pursuing the Muses with any hope of
advancement by them. All was in vain; sheets of the poem continued to
come by every post. In the mean time, Mrs. T------, having on his
account lost her friends and business, was often in distresses, and us'd
to send for me, and borrow what I could spare to help her out of them. I
grew fond of her company, and, being at that time under no religious
restraint, and presuming upon my importance to her, I attempted
familiarities (another erratum) which she repuls'd with a proper
resentment, and acquainted him with my behaviour. This made a breach
between us; and, when he returned again to London, he let me know he
thought I had cancell'd all the obligations he had been under to me. So
I found I was never to expect his repaying me what I lent to him, or
advanc'd for him. This, however, was not then of much consequence, as he
was totally unable; and in the loss of his friendship I found myself
relieved from a burthen. I now began to think of getting a little money
beforehand, and, expecting better work, I left Palmer's to work at
Watts's, near Lincoln's Inn Fields, a still greater printing-house. Here
I continued all the rest of my stay in London.

At my first admission into this printing-house I took to working at
press, imagining I felt a want of the bodily exercise I had been us'd to
in America, where presswork is mix'd with composing. I drank only water;
the other workmen, near fifty in number, were great guzzlers of beer. On
occasion, I carried up and down stairs a large form of types in each
hand, when others carried but one in both hands. They wondered to see,
from this and several instances, that the Water-American, as they called
me, was stronger than themselves, who drank strong beer! We had an
alehouse boy who attended always in the house to supply the workmen. My
companion at the press drank every day a pint before breakfast, a pint
at breakfast with his bread and cheese, a pint between breakfast and
dinner, a pint at dinner, a pint in the afternoon about six o'clock, and
another when he had done his day's work. I thought it a detestable
custom; but it was necessary, he suppos'd, to drink strong beer, that he
might be strong to labor. I endeavored to convince him that the bodily
strength afforded by beer could only be in proportion to the grain or
flour of the barley dissolved in the water of which it was made; that
there was more flour in a pennyworth of bread; and therefore, if he
would eat that with a pint of water, it would give him more strength
than a quart of beer. He drank on, however, and had four or five
shillings to pay out of his wages every Saturday night for that muddling
liquor; an expense I was free from. And thus these poor devils keep
themselves always under.

Watts, after some weeks, desiring to have me in the composing-room, I
left the pressmen; a new bien venu or sum for drink, being five
shillings, was demanded of me by the compositors. I thought it an
imposition, as I had paid below; the master thought so too, and forbad
my paying it. I stood out two or three weeks, was accordingly considered
as an excommunicate, and had so many little pieces of private mischief
done me, by mixing my sorts, transposing my pages, breaking my matter,
etc., etc., if I were ever so little out of the room, and all ascribed
to the chappel ghost, which they said ever haunted those not regularly
admitted, that, notwithstanding the master's protection, I found myself
oblig'd to comply and pay the money, convinc'd of the folly of being on
ill terms with those one is to live with continually.

I was now on a fair footing with them, and soon acquir'd considerable
influence. I propos'd some reasonable alterations in their chappel [4]
laws, and carried them against all opposition. From my example, a great
part of them left their muddling breakfast of beer, and bread, and
cheese, finding they could with me be suppli'd from a neighboring house
with a large porringer of hot water-gruel, sprinkled with pepper,
crumbl'd with bread, and a bit of butter in it, for the price of a pint
of beer, viz., three half-pence. This was a more comfortable as well as
cheaper breakfast, and kept their heads clearer. Those who continued
sotting with beer all day, were often, by not paying, out of credit at
the alehouse, and us'd to make interest with me to get beer; their
light, as they phrased it, being out. I watch'd the pay-table on
Saturday night, and collected what I stood engag'd for them, having to
pay sometimes near thirty shillings a week on their account. This, and
my being esteem'd a pretty good riggite, that is, a jocular verbal
satirist, supported my consequence in the society. My constant
attendance (I never making a St. Monday) recommended me to the master;
and my uncommon quickness at composing occasioned my being put upon all
work of dispatch, which was generally better paid. So I went on now very
agreeably.

[4] "A printing-house is always called a chapel by the workmen, the
origin of which appears to have been that printing was first carried on
in England in an ancient chapel converted into a printing-house, and the
title has been preserved by tradition. The bien venu among the printers
answers to the terms entrance and footing among mechanics; thus a
journeyman, on entering a printing-house, was accustomed to pay one or
more gallons of beer for the good of the chapel; this custom was falling
into disuse thirty years ago; it is very properly rejected entirely in
the United States."--W. T. F.

My lodging in Little Britain being too remote, I found another in
Duke-street, opposite to the Romish Chapel. It was two pair of stairs
backwards, at an Italian warehouse. A widow lady kept the house; she had
a daughter, and a maid servant, and a journeyman who attended the
warehouse, but lodg'd abroad. After sending to inquire my character at
the house where I last lodg'd she agreed to take me in at the same rate,
3s. 6d. per week; cheaper, as she said, from the protection she expected
in having a man lodge in the house. She was a widow, an elderly woman;
had been bred a Protestant, being a clergyman's daughter, but was
converted to the Catholic religion by her husband, whose memory she much
revered; had lived much among people of distinction, and knew a thousand
anecdotes of them as far back as the times of Charles the Second. She
was lame in her knees with the gout, and, therefore, seldom stirred out
of her room, so sometimes wanted company; and hers was so highly amusing
to me, that I was sure to spend an evening with her whenever she desired
it. Our supper was only half an anchovy each, on a very little strip of
bread and butter, and half a pint of ale between us; but the
entertainment was in her conversation. My always keeping good hours, and
giving little trouble in the family, made her unwilling to part with me;
so that, when I talk'd of a lodging I had heard of, nearer my business,
for two shillings a week, which, intent as I now was on saving money,
made some difference, she bid me not think of it, for she would abate me
two shillings a week for the future; so I remained with her at one
shilling and sixpence as long as I staid in London.

In a garret of her house there lived a maiden lady of seventy, in the
most retired manner, of whom my landlady gave me this account: that she
was a Roman Catholic, had been sent abroad when young, and lodg'd in a
nunnery with an intent of becoming a nun; but, the country not agreeing
with her, she returned to England, where, there being no nunnery, she
had vow'd to lead the life of a nun, as near as might be done in those
circumstances. Accordingly, she had given all her estate to charitable
uses, reserving only twelve pounds a year to live on, and out of this
sum she still gave a great deal in charity, living herself on
water-gruel only, and using no fire but to boil it. She had lived many
years in that garret, being permitted to remain there gratis by
successive Catholic tenants of the house below, as they deemed it a
blessing to have her there. A priest visited her to confess her every
day. "I have ask'd her," says my landlady, "how she, as she liv'd, could
possibly find so much employment for a confessor?" "Oh," said she, "it
is impossible to avoid vain thoughts." I was permitted once to visit
her. She was chearful and polite, and convers'd pleasantly. The room was
clean, but had no other furniture than a matras, a table with a crucifix
and book, a stool which she gave me to sit on, and a picture over the
chimney of Saint Veronica displaying her handkerchief, with the
miraculous figure of Christ's bleeding face on it, which she explained
to me with great seriousness. She look'd pale, but was never sick; and I
give it as another instance on how small an income life and health may
be supported.

At Watts's printing-house I contracted an acquaintance with an ingenious
young man, one Wygate, who, having wealthy relations, had been better
educated than most printers; was a tolerable Latinist, spoke French, and
lov'd reading. I taught him and a friend of his to swim at twice going
into the river, and they soon became good swimmers. They introduc'd me
to some gentlemen from the country, who went to Chelsea by water to see
the College and Don Saltero's curiosities. In our return, at the request
of the company, whose curiosity Wygate had excited, I stripped and
leaped into the river, and swam from near Chelsea to Blackfryar's,
performing on the way many feats of activity, both upon and under water,
that surpris'd and pleas'd those to whom they were novelties.

I had from a child been ever delighted with this exercise, had studied
and practis'd all Thevenot's motions and positions, added some of my
own, aiming at the graceful and easy as well as the useful. All these I
took this occasion of exhibiting to the company, and was much flatter'd
by their admiration; and Wygate, who was desirous of becoming a master,
grew more and more attach'd to me on that account, as well as from the
similarity of our studies. He at length proposed to me travelling all
over Europe together, supporting ourselves everywhere by working at our
business. I was once inclined to it; but, mentioning it to my good
friend Mr. Denham, with whom I often spent an hour when I had leisure,
he dissuaded me from it, advising me to think only of returning to
Pennsilvania, which he was now about to do.

I must record one trait of this good man's character. He had formerly
been in business at Bristol, but failed in debt to a number of people,
compounded and went to America. There, by a close application to
business as a merchant, he acquir'd a plentiful fortune in a few years.
Returning to England in the ship with me, he invited his old creditors
to an entertainment, at which he thank'd them for the easy composition
they had favored him with, and, when they expected nothing but the
treat, every man at the first remove found under his plate an order on a
banker for the full amount of the unpaid remainder with interest.

He now told me he was about to return to Philadelphia, and should carry
over a great quantity of goods in order to open a store there. He
propos'd to take me over as his clerk, to keep his books, in which he
would instruct me, copy his letters, and attend the store. He added
that, as soon as I should be acquainted with mercantile business, he
would promote me by sending me with a cargo of flour and bread, etc., to
the West Indies, and procure me commissions from others which would be
profitable; and, if I manag'd well, would establish me handsomely. The
thing pleas'd me; for I was grown tired of London, remembered with
pleasure the happy months I had spent in Pennsylvania, and wish'd again
to see it; therefore I immediately agreed on the terms of fifty pounds a
year, Pennsylvania money; less, indeed, than my present gettings as a
compositor, but affording a better prospect.

I now took leave of printing, as I thought, for ever, and was daily
employed in my new business, going about with Mr. Denham among the
tradesmen to purchase various articles, and seeing them pack'd up, doing
errands, calling upon workmen to dispatch, etc.; and, when all was on
board, I had a few days' leisure. On one of these days, I was, to my
surprise, sent for by a great man I knew only by name, a Sir William
Wyndham, and I waited upon him. He had heard by some means or other of
my swimming from Chelsea to Blackfriar's, and of my teaching Wygate and
another young man to swim in a few hours. He had two sons, about to set
out on their travels; he wish'd to have them first taught swimming, and
proposed to gratify me handsomely if I would teach them. They were not
yet come to town, and my stay was uncertain, so I could not undertake
it; but, from this incident, I thought it likely that, if I were to
remain in England and open a swimming-school, I might get a good deal of
money; and it struck me so strongly, that, had the overture been sooner
made me, probably I should not so soon have returned to America. After
many years, you and I had something of more importance to do with one of
these sons of Sir William Wyndham, become Earl of Egremont, which I
shall mention in its place.

Thus I spent about eighteen months in London; most part of the time I
work'd hard at my business, and spent but little upon myself except in
seeing plays and in books. My friend Ralph had kept me poor; he owed me
about twenty-seven pounds, which I was now never likely to receive; a
great sum out of my small earnings! I lov'd him, notwithstanding, for he
had many amiable qualities. I had by no means improv'd my fortune; but I
had picked up some very ingenious acquaintance, whose conversation was
of great advantage to me; and I had read considerably.

We sail'd from Gravesend on the 23d of July, 1726. For the incidents of
the voyage, I refer you to my Journal, where you will find them all
minutely related. Perhaps the most important part of that journal is the
plan [5] to be found in it, which I formed at sea, for regulating my
future conduct in life. It is the more remarkable, as being formed when
I was so young, and yet being pretty faithfully adhered to quite thro'
to old age.

[5] The "Journal" was printed by Sparks, from a copy made at Reading in
1787. But it does not contain the Plan.--Ed.

We landed in Philadelphia on the 11th of October, where I found sundry
alterations. Keith was no longer governor, being superseded by Major
Gordon. I met him walking the streets as a common citizen. He seem'd a
little asham'd at seeing me, but pass'd without saying anything. I
should have been as much asham'd at seeing Miss Read, had not her
friends, despairing with reason of my return after the receipt of my
letter, persuaded her to marry another, one Rogers, a potter, which was
done in my absence. With him, however, she was never happy, and soon
parted from him, refusing to cohabit with him or bear his name, it being
now said that he had another wife. He was a worthless fellow, tho' an
excellent workman, which was the temptation to her friends. He got into
debt, ran away in 1727 or 1728, went to the West Indies, and died there.
Keimer had got a better house, a shop well supply'd with stationery,
plenty of new types, a number of hands, tho' none good, and seem'd to
have a great deal of business.

Mr. Denham took a store in Water-street, where we open'd our goods; I
attended the business diligently, studied accounts, and grew, in a
little time, expert at selling. We lodg'd and boarded together; he
counsell'd me as a father, having a sincere regard for me. I respected
and lov'd him, and we might have gone on together very happy; but, in
the beginning of February, 1726-7, when I had just pass'd my
twenty-first year, we both were taken ill. My distemper was a pleurisy,
which very nearly carried me off. I suffered a good deal, gave up the
point in my own mind, and was rather disappointed when I found myself
recovering, regretting, in some degree, that I must now, some time or
other, have all that disagreeable work to do over again. I forget what
his distemper was; it held him a long time, and at length carried him
off. He left me a small legacy in a nuncupative will, as a token of his
kindness for me, and he left me once more to the wide world; for the
store was taken into the care of his executors, and my employment under
him ended.

My brother-in-law, Holmes, being now at Philadelphia, advised my return
to my business; and Keimer tempted me, with an offer of large wages by
the year, to come and take the management of his printing-house, that he
might better attend his stationer's shop. I had heard a bad character of
him in London from his wife and her friends, and was not fond of having
any more to do with him. I tri'd for farther employment as a merchant's
clerk; but, not readily meeting with any, I clos'd again with Keimer. I
found in his house these hands: Hugh Meredith, a Welsh Pensilvanian,
thirty years of age, bred to country work; honest, sensible, had a great
deal of solid observation, was something of a reader, but given to
drink. Stephen Potts, a young countryman of full age, bred to the same,
of uncommon natural parts, and great wit and humor, but a little idle.
These he had agreed with at extream low wages per week, to be rais'd a
shilling every three months, as they would deserve by improving in their
business; and the expectation of these high wages, to come on hereafter,
was what he had drawn them in with. Meredith was to work at press, Potts
at book-binding, which he, by agreement, was to teach them, though he
knew neither one nor t'other. John ------, a wild Irishman, brought up
to no business, whose service, for four years, Keimer had purchased from
the captain of a ship; he, too, was to be made a pressman. George Webb,
an Oxford scholar, whose time for four years he had likewise bought,
intending him for a compositor, of whom more presently; and David Harry,
a country boy, whom he had taken apprentice.

I soon perceiv'd that the intention of engaging me at wages so much
higher than he had been us'd to give, was, to have these raw, cheap
hands form'd thro' me; and, as soon as I had instructed them, then they
being all articled to him, he should be able to do without me. I went
on, however, very cheerfully, put his printing-house in order, which had
been in great confusion, and brought his hands by degrees to mind their
business and to do it better.

It was an odd thing to find an Oxford scholar in the situation of a
bought servant. He was not more than eighteen years of age, and gave me
this account of himself; that he was born in Gloucester, educated at a
grammar-school there, had been distinguish'd among the scholars for some
apparent superiority in performing his part, when they exhibited plays;
belong'd to the Witty Club there, and had written some pieces in prose
and verse, which were printed in the Gloucester newspapers; thence he
was sent to Oxford; where he continued about a year, but not well
satisfi'd, wishing of all things to see London, and become a player. At
length, receiving his quarterly allowance of fifteen guineas, instead of
discharging his debts he walk'd out of town, hid his gown in a furze
bush, and footed it to London, where, having no friend to advise him, he
fell into bad company, soon spent his guineas, found no means of being
introduc'd among the players, grew necessitous, pawn'd his cloaths, and
wanted bread. Walking the street very hungry, and not knowing what to do
with himself, a crimp's bill was put into his hand, offering immediate
entertainment and encouragement to such as would bind themselves to
serve in America. He went directly, sign'd the indentures, was put into
the ship, and came over, never writing a line to acquaint his friends
what was become of him. He was lively, witty, good-natur'd, and a
pleasant companion, but idle, thoughtless, and imprudent to the last
degree.

John, the Irishman, soon ran away; with the rest I began to live very
agreeably, for they all respected me the more, as they found Keimer
incapable of instructing them, and that from me they learned something
daily. We never worked on Saturday, that being Keimer's Sabbath, so I
had two days for reading. My acquaintance with ingenious people in the
town increased. Keimer himself treated me with great civility and
apparent regard, and nothing now made me uneasy but my debt to Vernon,
which I was yet unable to pay, being hitherto but a poor œconomist. He,
however, kindly made no demand of it.

Our printing-house often wanted sorts, and there was no letter-founder
in America; I had seen types cast at James's in London, but without much
attention to the manner; however, I now contrived a mould, made use of
the letters we had as puncheons, struck the matrices in lead, And thus
supply'd in a pretty tolerable way all deficiencies. I also engrav'd
several things on occasion; I made the ink; I was warehouseman, and
everything, and, in short, quite a factotum.

But, however serviceable I might be, I found that my services became
every day of less importance, as the other hands improv'd in the
business; and, when Keimer paid my second quarter's wages, he let me
know that he felt them too heavy, and thought I should make an
abatement. He grew by degrees less civil, put on more of the master,
frequently found fault, was captious, and seem'd ready for an
outbreaking. I went on, nevertheless, with a good deal of patience,
thinking that his encumber'd circumstances were partly the cause. At
length a trifle snapt our connections; for, a great noise happening near
the court-house, I put my head out of the window to see what was the
matter. Keimer, being in the street, look'd up and saw me, call'd out to
me in a loud voice and angry tone to mind my business, adding some
reproachful words, that nettled me the more for their publicity, all the
neighbors who were looking out on the same occasion being witnesses how
I was treated. He came up immediately into the printing-house, continu'd
the quarrel, high words pass'd on both sides, he gave me the quarter's
warning we had stipulated, expressing a wish that he had not been
oblig'd to so long a warning. I told him his wish was unnecessary, for I
would leave him that instant; and so, taking my hat, walk'd out of
doors, desiring Meredith, whom I saw below, to take care of some things
I left, and bring them to my lodgings.

Meredith came accordingly in the evening, when we talked my affair over.
He had conceiv'd a great regard for me, and was very unwilling that I
should leave the house while he remain'd in it. He dissuaded me from
returning to my native country, which I began to think of; he reminded
me that Keimer was in debt for all he possess'd; that his creditors
began to be uneasy; that he kept his shop miserably, sold often without
profit for ready money, and often trusted without keeping accounts; that
he must therefore fall, which would make a vacancy I might profit of. I
objected my want of money. He then let me know that his father had a
high opinion of me, and, from some discourse that had pass'd between
them, he was sure would advance money to set us up, if I would enter
into partnership with him. "My time," says he, "will be out with Keimer
in the spring; by that time we may have our press and types in from
London. I am sensible I am no workman; if you like it, your skill in the
business shall be set against the stock I furnish, and we will share the
profits equally."

The proposal was agreeable, and I consented; his father was in town and
approv'd of it; the more as he saw I had great influence with his son,
had prevail'd on him to abstain long from dram-drinking, and he hop'd
might break him off that wretched habit entirely, when we came to be so
closely connected. I gave an inventory to the father, who carry'd it to
a merchant; the things were sent for, the secret was to be kept till
they should arrive, and in the mean time I was to get work, if I could,
at the other printing-house. But I found no vacancy there, and so
remain'd idle a few days, when Keimer, on a prospect of being employ'd
to print some paper money in New Jersey, which would require cuts and
various types that I only could supply, and apprehending Bradford might
engage me and get the jobb from him, sent me a very civil message, that
old friends should not part for a few words, the effect of sudden
passion, and wishing me to return. Meredith persuaded me to comply, as
it would give more opportunity for his improvement under my daily
instructions; so I return'd, and we went on more smoothly than for some
time before. The New Jersey jobb was obtain'd, I contriv'd a copperplate
press for it, the first that had been seen in the country; I cut several
ornaments and checks for the bills. We went together to Burlington,
where I executed the whole to satisfaction; and he received so large a
sum for the work as to be enabled thereby to keep his head much longer
above water.

At Burlington I made an acquaintance with many principal people of the
province. Several of them had been appointed by the Assembly a committee
to attend the press, and take care that no more bills were printed than
the law directed. They were therefore, by turns, constantly with us, and
generally he who attended, brought with him a friend or two for company.
My mind having been much more improv'd by reading than Keimer's, I
suppose it was for that reason my conversation seem'd to be more valu'd.
They had me to their houses, introduced me to their friends, and show'd
me much civility; while he, tho' the master, was a little neglected. In
truth, he was an odd fish; ignorant of common life, fond of rudely
opposing receiv'd opinions, slovenly to extream dirtiness, enthusiastic
in some points of religion, and a little knavish withal.

We continu'd there near three months; and by that time I could reckon
among my acquired friends, Judge Allen, Samuel Bustill, the secretary of
the Province, Isaac Pearson, Joseph Cooper, and several of the Smiths,
members of Assembly, and Isaac Decow, the surveyor-general. The latter
was a shrewd, sagacious old man, who told me that he began for himself,
when young, by wheeling clay for the brick-makers, learned to write
after he was of age, carri'd the chain for surveyors, who taught him
surveying, and he had now by his industry, acquir'd a good estate; and
says he, "I foresee that you will soon work this man out of business,
and make a fortune in it at Philadelphia." He had not then the least
intimation of my intention to set up there or anywhere. These friends
were afterwards of great use to me, as I occasionally was to some of
them. They all continued their regard for me as long as they lived.

Before I enter upon my public appearance in business, it may be well to
let you know the then state of my mind with regard to my principles and
morals, that you may see how far those influenc'd the future events of
my life. My parents had early given me religious impressions, and
brought me through my childhood piously in the Dissenting way. But I was
scarce fifteen, when, after doubting by turns of several points, as I
found them disputed in the different books I read, I began to doubt of
Revelation itself. Some books against Deism fell into my hands; they
were said to be the substance of sermons preached at Boyle's Lectures.
It happened that they wrought an effect on me quite contrary to what was
intended by them; for the arguments of the Deists, which were quoted to
be refuted, appeared to me much stronger than the refutations; in short,
I soon became a thorough Deist. My arguments perverted some others,
particularly Collins and Ralph; but, each of them having afterwards
wrong'd me greatly without the least compunction, and recollecting
Keith's conduct towards me (who was another freethinker), and my own
towards Vernon and Miss Read, which at times gave me great trouble, I
began to suspect that this doctrine, tho' it might be true, was not very
useful. My London pamphlet, which had for its motto these lines of
Dryden:

   "Whatever is, is right. Though purblind man
    Sees but a part o' the chain, the nearest link:
    His eyes not carrying to the equal beam,
    That poises all above;"

and from the attributes of God, his infinite wisdom, goodness and power,
concluded that nothing could possibly be wrong in the world, and that
vice and virtue were empty distinctions, no such things existing,
appear'd now not so clever a performance as I once thought it; and I
doubted whether some error had not insinuated itself unperceiv'd into my
argument, so as to infect all that follow'd, as is common in
metaphysical reasonings.

I grew convinc'd that truth, sincerity and integrity in dealings between
man and man were of the utmost importance to the felicity of life; and I
form'd written resolutions, which still remain in my journal book, to
practice them ever while I lived. Revelation had indeed no weight with
me, as such; but I entertain'd an opinion that, though certain actions
might not be bad because they were forbidden by it, or good because it
commanded them, yet probably these actions might be forbidden because
they were bad for us, or commanded because they were beneficial to us,
in their own natures, all the circumstances of things considered. And
this persuasion, with the kind hand of Providence, or some guardian
angel, or accidental favorable circumstances and situations, or all
together, preserved me, thro' this dangerous time of youth, and the
hazardous situations I was sometimes in among strangers, remote from the
eye and advice of my father, without any willful gross immorality or
injustice, that might have been expected from my want of religion. I say
willful, because the instances I have mentioned had something of
necessity in them, from my youth, inexperience, and the knavery of
others. I had therefore a tolerable character to begin the world with; I
valued it properly, and determin'd to preserve it.

We had not been long return'd to Philadelphia before the new types
arriv'd from London. We settled with Keimer, and left him by his consent
before he heard of it. We found a house to hire near the market, and
took it. To lessen the rent, which was then but twenty-four pounds a
year, tho' I have since known it to let for seventy, we took in Thomas
Godfrey, a glazier, and his family, who were to pay a considerable part
of it to us, and we to board with them. We had scarce opened our letters
and put our press in order, before George House, an acquaintance of
mine, brought a countryman to us, whom he had met in the street
inquiring for a printer. All our cash was now expended in the variety of
particulars we had been obliged to procure, and this countryman's five
shillings, being our first-fruits, and coming so seasonably, gave me
more pleasure than any crown I have since earned; and the gratitude I
felt toward House has made me often more ready than perhaps I should
otherwise have been to assist young beginners.

There are croakers in every country, always boding its ruin. Such a one
then lived in Philadelphia; a person of note, an elderly man, with a
wise look and a very grave manner of speaking; his name was Samuel
Mickle. This gentleman, a stranger to me, stopt one day at my door, and
asked me if I was the young man who had lately opened a new
printing-house. Being answered in the affirmative, he said he was sorry
for me, because it was an expensive undertaking, and the expense would
be lost; for Philadelphia was a sinking place, the people already
half-bankrupts, or near being so; all appearances to the contrary, such
as new buildings and the rise of rents, being to his certain knowledge
fallacious; for they were, in fact, among the things that would soon
ruin us. And he gave me such a detail of misfortunes now existing, or
that were soon to exist, that he left me half melancholy. Had I known
him before I engaged in this business, probably I never should have done
it. This man continued to live in this decaying place, and to declaim in
the same strain, refusing for many years to buy a house there, because
all was going to destruction; and at last I had the pleasure of seeing
him give five times as much for one as he might have bought it for when
he first began his croaking.

I should have mentioned before, that, in the autumn of the preceding
year, I had form'd most of my ingenious acquaintance into a club of
mutual improvement, which we called the Junto; we met on Friday
evenings. The rules that I drew up required that every member, in his
turn, should produce one or more queries on any point of Morals,
Politics, or Natural Philosophy, to be discuss'd by the company; and
once in three months produce and read an essay of his own writing, on
any subject he pleased. Our debates were to be under the direction of a
president, and to be conducted in the sincere spirit of inquiry after
truth, without fondness for dispute, or desire of victory; and, to
prevent warmth, all expressions of positiveness in opinions, or direct
contradiction, were after some time made contraband, and prohibited
under small pecuniary penalties.

The first members were Joseph Breintnal, a copyer of deeds for the
scriveners, a good-natur'd, friendly, middle-ag'd man, a great lover of
poetry, reading all he could meet with, and writing some that was
tolerable; very ingenious in many little Nicknackeries, and of sensible
conversation.

Thomas Godfrey, a self-taught mathematician, great in his way, and
afterward inventor of what is now called Hadley's Quadrant. But he knew
little out of his way, and was not a pleasing companion; as, like most
great mathematicians I have met with, he expected universal precision in
everything said, or was for ever denying or distinguishing upon trifles,
to the disturbance of all conversation. He soon left us.

Nicholas Scull, a surveyor, afterwards surveyor-general, who lov'd
books, and sometimes made a few verses.

William Parsons, bred a shoemaker, but loving reading, had acquir'd a
considerable share of mathematics, which he first studied with a view to
astrology, that he afterwards laught at it. He also became
surveyor-general.

William Maugridge, a joiner, a most exquisite mechanic, and a solid,
sensible man.

Hugh Meredith, Stephen Potts, and George Webb I have characteriz'd
before.

Robert Grace, a young gentleman of some fortune, generous, lively, and
witty; a lover of punning and of his friends.

And William Coleman, then a merchant's clerk, about my age, who had the
coolest, clearest head, the best heart, and the exactest morals of
almost any man I ever met with. He became afterwards a merchant of great
note, and one of our provincial judges. Our friendship continued without
interruption to his death, upward of forty years; and the club continued
almost as long, and was the best school of philosophy, morality, and
politics that then existed in the province; for our queries, which were
read the week preceding their discussion, put us upon reading with
attention upon the several subjects, that we might speak more to the
purpose; and here, too, we acquired better habits of conversation, every
thing being studied in our rules which might prevent our disgusting each
other. From hence the long continuance of the club, which I shall have
frequent occasion to speak further of hereafter.

But my giving this account of it here is to show something of the
interest I had, every one of these exerting themselves in recommending
business to us. Breintnal particularly procur'd us from the Quakers the
printing forty sheets of their history, the rest being to be done by
Keimer; and upon this we work'd exceedingly hard, for the price was low.
It was a folio, pro patria size, in pica, with long primer notes. I
compos'd of it a sheet a day, and Meredith worked it off at press; it
was often eleven at night, and sometimes later, before I had finished my
distribution for the next day's work, for the little jobbs sent in by
our other friends now and then put us back. But so determin'd I was to
continue doing a sheet a day of the folio, that one night, when, having
impos'd my forms, I thought my day's work over, one of them by accident
was broken, and two pages reduced to pi, I immediately distributed and
compos'd it over again before I went to bed; and this industry, visible
to our neighbors, began to give us character and credit; particularly, I
was told, that mention being made of the new printing-office at the
merchants' Every-night club, the general opinion was that it must fail,
there being already two printers in the place, Keimer and Bradford; but
Dr. Baird (whom you and I saw many years after at his native place, St.
Andrew's in Scotland) gave a contrary opinion: "For the industry of that
Franklin," says he, "is superior to any thing I ever saw of the kind; I
see him still at work when I go home from club, and he is at work again
before his neighbors are out of bed." This struck the rest, and we soon
after had offers from one of them to supply us with stationery; but as
yet we did not chuse to engage in shop business.

I mention this industry the more particularly and the more freely, tho'
it seems to be talking in my own praise, that those of my posterity, who
shall read it, may know the use of that virtue, when they see its
effects in my favour throughout this relation.

George Webb, who had found a female friend that lent him wherewith to
purchase his time of Keimer, now came to offer himself as a journeyman
to us. We could not then imploy him; but I foolishly let him know as a
secret that I soon intended to begin a newspaper, and might then have
work for him. My hopes of success, as I told him, were founded on this,
that the then only newspaper, printed by Bradford, was a paltry thing,
wretchedly manag'd, no way entertaining, and yet was profitable to him;
I therefore thought a good paper would scarcely fail of good
encouragement. I requested Webb not to mention it; but he told it to
Keimer, who immediately, to be beforehand with me, published proposals
for printing one himself, on which Webb was to be employ'd. I resented
this; and, to counteract them, as I could not yet begin our paper, I
wrote several pieces of entertainment for Bradford's paper, under the
title of the Busy Body, which Breintnal continu'd some months. By this
means the attention of the publick was fixed on that paper, and Keimer's
proposals, which we burlesqu'd and ridicul'd, were disregarded. He began
his paper, however, and, after carrying it on three quarters of a year,
with at most only ninety subscribers, he offered it to me for a trifle;
and I, having been ready some time to go on with it, took it in hand
directly; and it prov'd in a few years extremely profitable to me.

I perceive that I am apt to speak in the singular number, though our
partnership still continu'd; the reason may be that, in fact, the whole
management of the business lay upon me. Meredith was no compositor, a
poor pressman, and seldom sober. My friends lamented my connection with
him, but I was to make the best of it.

Our first papers made a quite different appearance from any before in
the province; a better type, and better printed; but some spirited
remarks of my writing, on the dispute then going on between Governor
Burnet and the Massachusetts Assembly, struck the principal people,
occasioned the paper and the manager of it to be much talk'd of, and in
a few weeks brought them all to be our subscribers.

Their example was follow'd by many, and our number went on growing
continually. This was one of the first good effects of my having learnt
a little to scribble; another was, that the leading men, seeing a
newspaper now in the hands of one who could also handle a pen, thought
it convenient to oblige and encourage me. Bradford still printed the
votes, and laws, and other publick business. He had printed an address
of the House to the governor, in a coarse, blundering manner, we
reprinted it elegantly and correctly, and sent one to every member. They
were sensible of the difference: it strengthened the hands of our
friends in the House, and they voted us their printers for the year
ensuing.

Among my friends in the House I must not forget Mr. Hamilton, before
mentioned, who was then returned from England, and had a seat in it. He
interested himself for me strongly in that instance, as he did in many
others afterward, continuing his patronage till his death. [6]

[6] I got his son once £500.--[Marg. note.]

Mr. Vernon, about this time, put me in mind of the debt I ow'd him, but
did not press me. I wrote him an ingenuous letter of acknowledgment,
crav'd his forbearance a little longer, which he allow'd me, and as soon
as I was able, I paid the principal with interest, and many thanks; so
that erratum was in some degree corrected.

But now another difficulty came upon me which I had never the least
reason to expect. Mr. Meredith's father, who was to have paid for our
printing-house, according to the expectations given me, was able to
advance only one hundred pounds currency, which had been paid; and a
hundred more was due to the merchant, who grew impatient, and su'd us
all. We gave bail, but saw that, if the money could not be rais'd in
time, the suit must soon come to a judgment and execution, and our
hopeful prospects must, with us, be ruined, as the press and letters
must be sold for payment, perhaps at half price.

In this distress two true friends, whose kindness I have never
forgotten, nor ever shall forget while I can remember any thing, came to
me separately, unknown to each other, and, without any application from
me, offering each of them to advance me all the money that should be
necessary to enable me to take the whole business upon myself, if that
should be practicable; but they did not like my continuing the
partnership with Meredith, who, as they said, was often seen drunk in
the streets, and playing at low games in alehouses, much to our
discredit. These two friends were William Coleman and Robert Grace. I
told them I could not propose a separation while any prospect remain'd
of the Merediths' fulfilling their part of our agreement, because I
thought myself under great obligations to them for what they had done,
and would do if they could; but, if they finally fail'd in their
performance, and our partnership must be dissolv'd, I should then think
myself at liberty to accept the assistance of my friends.

Thus the matter rested for some time, when I said to my partner,
"Perhaps your father is dissatisfied at the part you have undertaken in
this affair of ours, and is unwilling to advance for you and me what he
would for you alone. If that is the case, tell me, and I will resign the
whole to you, and go about my business." "No," said he, "my father has
really been disappointed, and is really unable; and I am unwilling to
distress him farther. I see this is a business I am not fit for. I was
bred a farmer, and it was a folly in me to come to town, and put myself,
at thirty years of age, an apprentice to learn a new trade. Many of our
Welsh people are going to settle in North Carolina, where land is cheap.
I am inclin'd to go with them, and follow my old employment. You may
find friends to assist you. If you will take the debts of the company
upon you; return to my father the hundred pound he has advanced; pay my
little personal debts, and give me thirty pounds and a new saddle, I
will relinquish the partnership, and leave the whole in your hands." I
agreed to this proposal: it was drawn up in writing, sign'd, and seal'd
immediately. I gave him what he demanded, and he went soon after to
Carolina, from whence he sent me next year two long letters, containing
the best account that had been given of that country, the climate, the
soil, husbandry, etc., for in those matters he was very judicious. I
printed them in the papers, and they gave great satisfaction to the
publick.

As soon as he was gone, I recurr'd to my two friends; and because I
would not give an unkind preference to either, I took half of what each
had offered and I wanted of one, and half of the other; paid off the
company's debts, and went on with the business in my own name,
advertising that the partnership was dissolved. I think this was in or
about the year 1729.

About this time there was a cry among the people for more paper money,
only fifteen thousand pounds being extant in the province, and that soon
to be sunk. The wealthy inhabitants oppos'd any addition, being against
all paper currency, from an apprehension that it would depreciate, as it
had done in New England, to the prejudice of all creditors. We had
discuss'd this point in our Junto, where I was on the side of an
addition, being persuaded that the first small sum struck in 1723 had
done much good by increasing the trade, employment, and number of
inhabitants in the province, since I now saw all the old houses
inhabited, and many new ones building: whereas I remembered well, that
when I first walk'd about the streets of Philadelphia, eating my roll, I
saw most of the houses in Walnut-street, between Second and Front
streets, with bills on their doors, "To be let"; and many likewise in
Chestnut-street and other streets, which made me then think the
inhabitants of the city were deserting it one after another.

Our debates possess'd me so fully of the subject, that I wrote and
printed an anonymous pamphlet on it, entitled "The Nature and Necessity
of a Paper Currency." It was well receiv'd by the common people in
general; but the rich men dislik'd it, for it increas'd and strengthen'd
the clamor for more money, and they happening to have no writers among
them that were able to answer it, their opposition slacken'd, and the
point was carried by a majority in the House. My friends there, who
conceiv'd I had been of some service, thought fit to reward me by
employing me in printing the money; a very profitable jobb and a great
help to me. This was another advantage gain'd by my being able to write.

The utility of this currency became by time and experience so evident as
never afterwards to be much disputed; so that it grew soon to fifty-five
thousand pounds, and in 1739 to eighty thousand pounds, since which it
arose during war to upwards of three hundred and fifty thousand pounds,
trade, building, and inhabitants all the while increasing, tho' I now
think there are limits beyond which the quantity may be hurtful.

I soon after obtain'd, thro' my friend Hamilton, the printing of the
Newcastle paper money, another profitable jobb as I then thought it;
small things appearing great to those in small circumstances; and these,
to me, were really great advantages, as they were great encouragements.
He procured for me, also, the printing of the laws and votes of that
government, which continu'd in my hands as long as I follow'd the
business.

I now open'd a little stationer's shop. I had in it blanks of all sorts,
the correctest that ever appear'd among us, being assisted in that by my
friend Breintnal. I had also paper, parchment, chapmen's books, etc. One
Whitemash, a compositor I had known in London, an excellent workman, now
came to me, and work'd with me constantly and diligently; and I took an
apprentice, the son of Aquila Rose.

I began now gradually to pay off the debt I was under for the
printing-house. In order to secure my credit and character as a
tradesman, I took care not only to be in reality industrious and frugal,
but to avoid all appearances to the contrary. I drest plainly; I was
seen at no places of idle diversion. I never went out a fishing or
shooting; a book, indeed, sometimes debauch'd me from my work, but that
was seldom, snug, and gave no scandal; and, to show that I was not above
my business, I sometimes brought home the paper I purchas'd at the
stores thro' the streets on a wheelbarrow. Thus being esteem'd an
industrious, thriving young man, and paying duly for what I bought, the
merchants who imported stationery solicited my custom; others proposed
supplying me with books, and I went on swimmingly. In the mean time,
Keimer's credit and business declining daily, he was at last forc'd to
sell his printing-house to satisfy his creditors. He went to Barbadoes,
and there lived some years in very poor circumstances.

His apprentice, David Harry, whom I had instructed while I work'd with
him, set up in his place at Philadelphia, having bought his materials. I
was at first apprehensive of a powerful rival in Harry, as his friends
were very able, and had a good deal of interest. I therefore propos'd a
partnership to him which he, fortunately for me, rejected with scorn. He
was very proud, dress'd like a gentleman, liv'd expensively, took much
diversion and pleasure abroad, ran in debt, and neglected his business;
upon which, all business left him; and, finding nothing to do, he
followed Keimer to Barbadoes, taking the printing-house with him. There
this apprentice employ'd his former master as a journeyman; they
quarrel'd often; Harry went continually behindhand, and at length was
forc'd to sell his types and return to his country work in Pensilvania.
The person that bought them employ'd Keimer to use them, but in a few
years he died.

There remained now no competitor with me at Philadelphia but the old
one, Bradford; who was rich and easy, did a little printing now and then
by straggling hands, but was not very anxious about the business.
However, as he kept the post-office, it was imagined he had better
opportunities of obtaining news; his paper was thought a better
distributer of advertisements than mine, and therefore had many more,
which was a profitable thing to him, and a disadvantage to me; for, tho'
I did indeed receive and send papers by the post, yet the publick
opinion was otherwise, for what I did send was by bribing the riders,
who took them privately, Bradford being unkind enough to forbid it,
which occasion'd some resentment on my part; and I thought so meanly of
him for it, that, when I afterward came into his situation, I took care
never to imitate it.

I had hitherto continu'd to board with Godfrey, who lived in part of my
house with his wife and children, and had one side of the shop for his
glazier's business, tho' he worked little, being always absorbed in his
mathematics. Mrs. Godfrey projected a match for me with a relation's
daughter, took opportunities of bringing us often together, till a
serious courtship on my part ensu'd, the girl being in herself very
deserving. The old folks encourag'd me by continual invitations to
supper, and by leaving us together, till at length it was time to
explain. Mrs. Godfrey manag'd our little treaty. I let her know that I
expected as much money with their daughter as would pay off my remaining
debt for the printing-house, which I believe was not then above a
hundred pounds. She brought me word they had no such sum to spare; I
said they might mortgage their house in the loan-office. The answer to
this, after some days, was, that they did not approve the match; that,
on inquiry of Bradford, they had been inform'd the printing business was
not a profitable one; the types would soon be worn out, and more wanted;
that S. Keimer and D. Harry had failed one after the other, and I should
probably soon follow them; and, therefore, I was forbidden the house,
and the daughter shut up.

Whether this was a real change of sentiment or only artifice, on a
supposition of our being too far engaged in affection to retract, and
therefore that we should steal a marriage, which would leave them at
liberty to give or withhold what they pleas'd, I know not; but I
suspected the latter, resented it, and went no more. Mrs. Godfrey
brought me afterward some more favorable accounts of their disposition,
and would have drawn me on again; but I declared absolutely my
resolution to have nothing more to do with that family. This was
resented by the Godfreys; we differ'd, and they removed, leaving me the
whole house, and I resolved to take no more inmates.

But this affair having turned my thoughts to marriage, I look'd round me
and made overtures of acquaintance in other places; but soon found that,
the business of a printer being generally thought a poor one, I was not
to expect money with a wife, unless with such a one as I should not
otherwise think agreeable. In the mean time, that hard-to-be-governed
passion of youth hurried me frequently into intrigues with low women
that fell in my way, which were attended with some expense and great
inconvenience, besides a continual risque to my health by a distemper
which of all things I dreaded, though by great good luck I escaped it. A
friendly correspondence as neighbors and old acquaintances had continued
between me and Mrs. Read's family, who all had a regard for me from the
time of my first lodging in their house. I was often invited there and
consulted in their affairs, wherein I sometimes was of service. I piti'd
poor Miss Read's unfortunate situation, who was generally dejected,
seldom cheerful, and avoided company. I considered my giddiness and
inconstancy when in London as in a great degree the cause of her
unhappiness, tho' the mother was good enough to think the fault more her
own than mine, as she had prevented our marrying before I went thither,
and persuaded the other match in my absence. Our mutual affection was
revived, but there were now great objections to our union. The match was
indeed looked upon as invalid, a preceding wife being said to be living
in England; but this could not easily be prov'd, because of the
distance; and, tho' there was a report of his death, it was not certain.
Then, tho' it should be true, he had left many debts, which his
successor might be call'd upon to pay. We ventured, however, over all
these difficulties, and I took her to wife, September 1st, 1730. None of
the inconveniences happened that we had apprehended; she proved a good
and faithful helpmate, assisted me much by attending the shop; we throve
together, and have ever mutually endeavored to make each other happy.
Thus I corrected that great erratum as well as I could.

About this time, our club meeting, not at a tavern, but in a little room
of Mr. Grace's, set apart for that purpose, a proposition was made by
me, that, since our books were often referr'd to in our disquisitions
upon the queries, it might be convenient to us to have them altogether
where we met, that upon occasion they might be consulted; and by thus
clubbing our books to a common library, we should, while we lik'd to
keep them together, have each of us the advantage of using the books of
all the other members, which would be nearly as beneficial as if each
owned the whole. It was lik'd and agreed to, and we fill'd one end of
the room with such books as we could best spare. The number was not so
great as we expected; and tho' they had been of great use, yet some
inconveniences occurring for want of due care of them, the collection,
after about a year, was separated, and each took his books home again.

And now I set on foot my first project of a public nature, that for a
subscription library. I drew up the proposals, got them put into form by
our great scrivener, Brockden, and, by the help of my friends in the
Junto, procured fifty subscribers of forty shillings each to begin with,
and ten shillings a year for fifty years, the term our company was to
continue. We afterwards obtain'd a charter, the company being increased
to one hundred: this was the mother of all the North American
subscription libraries, now so numerous. It is become a great thing
itself, and continually increasing. These libraries have improved the
general conversation of the Americans, made the common tradesmen and
farmers as intelligent as most gentlemen from other countries, and
perhaps have contributed in some degree to the stand so generally made
throughout the colonies in defense of their privileges.

Memo. Thus far was written with the intention express'd in the beginning
and therefore contains several little family anecdotes of no importance
to others. What follows was written many years after in compliance with
the advice contain'd in these letters, and accordingly intended for the
public. The affairs of the Revolution occasion'd the interruption.

Letter from Mr. Abel James,
with Notes of my Life (received in Paris).

"My Dear and Honored Friend: I have often been desirous of writing to
thee, but could not be reconciled to the thought that the letter might
fall into the hands of the British, lest some printer or busy-body
should publish some part of the contents, and give our friend pain, and
myself censure.

"Some time since there fell into my hands, to my great joy, about
twenty-three sheets in thy own handwriting, containing an account of the
parentage and life of thyself, directed to thy son, ending in the year
1730, with which there were notes, likewise in thy writing; a copy of
which I inclose, in hopes it may be a means, if thou continued it up to
a later period, that the first and latter part may be put together; and
if it is not yet continued, I hope thee will not delay it. Life is
uncertain, as the preacher tells us; and what will the world say if
kind, humane, and benevolent Ben. Franklin should leave his friends and
the world deprived of so pleasing and profitable a work; a work which
would be useful and entertaining not only to a few, but to millions? The
influence writings under that class have on the minds of youth is very
great, and has nowhere appeared to me so plain, as in our public
friend's journals. It almost insensibly leads the youth into the
resolution of endeavoring to become as good and eminent as the
journalist. Should thine, for instance, when published (and I think it
could not fail of it), lead the youth to equal the industry and
temperance of thy early youth, what a blessing with that class would
such a work be! I know of no character living, nor many of them put
together, who has so much in his power as thyself to promote a greater
spirit of industry and early attention to business, frugality, and
temperance with the American youth. Not that I think the work would have
no other merit and use in the world, far from it; but the first is of
such vast importance that I know nothing that can equal it."

The foregoing letter and the minutes accompanying it being shown to a
friend, I received from him the following:

Letter from Mr. Benjamin Vaughan.

"Paris, January 31, 1783.

"My Dearest Sir: When I had read over your sheets of minutes of the
principal incidents of your life, recovered for you by your Quaker
acquaintance, I told you I would send you a letter expressing my reasons
why I thought it would be useful to complete and publish it as he
desired. Various concerns have for some time past prevented this letter
being written, and I do not know whether it was worth any expectation;
happening to be at leisure, however, at present, I shall by writing, at
least interest and instruct myself; but as the terms I am inclined to
use may tend to offend a person of your manners, I shall only tell you
how I would address any other person, who was as good and as great as
yourself, but less diffident. I would say to him, Sir, I solicit the
history of your life from the following motives: Your history is so
remarkable, that if you do not give it, somebody else will certainly
give it; and perhaps so as nearly to do as much harm, as your own
management of the thing might do good. It will moreover present a table
of the internal circumstances of your country, which will very much tend
to invite to it settlers of virtuous and manly minds. And considering
the eagerness with which such information is sought by them, and the
extent of your reputation, I do not know of a more efficacious
advertisement than your biography would give. All that has happened to
you is also connected with the detail of the manners and situation of a
rising people; and in this respect I do not think that the writings of
Cæsar and Tacitus can be more interesting to a true judge of human
nature and society. But these, sir, are small reasons, in my opinion,
compared with the chance which your life will give for the forming of
future great men; and in conjunction with your Art of Virtue (which you
design to publish) of improving the features of private character, and
consequently of aiding all happiness, both public and domestic. The two
works I allude to, sir, will in particular give a noble rule and example
of self-education. School and other education constantly proceed upon
false principles, and show a clumsy apparatus pointed at a false mark;
but your apparatus is simple, and the mark a true one; and while parents
and young persons are left destitute of other just means of estimating
and becoming prepared for a reasonable course in life, your discovery
that the thing is in many a man's private power, will be invaluable!
Influence upon the private character, late in life, is not only an
influence late in life, but a weak influence. It is in youth that we
plant our chief habits and prejudices; it is in youth that we take our
party as to profession, pursuits and matrimony. In youth, therefore, the
turn is given; in youth the education even of the next generation is
given; in youth the private and public character is determined; and the
term of life extending but from youth to age, life ought to begin well
from youth, and more especially before we take our party as to our
principal objects. But your biography will not merely teach
self-education, but the education of a wise man; and the wisest man will
receive lights and improve his progress, by seeing detailed the conduct
of another wise man. And why are weaker men to be deprived of such
helps, when we see our race has been blundering on in the dark, almost
without a guide in this particular, from the farthest trace of time?
Show then, sir, how much is to be done, both to sons and fathers; and
invite all wise men to become like yourself, and other men to become
wise. When we see how cruel statesmen and warriors can be to the human
race, and how absurd distinguished men can be to their acquaintance, it
will be instructive to observe the instances multiply of pacific,
acquiescing manners; and to find how compatible it is to be great and
domestic, enviable and yet good-humored.

"The little private incidents which you will also have to relate, will
have considerable use, as we want, above all things, rules of prudence
in ordinary affairs; and it will be curious to see how you have acted in
these. It will be so far a sort of key to life, and explain many things
that all men ought to have once explained to them, to give them a chance
of becoming wise by foresight. The nearest thing to having experience of
one's own, is to have other people's affairs brought before us in a
shape that is interesting; this is sure to happen from your pen; our
affairs and management will have an air of simplicity or importance that
will not fail to strike; and I am convinced you have conducted them with
as much originality as if you had been conducting discussions in
politics or philosophy; and what more worthy of experiments and system
(its importance and its errors considered) than human life?

"Some men have been virtuous blindly, others have speculated
fantastically, and others have been shrewd to bad purposes; but you,
sir, I am sure, will give under your hand, nothing but what is at the
same moment, wise, practical and good.  Your account of yourself (for I
suppose the parallel I am drawing for Dr. Franklin, will hold not only
in point of character, but of private history) will show that you are
ashamed of no origin; a thing the more important, as you prove how
little necessary all origin is to happiness, virtue, or greatness. As no
end likewise happens without a means, so we shall find, sir, that even
you yourself framed a plan by which you became considerable; but at the
same time we may see that though the event is flattering, the means are
as simple as wisdom could make them; that is, depending upon nature,
virtue, thought and habit. Another thing demonstrated will be the
propriety of every man's waiting for his time for appearing upon the
stage of the world. Our sensations being very much fixed to the moment,
we are apt to forget that more moments are to follow the first, and
consequently that man should arrange his conduct so as to suit the whole
of a life. Your attribution appears to have been applied to your life,
and the passing moments of it have been enlivened with content and
enjoyment, instead of being tormented with foolish impatience or
regrets. Such a conduct is easy for those who make virtue and themselves
in countenance by examples of other truly great men, of whom patience is
so often the characteristic. Your Quaker correspondent, sir (for here
again I will suppose the subject of my letter resembling Dr. Franklin),
praised your frugality, diligence and temperance, which he considered as
a pattern for all youth; but it is singular that he should have
forgotten your modesty and your disinterestedness, without which you
never could have waited for your advancement, or found your situation in
the mean time comfortable; which is a strong lesson to show the poverty
of glory and the importance of regulating our minds. If this
correspondent had known the nature of your reputation as well as I do,
he would have said, Your former writings and measures would secure
attention to your Biography, and Art of Virtue; and your Biography and
Art of Virtue, in return, would secure attention to them. This is an
advantage attendant upon a various character, and which brings all that
belongs to it into greater play; and it is the more useful, as perhaps
more persons are at a loss for the means of improving their minds and
characters, than they are for the time or the inclination to do it. But
there is one concluding reflection, sir, that will shew the use of your
life as a mere piece of biography. This style of writing seems a little
gone out of vogue, and yet it is a very useful one; and your specimen of
it may be particularly serviceable, as it will make a subject of
comparison with the lives of various public cutthroats and intriguers,
and with absurd monastic self-tormentors or vain literary triflers. If
it encourages more writings of the same kind with your own, and induces
more men to spend lives fit to be written, it will be worth all
Plutarch's Lives put together. But being tired of figuring to myself a
character of which every feature suits only one man in the world,
without giving him the praise of it, I shall end my letter, my dear Dr.
Franklin, with a personal application to your proper self. I am
earnestly desirous, then, my dear sir, that you should let the world
into the traits of your genuine character, as civil broils may otherwise
tend to disguise or traduce it. Considering your great age, the caution
of your character, and your peculiar style of thinking, it is not likely
that any one besides yourself can be sufficiently master of the facts of
your life, or the intentions of your mind. Besides all this, the immense
revolution of the present period, will necessarily turn our attention
towards the author of it, and when virtuous principles have been
pretended in it, it will be highly important to shew that such have
really influenced; and, as your own character will be the principal one
to receive a scrutiny, it is proper (even for its effects upon your vast
and rising country, as well as upon England and upon Europe) that it
should stand respectable and eternal. For the furtherance of human
happiness, I have always maintained that it is necessary to prove that
man is not even at present a vicious and detestable animal; and still
more to prove that good management may greatly amend him; and it is for
much the same reason, that I am anxious to see the opinion established,
that there are fair characters existing among the individuals of the
race; for the moment that all men, without exception, shall be conceived
abandoned, good people will cease efforts deemed to be hopeless, and
perhaps think of taking their share in the scramble of life, or at least
of making it comfortable principally for themselves. Take then, my dear
sir, this work most speedily into hand: shew yourself good as you are
good; temperate as you are temperate; and above all things, prove
yourself as one, who from your infancy have loved justice, liberty and
concord, in a way that has made it natural and consistent for you to
have acted, as we have seen you act in the last seventeen years of your
life. Let Englishmen be made not only to respect, but even to love you.
When they think well of individuals in your native country, they will go
nearer to thinking well of your country; and when your countrymen see
themselves well thought of by Englishmen, they will go nearer to
thinking well of England. Extend your views even further; do not stop at
those who speak the English tongue, but after having settled so many
points in nature and politics, think of bettering the whole race of men.
As I have not read any part of the life in question, but know only the
character that lived it, I write somewhat at hazard. I am sure, however,
that the life and the treatise I allude to (on the Art of Virtue) will
necessarily fulfil the chief of my expectations; and still more so if
you take up the measure of suiting these performances to the several
views above stated. Should they even prove unsuccessful in all that a
sanguine admirer of yours hopes from them, you will at least have framed
pieces to interest the human mind; and whoever gives a feeling of
pleasure that is innocent to man, has added so much to the fair side of
a life otherwise too much darkened by anxiety and too much injured by
pain. In the hope, therefore, that you will listen to the prayer
addressed to you in this letter, I beg to subscribe myself, my dearest
sir, etc., etc.,

"Signed,     Benj. Vaughan."

Continuation of the Account of my Life, begun at Passy, near Paris,
1784.

It is some time since I receiv'd the above letters, but I have been too
busy till now to think of complying with the request they contain. It
might, too, be much better done if I were at home among my papers, which
would aid my memory, and help to ascertain dates; but my return being
uncertain and having just now a little leisure, I will endeavor to
recollect and write what I can; if I live to get home, it may there be
corrected and improv'd.

Not having any copy here of what is already written, I know not whether
an account is given of the means I used to establish the Philadelphia
public library, which, from a small beginning, is now become so
considerable, though I remember to have come down to near the time of
that transaction (1730). I will therefore begin here with an account of
it, which may be struck out if found to have been already given.

At the time I establish'd myself in Pennsylvania, there was not a good
bookseller's shop in any of the colonies to the southward of Boston. In
New York and Philad'a the printers were indeed stationers; they sold
only paper, etc., almanacs, ballads, and a few common school-books.
Those who lov'd reading were oblig'd to send for their books from
England; the members of the Junto had each a few. We had left the
alehouse, where we first met, and hired a room to hold our club in. I
propos'd that we should all of us bring our books to that room, where
they would not only be ready to consult in our conferences, but become a
common benefit, each of us being at liberty to borrow such as he wish'd
to read at home. This was accordingly done, and for some time contented
us.

Finding the advantage of this little collection, I propos'd to render
the benefit from books more common, by commencing a public subscription
library. I drew a sketch of the plan and rules that would be necessary,
and got a skilful conveyancer, Mr. Charles Brockden, to put the whole in
form of articles of agreement to be subscribed, by which each subscriber
engag'd to pay a certain sum down for the first purchase of books, and
an annual contribution for increasing them. So few were the readers at
that time in Philadelphia, and the majority of us so poor, that I was
not able, with great industry; to find more than fifty persons, mostly
young tradesmen, willing to pay down for this purpose forty shillings
each, and ten shillings per annum. On this little fund we began. The
books were imported; the library was opened one day in the week for
lending to the subscribers, on their promissory notes to pay double the
value if not duly returned. The institution soon manifested its utility,
was imitated by other towns, and in other provinces. The libraries were
augmented by donations; reading became fashionable; and our people,
having no publick amusements to divert their attention from study,
became better acquainted with books, and in a few years were observ'd by
strangers to be better instructed and more intelligent than people of
the same rank generally are in other countries.

When we were about to sign the above-mentioned articles, which were to
be binding upon us, our heirs, etc., for fifty years, Mr. Brockden, the
scrivener, said to us, "You are young men, but it is scarcely probable
that any of you will live to see the expiration of the term fix'd in the
instrument." A number of us, however, are yet living; but the instrument
was after a few years rendered null by a charter that incorporated and
gave perpetuity to the company.

The objections and reluctances I met with in soliciting the
subscriptions, made me soon feel the impropriety of presenting one's
self as the proposer of any useful project, that might be suppos'd to
raise one's reputation in the smallest degree above that of one's
neighbors, when one has need of their assistance to accomplish that
project. I therefore put myself as much as I could out of sight, and
stated it as a scheme of a number of friends, who had requested me to go
about and propose it to such as they thought lovers of reading. In this
way my affair went on more smoothly, and I ever after practis'd it on
such occasions; and, from my frequent successes, can heartily recommend
it. The present little sacrifice of your vanity will afterwards be amply
repaid. If it remains a while uncertain to whom the merit belongs, some
one more vain than yourself will be encouraged to claim it, and then
even envy will be disposed to do you justice by plucking those assumed
feathers, and restoring them to their right owner.

This library afforded me the means of improvement by constant study, for
which I set apart an hour or two each day, and thus repair'd in some
degree the loss of the learned education my father once intended for me.
Reading was the only amusement I allow'd myself. I spent no time in
taverns, games, or frolicks of any kind; and my industry in my business
continu'd as indefatigable as it was necessary. I was indebted for my
printing-house; I had a young family coming on to be educated, and I had
to contend with for business two printers, who were established in the
place before me. My circumstances, however, grew daily easier. My
original habits of frugality continuing, and my father having, among his
instructions to me when a boy, frequently repeated a proverb of Solomon,
"Seest thou a man diligent in his calling, he shall stand before kings,
he shall not stand before mean men," I from thence considered industry
as a means of obtaining wealth and distinction, which encourag'd me,
tho' I did not think that I should ever literally stand before kings,
which, however, has since happened; for I have stood before five, and
even had the honor of sitting down with one, the King of Denmark, to
dinner.

We have an English proverb that says, "He that would thrive, must ask
his wife." It was lucky for me that I had one as much dispos'd to
industry and frugality as myself. She assisted me cheerfully in my
business, folding and stitching pamphlets, tending shop, purchasing old
linen rags for the papermakers, etc., etc. We kept no idle servants, our
table was plain and simple, our furniture of the cheapest. For instance,
my breakfast was a long time bread and milk (no tea), and I ate it out
of a twopenny earthen porringer, with a pewter spoon. But mark how
luxury will enter families, and make a progress, in spite of principle:
being call'd one morning to breakfast, I found it in a China bowl, with
a spoon of silver! They had been bought for me without my knowledge by
my wife, and had cost her the enormous sum of three-and-twenty
shillings, for which she had no other excuse or apology to make, but
that she thought her husband deserv'd a silver spoon and China bowl as
well as any of his neighbors. This was the first appearance of plate and
China in our house, which afterward, in a course of years, as our wealth
increas'd, augmented gradually to several hundred pounds in value.

I had been religiously educated as a Presbyterian; and tho' some of the
dogmas of that persuasion, such as the eternal decrees of God, election,
reprobation, etc., appeared to me unintelligible, others doubtful, and I
early absented myself from the public assemblies of the sect, Sunday
being my studying day, I never was without some religious principles. I
never doubted, for instance, the existence of the Deity; that he made
the world, and govern'd it by his Providence; that the most acceptable
service of God was the doing good to man; that our souls are immortal;
and that all crime will be punished, and virtue rewarded, either here or
hereafter. These I esteem'd the essentials of every religion; and, being
to be found in all the religions we had in our country, I respected them
all, tho' with different degrees of respect, as I found them more or
less mix'd with other articles, which, without any tendency to inspire,
promote, or confirm morality, serv'd principally to divide us, and make
us unfriendly to one another. This respect to all, with an opinion that
the worst had some good effects, induc'd me to avoid all discourse that
might tend to lessen the good opinion another might have of his own
religion; and as our province increas'd in people, and new places of
worship were continually wanted, and generally erected by voluntary
contributions, my mite for such purpose, whatever might be the sect, was
never refused.

Tho' I seldom attended any public worship, I had still an opinion of its
propriety, and of its utility when rightly conducted, and I regularly
paid my annual subscription for the support of the only Presbyterian
minister or meeting we had in Philadelphia. He us'd to visit me
sometimes as a friend, and admonish me to attend his administrations,
and I was now and then prevail'd on to do so, once for five Sundays
successively. Had he been in my opinion a good preacher, perhaps I might
have continued, notwithstanding the occasion I had for the Sunday's
leisure in my course of study; but his discourses were chiefly either
polemic arguments, or explications of the peculiar doctrines of our
sect, and were all to me very dry, uninteresting, and unedifying, since
not a single moral principle was inculcated or enforc'd, their aim
seeming to be rather to make us Presbyterians than good citizens.

At length he took for his text that verse of the fourth chapter of
Philippians, "Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, or of good report, if there be any virtue, or any
praise, think on these things." And I imagin'd, in a sermon on such a
text, we could not miss of having some morality. But he confin'd himself
to five points only, as meant by the apostle, viz.: 1. Keeping holy the
Sabbath day. 2. Being diligent in reading the holy Scriptures. 3.
Attending duly the publick worship. 4. Partaking of the Sacrament. 5.
Paying a due respect to God's ministers. These might be all good things;
but, as they were not the kind of good things that I expected from that
text, I despaired of ever meeting with them from any other, was
disgusted, and attended his preaching no more. I had some years before
compos'd a little Liturgy, or form of prayer, for my own private use
(viz., in 1728), entitled, Articles of Belief and Acts of Religion. I
return'd to the use of this, and went no more to the public assemblies.
My conduct might be blameable, but I leave it, without attempting
further to excuse it; my present purpose being to relate facts, and not
to make apologies for them.

It was about this time I conceiv'd the bold and arduous project of
arriving at moral perfection. I wish'd to live without committing any
fault at any time; I would conquer all that either natural inclination,
custom, or company might lead me into. As I knew, or thought I knew,
what was right and wrong, I did not see why I might not always do the
one and avoid the other. But I soon found I had undertaken a task of
more difficulty than I had imagined. While my care was employ'd in
guarding against one fault, I was often surprised by another; habit took
the advantage of inattention; inclination was sometimes too strong for
reason. I concluded, at length, that the mere speculative conviction
that it was our interest to be completely virtuous, was not sufficient
to prevent our slipping; and that the contrary habits must be broken,
and good ones acquired and established, before we can have any
dependence on a steady, uniform rectitude of conduct. For this purpose I
therefore contrived the following method.

In the various enumerations of the moral virtues I had met with in my
reading, I found the catalogue more or less numerous, as different
writers included more or fewer ideas under the same name. Temperance,
for example, was by some confined to eating and drinking, while by
others it was extended to mean the moderating every other pleasure,
appetite, inclination, or passion, bodily or mental, even to our avarice
and ambition. I propos'd to myself, for the sake of clearness, to use
rather more names, with fewer ideas annex'd to each, than a few names
with more ideas; and I included under thirteen names of virtues all that
at that time occurr'd to me as necessary or desirable, and annexed to
each a short precept, which fully express'd the extent I gave to its
meaning.

These names of virtues, with their precepts, were:

 1. Temperance.
    Eat not to dullness; drink not to elevation.
 2. Silence.
    Speak not but what may benefit others or yourself; avoid trifling
conversation.
 3. Order.
    Let all your things have their places; let each part of your
business have its time.
 4. Resolution.
    Resolve to perform what you ought; perform without fail what you
resolve.
 5. Frugality.
    Make no expense but to do good to others or yourself; i.e., waste
nothing.
 6. Industry.
    Lose no time; be always employ'd in something useful; cut off all
unnecessary actions.
 7. Sincerity.
    Use no hurtful deceit; think innocently and justly, and, if you
speak, speak accordingly.
 8. Justice.
    Wrong none by doing injuries, or omitting the benefits that are your
duty.
 9. Moderation.
    Avoid extreams; forbear resenting injuries so much as you think they
deserve.
10. Cleanliness.
    Tolerate no uncleanliness in body, cloaths, or habitation.
11. Tranquillity.
    Be not disturbed at trifles, or at accidents common or unavoidable.
12. Chastity.
    Rarely use venery but for health or offspring, never to dulness,
weakness, or the injury of your own or another's peace or reputation.
13. Humility.
    Imitate Jesus and Socrates.

My intention being to acquire the habitude of all these virtues, I
judg'd it would be well not to distract my attention by attempting the
whole at once, but to fix it on one of them at a time; and, when I
should be master of that, then to proceed to another, and so on, till I
should have gone thro' the thirteen; and, as the previous acquisition of
some might facilitate the acquisition of certain others, I arrang'd them
with that view, as they stand above. Temperance first, as it tends to
procure that coolness and clearness of head, which is so necessary where
constant vigilance was to be kept up, and guard maintained against the
unremitting attraction of ancient habits, and the force of perpetual
temptations. This being acquir'd and establish'd, Silence would be more
easy; and my desire being to gain knowledge at the same time that I
improv'd in virtue, and considering that in conversation it was obtain'd
rather by the use of the ears than of the tongue, and therefore wishing
to break a habit I was getting into of prattling, punning, and joking,
which only made me acceptable to trifling company, I gave Silence the
second place. This and the next, Order, I expected would allow me more
time for attending to my project and my studies. Resolution, once become
habitual, would keep me firm in my endeavors to obtain all the
subsequent virtues; Frugality and Industry freeing me from my remaining
debt, and producing affluence and independence, would make more easy the
practice of Sincerity and Justice, etc., etc. Conceiving then, that,
agreeably to the advice of Pythagoras in his Golden Verses, daily
examination would be necessary, I contrived the following method for
conducting that examination.

I made a little book, in which I allotted a page for each of the
virtues. I rul'd each page with red ink, so as to have seven columns,
one for each day of the week, marking each column with a letter for the
day. I cross'd these columns with thirteen red lines, marking the
beginning of each line with the first letter of one of the virtues, on
which line, and in its proper column, I might mark, by a little black
spot, every fault I found upon examination to have been committed
respecting that virtue upon that day.

Form of the pages.

TEMPERANCE.
eat not to dulness;
drink not to elevation.

        S.      M.      T.      W.      T.      F.      S.
T.
S.      •       •               •               •
O.      ••      •       •               •       •       •
R.                      •                       •
F.              •                       •
I.                      •
S.
J.
M.
C.
T.
C.
H.

I determined to give a week's strict attention to each of the virtues
successively. Thus, in the first week, my great guard was to avoid every
the least offence against Temperance, leaving the other virtues to their
ordinary chance, only marking every evening the faults of the day. Thus,
if in the first week I could keep my first line, marked T, clear of
spots, I suppos'd the habit of that virtue so much strengthen'd, and its
opposite weaken'd, that I might venture extending my attention to
include the next, and for the following week keep both lines clear of
spots. Proceeding thus to the last, I could go thro' a course compleat
in thirteen weeks, and four courses in a year. And like him who, having
a garden to weed, does not attempt to eradicate all the bad herbs at
once, which would exceed his reach and his strength, but works on one of
the beds at a time, and, having accomplish'd the first, proceeds to a
second, so I should have, I hoped, the encouraging pleasure of seeing on
my pages the progress I made in virtue, by clearing successively my
lines of their spots, till in the end, by a number of courses, I should
be happy in viewing a clean book, after a thirteen weeks' daily
examination.

This my little book had for its motto these lines from Addison's Cato:

   "Here will I hold. If there's a power above us
    (And that there is, all nature cries aloud
    Thro' all her works), He must delight in virtue;
    And that which he delights in must be happy."

Another from Cicero,

"O vitæ Philosophia dux! O virtutum indagatrix expultrixque vitiorum!
Unus dies, bene et ex præceptis tuis actus, peccanti immortalitati est
anteponendus."

Another from the Proverbs of Solomon, speaking of wisdom or virtue:

"Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honour. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace."
iii. 16, 17.

And conceiving God to be the fountain of wisdom, I thought it right and
necessary to solicit his assistance for obtaining it; to this end I
formed the following little prayer, which was prefix'd to my tables of
examination, for daily use.

"O powerful Goodness! bountiful Father! merciful Guide! Increase in me
that wisdom which discovers my truest interest. Strengthen my
resolutions to perform what that wisdom dictates. Accept my kind offices
to thy other children as the only return in my power for thy continual
favors to me."

I used also sometimes a little prayer which I took from Thomson's Poems,
viz.:

   "Father of light and life, thou Good Supreme!
    O teach me what is good; teach me Thyself!
    Save me from folly, vanity, and vice,
    From every low pursuit; and fill my soul
    With knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure;
    Sacred, substantial, never-fading bliss!"

The precept of Order requiring that every part of my business should
have its allotted time, one page in my little book contain'd the
following scheme of employment for the twenty-four hours of a natural
day:

  THE MORNING.         { 5}   Rise, wash, and address Powerful
  Question.            { 6}   Goodness! Contrive day's
  What good shall      {  }   business, and take the resolution
  I do this day?       { 7}   of the day; prosecute the present
                       {  }   study, and breakfast.
                         8}
                         9}
                        10}   Work.
                        11}
  NOON.                {12}   Read, or overlook my accounts,
                       { 1}   and dine.
                         2}
                         3}   Work.
                         4}
                         5}
  EVENING.             { 6}   Put things in their places.
  Question.            { 7}   Supper. Music or diversion, or
    What good have     { 8}   conversation. Examination of
    I done to-day?     { 9}   the day.
                       {10}
                       {11}
                       {12}
  NIGHT.               { 1}   Sleep.
                       { 2}
                       { 3}
                       { 4}

I enter'd upon the execution of this plan for self-examination, and
continu'd it with occasional intermissions for some time. I was
surpris'd to find myself so much fuller of faults than I had imagined;
but I had the satisfaction of seeing them diminish. To avoid the trouble
of renewing now and then my little book, which, by scraping out the
marks on the paper of old faults to make room for new ones in a new
course, became full of holes, I transferr'd my tables and precepts to
the ivory leaves of a memorandum book, on which the lines were drawn
with red ink, that made a durable stain, and on those lines I mark'd my
faults with a black-lead pencil, which marks I could easily wipe out
with a wet sponge. After a while I went thro' one course only in a year,
and afterward only one in several years, till at length I omitted them
entirely, being employ'd in voyages and business abroad, with a
multiplicity of affairs that interfered; but I always carried my little
book with me.

My scheme of Order gave me the most trouble; and I found that, tho' it
might be practicable where a man's business was such as to leave him the
disposition of his time, that of a journeyman printer, for instance, it
was not possible to be exactly observed by a master, who must mix with
the world, and often receive people of business at their own hours.
Order, too, with regard to places for things, papers, etc., I found
extreamly difficult to acquire. I had not been early accustomed to it,
and, having an exceeding good memory, I was not so sensible of the
inconvenience attending want of method. This article, therefore, cost me
so much painful attention, and my faults in it vexed me so much, and I
made so little progress in amendment, and had such frequent relapses,
that I was almost ready to give up the attempt, and content myself with
a faulty character in that respect, like the man who, in buying an ax of
a smith, my neighbour, desired to have the whole of its surface as
bright as the edge. The smith consented to grind it bright for him if he
would turn the wheel; he turn'd, while the smith press'd the broad face
of the ax hard and heavily on the stone, which made the turning of it
very fatiguing. The man came every now and then from the wheel to see
how the work went on, and at length would take his ax as it was, without
farther grinding. "No," said the smith, "turn on, turn on; we shall have
it bright by-and-by; as yet, it is only speckled." "Yes," said the man,
"but I think I like a speckled ax best." And I believe this may have
been the case with many, who, having, for want of some such means as I
employ'd, found the difficulty of obtaining good and breaking bad habits
in other points of vice and virtue, have given up the struggle, and
concluded that "a speckled ax was best"; for something, that pretended
to be reason, was every now and then suggesting to me that such extream
nicety as I exacted of myself might be a kind of foppery in morals,
which, if it were known, would make me ridiculous; that a perfect
character might be attended with the inconvenience of being envied and
hated; and that a benevolent man should allow a few faults in himself,
to keep his friends in countenance.

In truth, I found myself incorrigible with respect to Order; and now I
am grown old, and my memory bad, I feel very sensibly the want of it.
But, on the whole, tho' I never arrived at the perfection I had been so
ambitious of obtaining, but fell far short of it, yet I was, by the
endeavour, a better and a happier man than I otherwise should have been
if I had not attempted it; as those who aim at perfect writing by
imitating the engraved copies, tho' they never reach the wish'd-for
excellence of those copies, their hand is mended by the endeavor, and is
tolerable while it continues fair and legible.

It may be well my posterity should be informed that to this little
artifice, with the blessing of God, their ancestor ow'd the constant
felicity of his life, down to his 79th year, in which this is written.
What reverses may attend the remainder is in the hand of Providence;
but, if they arrive, the reflection on past happiness enjoy'd ought to
help his bearing them with more resignation. To Temperance he ascribes
his long-continued health, and what is still left to him of a good
constitution; to Industry and Frugality, the early easiness of his
circumstances and acquisition of his fortune, with all that knowledge
that enabled him to be a useful citizen, and obtained for him some
degree of reputation among the learned; to Sincerity and Justice, the
confidence of his country, and the honorable employs it conferred upon
him; and to the joint influence of the whole mass of the virtues, even
in the imperfect state he was able to acquire them, all that evenness of
temper, and that cheerfulness in conversation, which makes his company
still sought for, and agreeable even to his younger acquaintance. I
hope, therefore, that some of my descendants may follow the example and
reap the benefit.

It will be remark'd that, tho' my scheme was not wholly without
religion, there was in it no mark of any of the distinguishing tenets of
any particular sect. I had purposely avoided them; for, being fully
persuaded of the utility and excellency of my method, and that it might
be serviceable to people in all religions, and intending some time or
other to publish it, I would not have any thing in it that should
prejudice any one, of any sect, against it. I purposed writing a little
comment on each virtue, in which I would have shown the advantages of
possessing it, and the mischiefs attending its opposite vice; and I
should have called my book The Art of Virtue, [7] because it would have
shown the means and manner of obtaining virtue, which would have
distinguished it from the mere exhortation to be good, that does not
instruct and indicate the means, but is like the apostle's man of verbal
charity, who only without showing to the naked and hungry how or where
they might get clothes or victuals, exhorted them to be fed and
clothed.--James ii. 15, 16.

[7] Nothing so likely to make a man's fortune as virtue.--[Marg. note.]

But it so happened that my intention of writing and publishing this
comment was never fulfilled. I did, indeed, from time to time, put down
short hints of the sentiments, reasonings, etc., to be made use of in
it, some of which I have still by me; but the necessary close attention
to private business in the earlier part of my life, and public business
since, have occasioned my postponing it; for, it being connected in my
mind with a great and extensive project, that required the whole man to
execute, and which an unforeseen succession of employs prevented my
attending to, it has hitherto remain'd unfinish'd.

In this piece it was my design to explain and enforce this doctrine,
that vicious actions are not hurtful because they are forbidden, but
forbidden because they are hurtful, the nature of man alone considered;
that it was, therefore, every one's interest to be virtuous who wish'd
to be happy even in this world; and I should, from this circumstance
(there being always in the world a number of rich merchants, nobility,
states, and princes, who have need of honest instruments for the
management of their affairs, and such being so rare), have endeavored to
convince young persons that no qualities were so likely to make a poor
man's fortune as those of probity and integrity.

My list of virtues contain'd at first but twelve; but a Quaker friend
having kindly informed me that I was generally thought proud; that my
pride show'd itself frequently in conversation; that I was not content
with being in the right when discussing any point, but was overbearing,
and rather insolent, of which he convinc'd me by mentioning several
instances; I determined endeavouring to cure myself, if I could, of this
vice or folly among the rest, and I added Humility to my list, giving an
extensive meaning to the word.

I cannot boast of much success in acquiring the reality of this virtue,
but I had a good deal with regard to the appearance of it. I made it a
rule to forbear all direct contradiction to the sentiments of others,
and all positive assertion of my own. I even forbid myself, agreeably to
the old laws of our Junto, the use of every word or expression in the
language that imported a fix'd opinion, such as certainly, undoubtedly,
etc., and I adopted, instead of them, I conceive, I apprehend, or I
imagine a thing to be so or so; or it so appears to me at present. When
another asserted something that I thought an error, I deny'd myself the
pleasure of contradicting him abruptly, and of showing immediately some
absurdity in his proposition; and in answering I began by observing that
in certain cases or circumstances his opinion would be right, but in the
present case there appear'd or seem'd to me some difference, etc. I soon
found the advantage of this change in my manner; the conversations I
engag'd in went on more pleasantly. The modest way in which I propos'd
my opinions procur'd them a readier reception and less contradiction; I
had less mortification when I was found to be in the wrong, and I more
easily prevail'd with others to give up their mistakes and join with me
when I happened to be in the right.

And this mode, which I at first put on with some violence to natural
inclination, became at length so easy, and so habitual to me, that
perhaps for these fifty years past no one has ever heard a dogmatical
expression escape me. And to this habit (after my character of
integrity) I think it principally owing that I had early so much weight
with my fellow-citizens when I proposed new institutions, or alterations
in the old, and so much influence in public councils when I became a
member; for I was but a bad speaker, never eloquent, subject to much
hesitation in my choice of words, hardly correct in language, and yet I
generally carried my points.

In reality, there is, perhaps, no one of our natural passions so hard to
subdue as pride. Disguise it, struggle with it, beat it down, stifle it,
mortify it as much as one pleases, it is still alive, and will every now
and then peep out and show itself; you will see it, perhaps, often in
this history; for, even if I could conceive that I had compleatly
overcome it, I should probably be proud of my humility.

[Thus far written at Passy, 1784.]

["I am now about to write at home, August, 1788, but can not have the
help expected from my papers, many of them being lost in the war. I
have, however, found the following."] [8]

Having mentioned a great and extensive project which I had conceiv'd, it
seems proper that some account should be here given of that project and
its object. Its first rise in my mind appears in the following little
paper, accidentally preserv'd, viz.:

[8] This is a marginal memorandum.--B.

Observations on my reading history, in Library, May 19th, 1731.

"That the great affairs of the world, the wars, revolutions, etc., are
carried on and affected by parties.

"That the view of these parties is their present general interest, or
what they take to be such.

"That the different views of these different parties occasion all
confusion.

"That while a party is carrying on a general design, each man has his
particular private interest in view.

"That as soon as a party has gain'd its general point, each member
becomes intent upon his particular interest; which, thwarting others,
breaks that party into divisions, and occasions more confusion.

"That few in public affairs act from a meer view of the good of their
country, whatever they may pretend; and, tho' their actings bring real
good to their country, yet men primarily considered that their own and
their country's interest was united, and did not act from a principle of
benevolence.

"That fewer still, in public affairs, act with a view to the good of
mankind.

"There seems to me at present to be great occasion for raising a United
Party for Virtue, by forming the virtuous and good men of all nations
into a regular body, to be govern'd by suitable good and wise rules,
which good and wise men may probably be more unanimous in their
obedience to, than common people are to common laws.

"I at present think that whoever attempts this aright, and is well
qualified, can not fail of pleasing God, and of meeting with success.

B. F."

Revolving this project in my mind, as to be undertaken hereafter, when
my circumstances should afford me the necessary leisure, I put down from
time to time, on pieces of paper, such thoughts as occurr'd to me
respecting it. Most of these are lost; but I find one purporting to be
the substance of an intended creed, containing, as I thought, the
essentials of every known religion, and being free of every thing that
might shock the professors of any religion. It is express'd in these
words, viz.:

"That there is one God, who made all things.

"That he governs the world by his providence.

"That he ought to be worshiped by adoration, prayer, and thanksgiving.

"But that the most acceptable service of God is doing good to man.

"That the soul is immortal.

"And that God will certainly reward virtue and punish vice, either here
or hereafter." [9]

[9] In the Middle Ages, Franklin, if such a phenomenon as Franklin were
possible in the Middle Ages, would probably have been the founder of a
monastic order.--B.

My ideas at that time were, that the sect should be begun and spread at
first among young and single men only; that each person to be initiated
should not only declare his assent to such creed, but should have
exercised himself with the thirteen weeks' examination and practice of
the virtues, as in the before-mention'd model; that the existence of
such a society should be kept a secret, till it was become considerable,
to prevent solicitations for the admission of improper persons, but that
the members should each of them search among his acquaintance for
ingenuous, well-disposed youths, to whom, with prudent caution, the
scheme should be gradually communicated; that the members should engage
to afford their advice, assistance, and support to each other in
promoting one another's interests, business, and advancement in life;
that, for distinction, we should be call'd The Society of the Free and
Easy: free, as being, by the general practice and habit of the virtues,
free from the dominion of vice; and particularly by the practice of
industry and frugality, free from debt, which exposes a man to
confinement, and a species of slavery to his creditors.

This is as much as I can now recollect of the project, except that I
communicated it in part to two young men, who adopted it with some
enthusiasm; but my then narrow circumstances, and the necessity I was
under of sticking close to my business, occasion'd my postponing the
further prosecution of it at that time; and my multifarious occupations,
public and private, induc'd me to continue postponing, so that it has
been omitted till I have no longer strength or activity left sufficient
for such an enterprise; tho' I am still of opinion that it was a
practicable scheme, and might have been very useful, by forming a great
number of good citizens; and I was not discourag'd by the seeming
magnitude of the undertaking, as I have always thought that one man of
tolerable abilities may work great changes, and accomplish great affairs
among mankind, if he first forms a good plan, and, cutting off all
amusements or other employments that would divert his attention, makes
the execution of that same plan his sole study and business.

In 1732 I first publish'd my Almanack, under the name of Richard
Saunders; it was continu'd by me about twenty-five years, commonly
call'd Poor Richard's Almanac. I endeavor'd to make it both entertaining
and useful, and it accordingly came to be in such demand, that I reap'd
considerable profit from it, vending annually near ten thousand. And
observing that it was generally read, scarce any neighborhood in the
province being without it, I consider'd it as a proper vehicle for
conveying instruction among the common people, who bought scarcely any
other books; I therefore filled all the little spaces that occurr'd
between the remarkable days in the calendar with proverbial sentences,
chiefly such as inculcated industry and frugality, as the means of
procuring wealth, and thereby securing virtue; it being more difficult
for a man in want, to act always honestly, as, to use here one of those
proverbs, it is hard for an empty sack to stand upright.

These proverbs, which contained the wisdom of many ages and nations, I
assembled and form'd into a connected discourse prefix'd to the Almanack
of 1757, as the harangue of a wise old man to the people attending an
auction. The bringing all these scatter'd counsels thus into a focus
enabled them to make greater impression. The piece, being universally
approved, was copied in all the newspapers of the Continent; reprinted
in Britain on a broad side, to be stuck up in houses; two translations
were made of it in French, and great numbers bought by the clergy and
gentry, to distribute gratis among their poor parishioners and tenants.
In Pennsylvania, as it discouraged useless expense in foreign
superfluities, some thought it had its share of influence in producing
that growing plenty of money which was observable for several years
after its publication.

I considered my newspaper, also, as another means of communicating
instruction, and in that view frequently reprinted in it extracts from
the Spectator, and other moral writers; and sometimes publish'd little
pieces of my own, which had been first compos'd for reading in our
Junto. Of these are a Socratic dialogue, tending to prove that, whatever
might be his parts and abilities, a vicious man could not properly be
called a man of sense; and a discourse on self-denial, showing that
virtue was not secure till its practice became a habitude, and was free
from the opposition of contrary inclinations. These may be found in the
papers about the beginning of 1735.

In the conduct of my newspaper, I carefully excluded all libelling and
personal abuse, which is of late years become so disgraceful to our
country. Whenever I was solicited to insert anything of that kind, and
the writers pleaded, as they generally did, the liberty of the press,
and that a newspaper was like a stage-coach, in which any one who would
pay had a right to a place, my answer was, that I would print the piece
separately if desired, and the author might have as many copies as he
pleased to distribute himself, but that I would not take upon me to
spread his detraction; and that, having contracted with my subscribers
to furnish them with what might be either useful or entertaining, I
could not fill their papers with private altercation, in which they had
no concern, without doing them manifest injustice. Now, many of our
printers make no scruple of gratifying the malice of individuals by
false accusations of the fairest characters among ourselves, augmenting
animosity even to the producing of duels; and are, moreover, so
indiscreet as to print scurrilous reflections on the government of
neighboring states, and even on the conduct of our best national allies,
which may be attended with the most pernicious consequences. These
things I mention as a caution to young printers, and that they may be
encouraged not to pollute their presses and disgrace their profession by
such infamous practices, but refuse steadily, as they may see by my
example that such a course of conduct will not, on the whole, be
injurious to their interests.

In 1733 I sent one of my journeymen to Charleston, South Carolina, where
a printer was wanting. I furnish'd him with a press and letters, on an
agreement of partnership, by which I was to receive one-third of the
profits of the business, paying one-third of the expense. He was a man
of learning, and honest but ignorant in matters of account; and, tho' he
sometimes made me remittances, I could get no account from him, nor any
satisfactory state of our partnership while he lived. On his decease,
the business was continued by his widow, who, being born and bred in
Holland, where, as I have been inform'd, the knowledge of accounts makes
a part of female education, she not only sent me as clear a state as she
could find of the transactions past, but continued to account with the
greatest regularity and exactness every quarter afterwards, and managed
the business with such success, that she not only brought up reputably a
family of children, but, at the expiration of the term, was able to
purchase of me the printing-house, and establish her son in it.

I mention this affair chiefly for the sake of recommending that branch
of education for our young females, as likely to be of more use to them
and their children, in case of widowhood, than either music or dancing,
by preserving them from losses by imposition of crafty men, and enabling
them to continue, perhaps, a profitable mercantile house, with
establish'd correspondence, till a son is grown up fit to undertake and
go on with it, to the lasting advantage and enriching of the family.

About the year 1734 there arrived among us from Ireland a young
Presbyterian preacher, named Hemphill, who delivered with a good voice,
and apparently extempore, most excellent discourses, which drew together
considerable numbers of different persuasion, who join'd in admiring
them. Among the rest, I became one of his constant hearers, his sermons
pleasing me, as they had little of the dogmatical kind, but inculcated
strongly the practice of virtue, or what in the religious stile are
called good works. Those, however, of our congregation, who considered
themselves as orthodox Presbyterians, disapprov'd his doctrine, and were
join'd by most of the old clergy, who arraign'd him of heterodoxy before
the synod, in order to have him silenc'd. I became his zealous partisan,
and contributed all I could to raise a party in his favour, and we
combated for him a while with some hopes of success. There was much
scribbling pro and con upon the occasion; and finding that, tho' an
elegant preacher, he was but a poor writer, I lent him my pen and wrote
for him two or three pamphlets, and one piece in the Gazette of April,
1735. Those pamphlets, as is generally the case with controversial
writings, tho' eagerly read at the time, were soon out of vogue, and I
question whether a single copy of them now exists.

During the contest an unlucky occurrence hurt his cause exceedingly. One
of our adversaries having heard him preach a sermon that was much
admired, thought he had somewhere read the sermon before, or at least a
part of it. On search he found that part quoted at length, in one of the
British Reviews, from a discourse of Dr. Foster's. This detection gave
many of our party disgust, who accordingly abandoned his cause, and
occasion'd our more speedy discomfiture in the synod. I stuck by him,
however, as I rather approv'd his giving us good sermons compos'd by
others, than bad ones of his own manufacture, tho' the latter was the
practice of our common teachers. He afterward acknowledg'd to me that
none of those he preach'd were his own; adding, that his memory was such
as enabled him to retain and repeat any sermon after one reading only.
On our defeat, he left us in search elsewhere of better fortune, and I
quitted the congregation, never joining it after, tho' I continu'd many
years my subscription for the support of its ministers.

I had begun in 1733 to study languages; I soon made myself so much a
master of the French as to be able to read the books with ease. I then
undertook the Italian. An acquaintance, who was also learning it, us'd
often to tempt me to play chess with him. Finding this took up too much
of the time I had to spare for study, I at length refus'd to play any
more, unless on this condition, that the victor in every game should
have a right to impose a task, either in parts of the grammar to be got
by heart, or in translations, etc., which tasks the vanquish'd was to
perform upon honour, before our next meeting. As we play'd pretty
equally, we thus beat one another into that language. I afterwards with
a little painstaking, acquir'd as much of the Spanish as to read their
books also.

I have already mention'd that I had only one year's instruction in a
Latin school, and that when very young, after which I neglected that
language entirely. But, when I had attained an acquaintance with the
French, Italian, and Spanish, I was surpriz'd to find, on looking over a
Latin Testament, that I understood so much more of that language than I
had imagined, which encouraged me to apply myself again to the study of
it, and I met with more success, as those preceding languages had
greatly smooth'd my way.

From these circumstances, I have thought that there is some
inconsistency in our common mode of teaching languages. We are told that
it is proper to begin first with the Latin, and, having acquir'd that,
it will be more easy to attain those modern languages which are deriv'd
from it; and yet we do not begin with the Greek, in order more easily to
acquire the Latin. It is true that, if you can clamber and get to the
top of a staircase without using the steps, you will more easily gain
them in descending; but certainly, if you begin with the lowest you will
with more ease ascend to the top; and I would therefore offer it to the
consideration of those who superintend the education of our youth,
whether, since many of those who begin with the Latin quit the same
after spending some years without having made any great proficiency, and
what they have learnt becomes almost useless, so that their time has
been lost, it would not have been better to have begun with the French,
proceeding to the Italian, etc.; for, tho', after spending the same
time, they should quit the study of languages and never arrive at the
Latin, they would, however, have acquired another tongue or two, that,
being in modern use, might be serviceable to them in common life.

After ten years' absence from Boston, and having become easy in my
circumstances, I made a journey thither to visit my relations, which I
could not sooner well afford. In returning, I call'd at Newport to see
my brother, then settled there with his printing-house. Our former
differences were forgotten, and our meeting was very cordial and
affectionate. He was fast declining in his health, and requested of me
that, in case of his death, which he apprehended not far distant, I
would take home his son, then but ten years of age, and bring him up to
the printing business. This I accordingly perform'd, sending him a few
years to school before I took him into the office. His mother carried on
the business till he was grown up, when I assisted him with an
assortment of new types, those of his father being in a manner worn out.
Thus it was that I made my brother ample amends for the service I had
depriv'd him of by leaving him so early.

In 1736 I lost one of my sons, a fine boy of four years old, by the
small-pox, taken in the common way. I long regretted bitterly, and still
regret that I had not given it to him by inoculation. This I mention for
the sake of parents who omit that operation, on the supposition that
they should never forgive themselves if a child died under it; my
example showing that the regret may be the same either way, and that,
therefore, the safer should be chosen.

Our club, the Junto, was found so useful, and afforded such satisfaction
to the members, that several were desirous of introducing their friends,
which could not well be done without exceeding what we had settled as a
convenient number, viz., twelve. We had from the beginning made it a
rule to keep our institution a secret, which was pretty well observ'd;
the intention was to avoid applications of improper persons for
admittance, some of whom, perhaps, we might find it difficult to refuse.
I was one of those who were against any addition to our number, but,
instead of it, made in writing a proposal, that every member separately
should endeavor to form a subordinate club, with the same rules
respecting queries, etc., and without informing them of the connection
with the Junto. The advantages proposed were, the improvement of so many
more young citizens by the use of our institutions; our better
acquaintance with the general sentiments of the inhabitants on any
occasion, as the Junto member might propose what queries we should
desire, and was to report to the Junto what pass'd in his separate club;
the promotion of our particular interests in business by more extensive
recommendation, and the increase of our influence in public affairs, and
our power of doing good by spreading thro' the several clubs the
sentiments of the Junto.

The project was approv'd, and every member undertook to form his club,
but they did not all succeed. Five or six only were compleated, which
were called by different names, as the Vine, the Union, the Band, etc.
They were useful to themselves, and afforded us a good deal of
amusement, information, and instruction, besides answering, in some
considerable degree, our views of influencing the public opinion on
particular occasions, of which I shall give some instances in course of
time as they happened.

My first promotion was my being chosen, in 1736, clerk of the General
Assembly. The choice was made that year without opposition; but the year
following, when I was again propos'd (the choice, like that of the
members, being annual), a new member made a long speech against me, in
order to favour some other candidate. I was, however, chosen, which was
the more agreeable to me, as, besides the pay for the immediate service
as clerk, the place gave me a better opportunity of keeping up an
interest among the members, which secur'd to me the business of printing
the votes, laws, paper money, and other occasional jobbs for the public,
that, on the whole, were very profitable.

I therefore did not like the opposition of this new member, who was a
gentleman of fortune and education, with talents that were likely to
give him, in time, great influence in the House, which, indeed,
afterwards happened. I did not, however, aim at gaining his favour by
paying any servile respect to him, but, after some time, took this other
method. Having heard that he had in his library a certain very scarce
and curious book, I wrote a note to him, expressing my desire of
perusing that book, and requesting he would do me the favour of lending
it to me for a few days. He sent it immediately, and I return'd it in
about a week with another note, expressing strongly my sense of the
favour. When we next met in the House, he spoke to me (which he had
never done before), and with great civility; and he ever after
manifested a readiness to serve me on all occasions, so that we became
great friends, and our friendship continued to his death. This is
another instance of the truth of an old maxim I had learned, which says,
"He that has once done you a kindness will be more ready to do you
another, than he whom you yourself have obliged." And it shows how much
more profitable it is prudently to remove, than to resent, return, and
continue inimical proceedings.

In 1737, Colonel Spotswood, late governor of Virginia, and then
postmaster-general, being dissatisfied with the conduct of his deputy at
Philadelphia, respecting some negligence in rendering, and inexactitude
of his accounts, took from him the commission and offered it to me. I
accepted it readily, and found it of great advantage; for, tho' the
salary was small, it facilitated the correspondence that improv'd my
newspaper, increas'd the number demanded, as well as the advertisements
to be inserted, so that it came to afford me a considerable income. My
old competitor's newspaper declin'd proportionably, and I was satisfy'd
without retaliating his refusal, while postmaster, to permit my papers
being carried by the riders. Thus he suffer'd greatly from his neglect
in due accounting; and I mention it as a lesson to those young men who
may be employ'd in managing affairs for others, that they should always
render accounts, and make remittances, with great clearness and
punctuality. The character of observing such a conduct is the most
powerful of all recommendations to new employments and increase of
business.

I began now to turn my thoughts a little to public affairs, beginning,
however, with small matters. The city watch was one of the first things
that I conceiv'd to want regulation. It was managed by the constables of
the respective wards in turn; the constable warned a number of
housekeepers to attend him for the night. Those who chose never to
attend paid him six shillings a year to be excus'd, which was suppos'd
to be for hiring substitutes, but was, in reality, much more than was
necessary for that purpose, and made the constableship a place of
profit; and the constable, for a little drink, often got such
ragamuffins about him as a watch, that respectable housekeepers did not
choose to mix with. Walking the rounds, too, was often neglected, and
most of the nights spent in tippling. I thereupon wrote a paper to be
read in Junto, representing these irregularities, but insisting more
particularly on the inequality of this six-shilling tax of the
constables, respecting the circumstances of those who paid it, since a
poor widow housekeeper, all whose property to be guarded by the watch
did not perhaps exceed the value of fifty pounds, paid as much as the
wealthiest merchant, who had thousands of pounds' worth of goods in his
stores.

On the whole, I proposed as a more effectual watch, the hiring of proper
men to serve constantly in that business; and as a more equitable way of
supporting the charge the levying a tax that should be proportion'd to
the property. This idea, being approv'd by the Junto, was communicated
to the other clubs, but as arising in each of them; and though the plan
was not immediately carried into execution, yet, by preparing the minds
of people for the change, it paved the way for the law obtained a few
years after, when the members of our clubs were grown into more
influence.

About this time I wrote a paper (first to be read in Junto, but it was
afterward publish'd) on the different accidents and carelessnesses by
which houses were set on fire, with cautions against them, and means
proposed of avoiding them. This was much spoken of as a useful piece,
and gave rise to a project, which soon followed it, of forming a company
for the more ready extinguishing of fires, and mutual assistance in
removing and securing the goods when in danger. Associates in this
scheme were presently found, amounting to thirty. Our articles of
agreement oblig'd every member to keep always in good order, and fit for
use, a certain number of leather buckets, with strong bags and baskets
(for packing and transporting of goods), which were to be brought to
every fire; and we agreed to meet once a month and spend a social
evening together, in discoursing and communicating such ideas as
occurred to us upon the subject of fires, as might be useful in our
conduct on such occasions.

The utility of this institution soon appeared, and many more desiring to
be admitted than we thought convenient for one company, they were
advised to form another, which was accordingly done; and this went on,
one new company being formed after another, till they became so numerous
as to include most of the inhabitants who were men of property; and now,
at the time of my writing this, tho' upward of fifty years since its
establishment, that which I first formed, called the Union Fire Company,
still subsists and flourishes, tho' the first members are all deceas'd
but myself and one, who is older by a year than I am. The small fines
that have been paid by members for absence at the monthly meetings have
been apply'd to the purchase of fire-engines, ladders, fire-hooks, and
other useful implements for each company, so that I question whether
there is a city in the world better provided with the means of putting a
stop to beginning conflagrations; and, in fact, since these
institutions, the city has never lost by fire more than one or two
houses at a time, and the flames have often been extinguished before the
house in which they began has been half consumed.

In 1739 arrived among us from Ireland the Reverend Mr. Whitefield, who
had made himself remarkable there as an itinerant preacher. He was at
first permitted to preach in some of our churches; but the clergy,
taking a dislike to him, soon refus'd him their pulpits, and he was
oblig'd to preach in the fields. The multitudes of all sects and
denominations that attended his sermons were enormous, and it was matter
of speculation to me, who was one of the number, to observe the
extraordinary influence of his oratory on his hearers, and how much they
admir'd and respected him, notwithstanding his common abuse of them, by
assuring them that they were naturally half beasts and half devils. It
was wonderful to see the change soon made in the manners of our
inhabitants. From being thoughtless or indifferent about religion, it
seem'd as if all the world were growing religious, so that one could not
walk thro' the town in an evening without hearing psalms sung in
different families of every street.

And it being found inconvenient to assemble in the open air, subject to
its inclemencies, the building of a house to meet in was no sooner
propos'd, and persons appointed to receive contributions, but sufficient
sums were soon receiv'd to procure the ground and erect the building,
which was one hundred feet long and seventy broad, about the size of
Westminster Hall; and the work was carried on with such spirit as to be
finished in a much shorter time than could have been expected. Both
house and ground were vested in trustees, expressly for the use of any
preacher of any religious persuasion who might desire to say something
to the people at Philadelphia; the design in building not being to
accommodate any particular sect, but the inhabitants in general; so that
even if the Mufti of Constantinople were to send a missionary to preach
Mohammedanism to us, he would find a pulpit at his service.

Mr. Whitefield, in leaving us, went preaching all the way thro' the
colonies to Georgia. The settlement of that province had lately been
begun, but, instead of being made with hardy, industrious husbandmen,
accustomed to labor, the only people fit for such an enterprise, it was
with families of broken shop-keepers and other insolvent debtors, many
of indolent and idle habits, taken out of the jails, who, being set down
in the woods, unqualified for clearing land, and unable to endure the
hardships of a new settlement, perished in numbers, leaving many
helpless children unprovided for. The sight of their miserable situation
inspir'd the benevolent heart of Mr. Whitefield with the idea of
building an Orphan House there, in which they might be supported and
educated. Returning northward, he preach'd up this charity, and made
large collections, for his eloquence had a wonderful power over the
hearts and purses of his hearers, of which I myself was an instance.

I did not disapprove of the design, but, as Georgia was then destitute
of materials and workmen, and it was proposed to send them from
Philadelphia at a great expense, I thought it would have been better to
have built the house here, and brought the children to it. This I
advis'd; but he was resolute in his first project, rejected my counsel,
and I therefore refus'd to contribute. I happened soon after to attend
one of his sermons, in the course of which I perceived he intended to
finish with a collection, and I silently resolved he should get nothing
from me. I had in my pocket a handful of copper money, three or four
silver dollars, and five pistoles in gold. As he proceeded I began to
soften, and concluded to give the coppers. Another stroke of his oratory
made me asham'd of that, and determin'd me to give the silver; and he
finish'd so admirably, that I empty'd my pocket wholly into the
collector's dish, gold and all. At this sermon there was also one of our
club, who, being of my sentiments respecting the building in Georgia,
and suspecting a collection might be intended, had, by precaution,
emptied his pockets before he came from home. Towards the conclusion of
the discourse, however, he felt a strong desire to give, and apply'd to
a neighbour, who stood near him, to borrow some money for the purpose.
The application was unfortunately [made] to perhaps the only man in the
company who had the firmness not to be affected by the preacher. His
answer was, "At any other time, Friend Hopkinson, I would lend to thee
freely; but not now, for thee seems to be out of thy right senses."

Some of Mr. Whitefield's enemies affected to suppose that he would apply
these collections to his own private emolument; but I who was intimately
acquainted with him (being employed in printing his Sermons and
Journals, etc.), never had the least suspicion of his integrity, but am
to this day decidedly of opinion that he was in all his conduct a
perfectly honest man, and methinks my testimony in his favour ought to
have the more weight, as we had no religious connection. He us'd,
indeed, sometimes to pray for my conversion, but never had the
satisfaction of believing that his prayers were heard. Ours was a mere
civil friendship, sincere on both sides, and lasted to his death.

The following instance will show something of the terms on which we
stood. Upon one of his arrivals from England at Boston, he wrote to me
that he should come soon to Philadelphia, but knew not where he could
lodge when there, as he understood his old friend and host, Mr. Benezet,
was removed to Germantown. My answer was, "You know my house; if you can
make shift with its scanty accommodations, you will be most heartily
welcome." He reply'd, that if I made that kind offer for Christ's sake,
I should not miss of a reward. And I returned, "Don't let me be
mistaken; it was not for Christ's sake, but for your sake." One of our
common acquaintance jocosely remark'd, that, knowing it to be the custom
of the saints, when they received any favour, to shift the burden of the
obligation from off their own shoulders, and place it in heaven, I had
contriv'd to fix it on earth.

The last time I saw Mr. Whitefield was in London, when he consulted me
about his Orphan House concern, and his purpose of appropriating it to
the establishment of a college.

He had a loud and clear voice, and articulated his words and sentences
so perfectly, that he might be heard and understood at a great distance,
especially as his auditories, however numerous, observ'd the most exact
silence. He preach'd one evening from the top of the Court-house steps,
which are in the middle of Market-street, and on the west side of
Second-street, which crosses it at right angles. Both streets were
fill'd with his hearers to a considerable distance. Being among the
hindmost in Market-street, I had the curiosity to learn how far he could
be heard, by retiring backwards down the street towards the river; and I
found his voice distinct till I came near Front-street, when some noise
in that street obscur'd it. Imagining then a semi-circle, of which my
distance should be the radius, and that it were fill'd with auditors, to
each of whom I allow'd two square feet, I computed that he might well be
heard by more than thirty thousand. This reconcil'd me to the newspaper
accounts of his having preach'd to twenty-five thousand people in the
fields, and to the ancient histories of generals haranguing whole
armies, of which I had sometimes doubted.

By hearing him often, I came to distinguish easily between sermons newly
compos'd, and those which he had often preach'd in the course of his
travels. His delivery of the latter was so improv'd by frequent
repetitions that every accent, every emphasis, every modulation of
voice, was so perfectly well turn'd and well plac'd, that, without being
interested in the subject, one could not help being pleas'd with the
discourse; a pleasure of much the same kind with that receiv'd from an
excellent piece of musick. This is an advantage itinerant preachers have
over those who are stationary, as the latter can not well improve their
delivery of a sermon by so many rehearsals.

His writing and printing from time to time gave great advantage to his
enemies; unguarded expressions, and even erroneous opinions, delivered
in preaching, might have been afterwards explain'd or qualifi'd by
supposing others that might have accompani'd them, or they might have
been deny'd; but litera scripta manet. Critics attack'd his writings
violently, and with so much appearance of reason as to diminish the
number of his votaries and prevent their encrease; so that I am of
opinion if he had never written any thing, he would have left behind him
a much more numerous and important sect, and his reputation might in
that case have been still growing, even after his death, as there being
nothing of his writing on which to found a censure and give him a lower
character, his proselytes would be left at liberty to feign for him as
great a variety of excellence as their enthusiastic admiration might
wish him to have possessed.

My business was now continually augmenting, and my circumstances growing
daily easier, my newspaper having become very profitable, as being for a
time almost the only one in this and the neighbouring provinces. I
experienced, too, the truth of the observation, "that after getting the
first hundred pound, it is more easy to get the second," money itself
being of a prolific nature.

The partnership at Carolina having succeeded, I was encourag'd to engage
in others, and to promote several of my workmen, who had behaved well,
by establishing them with printing-houses in different colonies, on the
same terms with that in Carolina. Most of them did well, being enabled
at the end of our term, six years, to purchase the types of me and go on
working for themselves, by which means several families were raised.
Partnerships often finish in quarrels; but I was happy in this, that
mine were all carried on and ended amicably, owing, I think, a good deal
to the precaution of having very explicitly settled, in our articles,
every thing to be done by or expected from each partner, so that there
was nothing to dispute, which precaution I would therefore recommend to
all who enter into partnerships; for, whatever esteem partners may have
for, and confidence in each other at the time of the contract, little
jealousies and disgusts may arise, with ideas of inequality in the care
and burden of the business, etc., which are attended often with breach
of friendship and of the connection, perhaps with lawsuits and other
disagreeable consequences.

I had, on the whole, abundant reason to be satisfied with my being
established in Pennsylvania. There were, however, two things that I
regretted, there being no provision for defense, nor for a compleat
education of youth; no militia, nor any college. I therefore, in 1743,
drew up a proposal for establishing an academy; and at that time,
thinking the Reverend Mr. Peters, who was out of employ, a fit person to
superintend such an institution, I communicated the project to him; but
he, having more profitable views in the service of the proprietaries,
which succeeded, declin'd the undertaking; and, not knowing another at
that time suitable for such a trust, I let the scheme lie a while
dormant. I succeeded better the next year, 1744, in proposing and
establishing a Philosophical Society. The paper I wrote for that purpose
will be found among my writings, when collected.

With respect to defense, Spain having been several years at war against
Great Britain, and being at length join'd by France, which brought us
into great danger; and the laboured and long-continued endeavour of our
governor, Thomas, to prevail with our Quaker Assembly to pass a militia
law, and make other provisions for the security of the province, having
proved abortive, I determined to try what might be done by a voluntary
association of the people. To promote this, I first wrote and published
a pamphlet, entitled Plain Truth, in which I stated our defenceless
situation in strong lights, with the necessity of union and discipline
for our defense, and promis'd to propose in a few days an association,
to be generally signed for that purpose. The pamphlet had a sudden and
surprising effect. I was call'd upon for the instrument of association,
and having settled the draft of it with a few friends, I appointed a
meeting of the citizens in the large building before mentioned. The
house was pretty full; I had prepared a number of printed copies, and
provided pens and ink dispers'd all over the room. I harangued them a
little on the subject, read the paper, and explained it, and then
distributed the copies, which were eagerly signed, not the least
objection being made.

When the company separated, and the papers were collected, we found
above twelve hundred hands; and, other copies being dispersed in the
country, the subscribers amounted at length to upward of ten thousand.
These all furnished themselves as soon as they could with arms, formed
themselves into companies and regiments, chose their own officers, and
met every week to be instructed in the manual exercise, and other parts
of military discipline. The women, by subscriptions among themselves,
provided silk colors, which they presented to the companies, painted
with different devices and mottos, which I supplied.

The officers of the companies composing the Philadelphia regiment, being
met, chose me for their colonel; but, conceiving myself unfit, I
declin'd that station, and recommended Mr. Lawrence, a fine person, and
man of influence, who was accordingly appointed. I then propos'd a
lottery to defray the expense of building a battery below the town, and
furnishing it with cannon. It filled expeditiously, and the battery was
soon erected, the merlons being fram'd of logs and fill'd with earth. We
bought some old cannon from Boston, but, these not being sufficient, we
wrote to England for more, soliciting, at the same time, our
proprietaries for some assistance, tho' without much expectation of
obtaining it.

Meanwhile, Colonel Lawrence, William Allen, Abram Taylor, Esqr., and
myself were sent to New York by the associators, commission'd to borrow
some cannon of Governor Clinton. He at first refus'd us peremptorily;
but at dinner with his council, where there was great drinking of
Madeira wine, as the custom of that place then was, he softened by
degrees, and said he would lend us six. After a few more bumpers he
advanc'd to ten; and at length he very good-naturedly conceded eighteen.
They were fine cannon, eighteen-pounders, with their carriages, which we
soon transported and mounted on our battery, where the associators kept
a nightly guard while the war lasted, and among the rest I regularly
took my turn of duty there as a common soldier.

My activity in these operations was agreeable to the governor and
council; they took me into confidence, and I was consulted by them in
every measure wherein their concurrence was thought useful to the
association. Calling in the aid of religion, I propos'd to them the
proclaiming a fast, to promote reformation, and implore the blessing of
Heaven on our undertaking. They embrac'd the motion; but, as it was the
first fast ever thought of in the province, the secretary had no
precedent from which to draw the proclamation. My education in New
England, where a fast is proclaimed every year, was here of some
advantage: I drew it in the accustomed stile, it was translated into
German, printed in both languages, and divulg'd thro' the province. This
gave the clergy of the different sects an opportunity of influencing
their congregations to join in the association, and it would probably
have been general among all but Quakers if the peace had not soon
interven'd.

It was thought by some of my friends that, by my activity in these
affairs, I should offend that sect, and thereby lose my interest in the
Assembly of the province, where they formed a great majority. A young
gentleman who had likewise some friends in the House, and wished to
succeed me as their clerk, acquainted me that it was decided to displace
me at the next election; and he, therefore, in good will, advis'd me to
resign, as more consistent with my honour than being turn'd out. My
answer to him was, that I had read or heard of some public man who made
it a rule never to ask for an office, and never to refuse one when
offer'd to him. "I approve," says I, "of his rule, and will practice it
with a small addition; I shall never ask, never refuse, nor ever resign
an office. If they will have my office of clerk to dispose of to
another, they shall take it from me. I will not, by giving it up, lose
my right of some time or other making reprisals on my adversaries." I
heard, however, no more of this; I was chosen again unanimously as usual
at the next election. Possibly, as they dislik'd my late intimacy with
the members of council, who had join'd the governors in all the disputes
about military preparations, with which the House had long been
harass'd, they might have been pleas'd if I would voluntarily have left
them; but they did not care to displace me on account merely of my zeal
for the association, and they could not well give another reason.

Indeed I had some cause to believe that the defense of the country was
not disagreeable to any of them, provided they were not requir'd to
assist in it. And I found that a much greater number of them than I
could have imagined, tho' against offensive war, were clearly for the
defensive. Many pamphlets pro and con were publish'd on the subject, and
some by good Quakers, in favour of defense, which I believe convinc'd
most of their younger people.

A transaction in our fire company gave me some insight into their
prevailing sentiments. It had been propos'd that we should encourage the
scheme for building a battery by laying out the present stock, then
about sixty pounds, in tickets of the lottery. By our rules, no money
could be dispos'd of till the next meeting after the proposal. The
company consisted of thirty members, of which twenty-two were Quakers,
and eight only of other persuasions. We eight punctually attended the
meeting; but, tho' we thought that some of the Quakers would join us, we
were by no means sure of a majority. Only one Quaker, Mr. James Morris,
appear'd to oppose the measure. He expressed much sorrow that it had
ever been propos'd, as he said Friends were all against it, and it would
create such discord as might break up the company. We told him that we
saw no reason for that; we were the minority, and if Friends were
against the measure, and outvoted us, we must and should, agreeably to
the usage of all societies, submit. When the hour for business arriv'd
it was mov'd to put the vote; he allow'd we might then do it by the
rules, but, as he could assure us that a number of members intended to
be present for the purpose of opposing it, it would be but candid to
allow a little time for their appearing.

While we were disputing this, a waiter came to tell me two gentlemen
below desir'd to speak with me. I went down, and found they were two of
our Quaker members. They told me there were eight of them assembled at a
tavern just by; that they were determin'd to come and vote with us if
there should be occasion, which they hop'd would not be the case, and
desir'd we would not call for their assistance if we could do without
it, as their voting for such a measure might embroil them with their
elders and friends. Being thus secure of a majority, I went up, and
after a little seeming hesitation, agreed to a delay of another hour.
This Mr. Morris allow'd to be extreamly fair. Not one of his opposing
friends appear'd, at which he express'd great surprize; and, at the
expiration of the hour, we carry'd the resolution eight to one; and as,
of the twenty-two Quakers, eight were ready to vote with us, and
thirteen, by their absence, manifested that they were not inclin'd to
oppose the measure, I afterward estimated the proportion of Quakers
sincerely against defense as one to twenty-one only; for these were all
regular members of that society, and in good reputation among them, and
had due notice of what was propos'd at that meeting.

The honorable and learned Mr. Logan, who had always been of that sect,
was one who wrote an address to them, declaring his approbation of
defensive war, and supporting his opinion by many strong arguments. He
put into my hands sixty pounds to be laid out in lottery tickets for the
battery, with directions to apply what prizes might be drawn wholly to
that service. He told me the following anecdote of his old master,
William Penn, respecting defense. He came over from England, when a
young man, with that proprietary, and as his secretary. It was war-time,
and their ship was chas'd by an armed vessel, suppos'd to be an enemy.
Their captain prepar'd for defense; but told William Penn, and his
company of Quakers, that he did not expect their assistance, and they
might retire into the cabin, which they did, except James Logan, who
chose to stay upon deck, and was quarter'd to a gun. The suppos'd enemy
prov'd a friend, so there was no fighting; but when the secretary went
down to communicate the intelligence, William Penn rebuk'd him severely
for staying upon deck, and undertaking to assist in defending the
vessel, contrary to the principles of Friends, especially as it had not
been required by the captain. This reproof, being before all the
company, piqu'd the secretary, who answer'd, "I being thy servant, why
did thee not order me to come down? But thee was willing enough that I
should stay and help to fight the ship when thee thought there was
danger."

My being many years in the Assembly, the majority of which were
constantly Quakers, gave me frequent opportunities of seeing the
embarrassment given them by their principle against war, whenever
application was made to them, by order of the crown, to grant aids for
military purposes. They were unwilling to offend government, on the one
hand, by a direct refusal; and their friends, the body of the Quakers,
on the other, by a compliance contrary to their principles; hence a
variety of evasions to avoid complying, and modes of disguising the
compliance when it became unavoidable. The common mode at last was, to
grant money under the phrase of its being "for the king's use," and
never to inquire how it was applied.

But, if the demand was not directly from the crown, that phrase was
found not so proper, and some other was to be invented. As, when powder
was wanting (I think it was for the garrison at Louisburg), and the
government of New England solicited a grant of some from Pennsilvania,
which was much urg'd on the House by Governor Thomas, they could not
grant money to buy powder, because that was an ingredient of war; but
they voted an aid to New England of three thousand pounds, to be put
into the hands of the governor, and appropriated it for the purchasing
of bread, flour, wheat, or other grain. Some of the council, desirous of
giving the House still further embarrassment, advis'd the governor not
to accept provision, as not being the thing he had demanded; but be
reply'd, "I shall take the money, for I understand very well their
meaning; other grain is gunpowder," which he accordingly bought, and
they never objected to it. [10]

[10] See the votes.--[Marg. note.]

It was in allusion to this fact that, when in our fire company we feared
the success of our proposal in favour of the lottery, and I had said to
my friend Mr. Syng, one of our members, "If we fail, let us move the
purchase of a fire-engine with the money; the Quakers can have no
objection to that; and then, if you nominate me and I you as a committee
for that purpose, we will buy a great gun, which is certainly a
fire-engine." "I see," says he, "you have improv'd by being so long in
the Assembly; your equivocal project would be just a match for their
wheat or other grain."

These embarrassments that the Quakers suffer'd from having establish'd
and published it as one of their principles that no kind of war was
lawful, and which, being once published, they could not afterwards,
however they might change their minds, easily get rid of, reminds me of
what I think a more prudent conduct in another sect among us, that of
the Dunkers. I was acquainted with one of its founders, Michael Welfare,
soon after it appear'd. He complain'd to me that they were grievously
calumniated by the zealots of other persuasions, and charg'd with
abominable principles and practices, to which they were utter strangers.
I told him this had always been the case with new sects, and that, to
put a stop to such abuse, I imagin'd it might be well to publish the
articles of their belief, and the rules of their discipline. He said
that it had been propos'd among them, but not agreed to, for this
reason: "When we were first drawn together as a society," says he, "it
had pleased God to enlighten our minds so far as to see that some
doctrines, which we once esteemed truths, were errors; and that others,
which we had esteemed errors, were real truths. From time to time He has
been pleased to afford us farther light, and our principles have been
improving, and our errors diminishing. Now we are not sure that we are
arrived at the end of this progression, and at the perfection of
spiritual or theological knowledge; and we fear that, if we should once
print our confession of faith, we should feel ourselves as if bound and
confin'd by it, and perhaps be unwilling to receive farther improvement,
and our successors still more so, as conceiving what we their elders and
founders had done, to be something sacred, never to be departed from."

This modesty in a sect is perhaps a singular instance in the history of
mankind, every other sect supposing itself in possession of all truth,
and that those who differ are so far in the wrong; like a man traveling
in foggy weather, those at some distance before him on the road he sees
wrapped up in the fog, as well as those behind him, and also the people
in the fields on each side, but near him all appears clear, tho' in
truth he is as much in the fog as any of them. To avoid this kind of
embarrassment, the Quakers have of late years been gradually declining
the public service in the Assembly and in the magistracy, choosing
rather to quit their power than their principle.

In order of time, I should have mentioned before, that having, in 1742,
invented an open stove for the better warming of rooms, and at the same
time saving fuel, as the fresh air admitted was warmed in entering, I
made a present of the model to Mr. Robert Grace, one of my early
friends, who, having an iron-furnace, found the casting of the plates
for these stoves a profitable thing, as they were growing in demand. To
promote that demand, I wrote and published a pamphlet, entitled "An
Account of the new-invented Pennsylvania Fireplaces; wherein their
Construction and Manner of Operation is particularly explained; their
Advantages above every other Method of warming Rooms demonstrated; and
all Objections that have been raised against the Use of them answered
and obviated," etc. This pamphlet had a good effect. Gov'r. Thomas was
so pleas'd with the construction of this stove, as described in it, that
he offered to give me a patent for the sole vending of them for a term
of years; but I declin'd it from a principle which has ever weighed with
me on such occasions, viz., That, as we enjoy great advantages from the
inventions of others, we should be glad of an opportunity to serve
others by any invention of ours; and this we should do freely and
generously.

An ironmonger in London however, assuming a good deal of my pamphlet,
and working it up into his own, and making some small changes in the
machine, which rather hurt its operation, got a patent for it there, and
made, as I was told, a little fortune by it. And this is not the only
instance of patents taken out for my inventions by others, tho' not
always with the same success, which I never contested, as having no
desire of profiting by patents myself, and hating disputes. The use of
these fireplaces in very many houses, both of this and the neighbouring
colonies, has been, and is, a great saving of wood to the inhabitants.

Peace being concluded, and the association business therefore at an end,
I turn'd my thoughts again to the affair of establishing an academy. The
first step I took was to associate in the design a number of active
friends, of whom the Junto furnished a good part; the next was to write
and publish a pamphlet, entitled Proposals Relating to the Education of
Youth in Pennsylvania. This I distributed among the principal
inhabitants gratis; and as soon as I could suppose their minds a little
prepared by the perusal of it, I set on foot a subscription for opening
and supporting an academy; it was to be paid in quotas yearly for five
years; by so dividing it, I judg'd the subscription might be larger, and
I believe it was so, amounting to no less, if I remember right, than
five thousand pounds.

In the introduction to these proposals, I stated their publication, not
as an act of mine, but of some publick-spirited gentlemen, avoiding as
much as I could, according to my usual rule, the presenting myself to
the publick as the author of any scheme for their benefit.

The subscribers, to carry the project into immediate execution, chose
out of their number twenty-four trustees, and appointed Mr. Francis,
then attorney-general, and myself to draw up constitutions for the
government of the academy; which being done and signed, a house was
hired, masters engag'd, and the schools opened, I think, in the same
year, 1749.

The scholars increasing fast, the house was soon found too small, and we
were looking out for a piece of ground, properly situated, with
intention to build, when Providence threw into our way a large house
ready built, which, with a few alterations, might well serve our
purpose. This was the building before mentioned, erected by the hearers
of Mr. Whitefield, and was obtained for us in the following manner.

It is to be noted that the contributions to this building being made by
people of different sects, care was taken in the nomination of trustees,
in whom the building and ground was to be vested, that a predominancy
should not be given to any sect, lest in time that predominancy might be
a means of appropriating the whole to the use of such sect, contrary to
the original intention. It was therefore that one of each sect was
appointed, viz., one Church-of-England man, one Presbyterian, one
Baptist, one Moravian, etc., those, in case of vacancy by death, were to
fill it by election from among the contributors. The Moravian happen'd
not to please his colleagues, and on his death they resolved to have no
other of that sect. The difficulty then was, how to avoid having two of
some other sect, by means of the new choice.

Several persons were named, and for that reason not agreed to. At length
one mention'd me, with the observation that I was merely an honest man,
and of no sect at all, which prevail'd with them to chuse me. The
enthusiasm which existed when the house was built had long since abated,
and its trustees had not been able to procure fresh contributions for
paying the ground-rent, and discharging some other debts the building
had occasion'd, which embarrass'd them greatly. Being now a member of
both setts of trustees, that for the building and that for the Academy,
I had a good opportunity of negotiating with both, and brought them
finally to an agreement, by which the trustees for the building were to
cede it to those of the academy, the latter undertaking to discharge the
debt, to keep for ever open in the building a large hall for occasional
preachers, according to the original intention, and maintain a
free-school for the instruction of poor children. Writings were
accordingly drawn, and on paying the debts the trustees of the academy
were put in possession of the premises; and by dividing the great and
lofty hall into stories, and different rooms above and below for the
several schools, and purchasing some additional ground, the whole was
soon made fit for our purpose, and the scholars remov'd into the
building. The care and trouble of agreeing with the workmen, purchasing
materials, and superintending the work, fell upon me; and I went thro'
it the more cheerfully, as it did not then interfere with my private
business, having the year before taken a very able, industrious, and
honest partner, Mr. David Hall, with whose character I was well
acquainted, as he had work'd for me four years. He took off my hands all
care of the printing-office, paying me punctually my share of the
profits. This partnership continued eighteen years, successfully for us
both.

The trustees of the academy, after a while, were incorporated by a
charter from the governor; their funds were increas'd by contributions
in Britain and grants of land from the proprietaries, to which the
Assembly has since made considerable addition; and thus was established
the present University of Philadelphia. I have been continued one of its
trustees from the beginning, now near forty years, and have had the very
great pleasure of seeing a number of the youth who have receiv'd their
education in it, distinguish'd by their improv'd abilities, serviceable
in public stations, and ornaments to their country.

When I disengaged myself, as above mentioned, from private business, I
flatter'd myself that, by the sufficient tho' moderate fortune I had
acquir'd, I had secured leisure during the rest of my life for
philosophical studies and amusements. I purchased all Dr. Spence's
apparatus, who had come from England to lecture here, and I proceeded in
my electrical experiments with great alacrity; but the publick, now
considering me as a man of leisure, laid hold of me for their purposes,
every part of our civil government, and almost at the same time,
imposing some duty upon me. The governor put me into the commission of
the peace; the corporation of the city chose me of the common council,
and soon after an alderman; and the citizens at large chose me a burgess
to represent them in Assembly. This latter station was the more
agreeable to me, as I was at length tired with sitting there to hear
debates, in which, as clerk, I could take no part, and which were often
so unentertaining that I was induc'd to amuse myself with making magic
squares or circles, or any thing to avoid weariness; and I conceiv'd my
becoming a member would enlarge my power of doing good. I would not,
however, insinuate that my ambition was not flatter'd by all these
promotions; it certainly was; for, considering my low beginning, they
were great things to me; and they were still more pleasing, as being so
many spontaneous testimonies of the public good opinion, and by me
entirely unsolicited.

The office of justice of the peace I try'd a little, by attending a few
courts, and sitting on the bench to hear causes; but finding that more
knowledge of the common law than I possess'd was necessary to act in
that station with credit, I gradually withdrew from it, excusing myself
by my being oblig'd to attend the higher duties of a legislator in the
Assembly. My election to this trust was repeated every year for ten
years, without my ever asking any elector for his vote, or signifying,
either directly or indirectly, any desire of being chosen. On taking my
seat in the House, my son was appointed their clerk.

The year following, a treaty being to be held with the Indians at
Carlisle, the governor sent a message to the House, proposing that they
should nominate some of their members, to be join'd with some members of
council, as commissioners for that purpose. [11] The House named the
speaker (Mr. Norris) and myself; and, being commission'd, we went to
Carlisle, and met the Indians accordingly.

[11] See the votes to have this more correctly.--[Marg. note.]

As those people are extreamly apt to get drunk, and, when so, are very
quarrelsome and disorderly, we strictly forbad the selling any liquor to
them; and when they complain'd of this restriction, we told them that if
they would continue sober during the treaty, we would give them plenty
of rum when business was over. They promis'd this, and they kept their
promise, because they could get no liquor, and the treaty was conducted
very orderly, and concluded to mutual satisfaction. They then claim'd
and receiv'd the rum; this was in the afternoon; they were near one
hundred men, women, and children, and were lodg'd in temporary cabins,
built in the form of a square, just without the town. In the evening,
hearing a great noise among them, the commissioners walk'd out to see
what was the matter. We found they had made a great bonfire in the
middle of the square; they were all drunk, men and women, quarreling and
fighting. Their dark-colour'd bodies, half naked, seen only by the
gloomy light of the bonfire, running after and beating one another with
firebrands, accompanied by their horrid yellings, form'd a scene the
most resembling our ideas of hell that could well be imagin'd; there was
no appeasing the tumult, and we retired to our lodging. At midnight a
number of them came thundering at our door, demanding more rum, of which
we took no notice.

The next day, sensible they had misbehav'd in giving us that
disturbance, they sent three of their old counselors to make their
apology. The orator acknowledg'd the fault, but laid it upon the rum;
and then endeavored to excuse the rum by saying, "The Great Spirit, who
made all things, made every thing for some use, and whatever use he
design'd any thing for, that use it should always be put to. Now, when
he made rum, he said 'Let this be for the Indians to get drunk with,'
and it must be so." And, indeed, if it be the design of Providence to
extirpate these savages in order to make room for cultivators of the
earth, it seems not improbable that rum may be the appointed means. It
has already annihilated all the tribes who formerly inhabited the
sea-coast.

In 1751, Dr. Thomas Bond, a particular friend of mine, conceived the
idea of establishing a hospital in Philadelphia (a very beneficent
design, which has been ascrib'd to me, but was originally his), for the
reception and cure of poor sick persons, whether inhabitants of the
province or strangers. He was zealous and active in endeavouring to
procure subscriptions for it, but the proposal being a novelty in
America, and at first not well understood, he met but with small
success.

At length he came to me with the compliment that he found there was no
such thing as carrying a public-spirited project through without my
being concern'd in it. "For," says he, "I am often ask'd by those to
whom I propose subscribing, Have you consulted Franklin upon this
business? And what does he think of it? And when I tell them that I have
not (supposing it rather out of your line), they do not subscribe, but
say they will consider of it." I enquired into the nature and probable
utility of his scheme, and receiving from him a very satisfactory
explanation, I not only subscrib'd to it myself, but engag'd heartily in
the design of procuring subscriptions from others. Previously, however,
to the solicitation, I endeavoured to prepare the minds of the people by
writing on the subject in the newspapers, which was my usual custom in
such cases, but which he had omitted.

The subscriptions afterwards were more free and generous; but, beginning
to flag, I saw they would be insufficient without some assistance from
the Assembly, and therefore propos'd to petition for it, which was done.
The country members did not at first relish the project; they objected
that it could only be serviceable to the city, and therefore the
citizens alone should be at the expense of it; and they doubted whether
the citizens themselves generally approv'd of it. My allegation on the
contrary, that it met with such approbation as to leave no doubt of our
being able to raise two thousand pounds by voluntary donations, they
considered as a most extravagant supposition, and utterly impossible.

On this I form'd my plan; and asking leave to bring in a bill for
incorporating the contributors according to the prayer of their
petition, and granting them a blank sum of money, which leave was
obtained chiefly on the consideration that the House could throw the
bill out if they did not like it, I drew it so as to make the important
clause a conditional one, viz., "And be it enacted, by the authority
aforesaid, that when the said contributors shall have met and chosen
their managers and treasurer, and shall have raised by their
contributions a capital stock of ------ value (the yearly interest of
which is to be applied to the accommodating of the sick poor in the said
hospital, free of charge for diet, attendance, advice, and medicines),
and shall make the same appear to the satisfaction of the speaker of the
Assembly for the time being, that then it shall and may be lawful for
the said speaker, and he is hereby required, to sign an order on the
provincial treasurer for the payment of two thousand pounds, in two
yearly payments, to the treasurer of the said hospital, to be applied to
the founding, building, and finishing of the same."

This condition carried the bill through; for the members, who had
oppos'd the grant, and now conceiv'd they might have the credit of being
charitable without the expence, agreed to its passage; and then, in
soliciting subscriptions among the people, we urg'd the conditional
promise of the law as an additional motive to give, since every man's
donation would be doubled; thus the clause work'd both ways. The
subscriptions accordingly soon exceeded the requisite sum, and we
claim'd and receiv'd the public gift, which enabled us to carry the
design into execution. A convenient and handsome building was soon
erected; the institution has by constant experience been found useful,
and flourishes to this day; and I do not remember any of my political
manœuvres, the success of which gave me at the time more pleasure, or
wherein, after thinking of it, I more easily excus'd myself for having
made some use of cunning.

It was about this time that another projector, the Rev. Gilbert Tennent,
came to me with a request that I would assist him in procuring a
subscription for erecting a new meeting-house. It was to be for the use
of a congregation he had gathered among the Presbyterians, who were
originally disciples of Mr. Whitefield. Unwilling to make myself
disagreeable to my fellow-citizens by too frequently soliciting their
contributions, I absolutely refus'd. He then desired I would furnish him
with a list of the names of persons I knew by experience to be generous
and public-spirited. I thought it would be unbecoming in me, after their
kind compliance with my solicitations, to mark them out to be worried by
other beggars, and therefore refus'd also to give such a list. He then
desir'd I would at least give him my advice. "That I will readily do,"
said I; "and, in the first place, I advise you to apply to all those
whom you know will give something; next, to those whom you are uncertain
whether they will give any thing or not, and show them the list of those
who have given; and, lastly, do not neglect those who you are sure will
give nothing, for in some of them you may be mistaken." He laugh'd and
thank'd me, and said he would take my advice. He did so, for he ask'd of
everybody, and he obtained a much larger sum than he expected, with
which he erected the capacious and very elegant meeting-house that
stands in Arch-street.

Our city, tho' laid out with a beautiful regularity, the streets large,
strait, and crossing each other at right angles, had the disgrace of
suffering those streets to remain long unpav'd, and in wet weather the
wheels of heavy carriages plough'd them into a quagmire, so that it was
difficult to cross them; and in dry weather the dust was offensive. I
had liv'd near what was call'd the Jersey Market, and saw with pain the
inhabitants wading in mud while purchasing their provisions. A strip of
ground down the middle of that market was at length pav'd with brick, so
that, being once in the market, they had firm footing, but were often
over shoes in dirt to get there. By talking and writing on the subject,
I was at length instrumental in getting the street pav'd with stone
between the market and the brick'd foot-pavement, that was on each side
next the houses. This, for some time, gave an easy access to the market
dry-shod; but, the rest of the street not being pav'd, whenever a
carriage came out of the mud upon this pavement, it shook off and left
its dirt upon it, and it was soon cover'd with mire, which was not
remov'd, the city as yet having no scavengers.

After some inquiry I found a poor industrious man, who was willing to
undertake keeping the pavement clean, by sweeping it twice a week,
carrying off the dirt from before all the neighbours' doors, for the sum
of sixpence per month, to be paid by each house. I then wrote and
printed a paper setting forth the advantages to the neighbourhood that
might be obtain'd by this small expense; the greater ease in keeping our
houses clean, so much dirt not being brought in by people's feet; the
benefit to the shops by more custom, etc., etc., as buyers could more
easily get at them; and by not having, in windy weather, the dust blown
in upon their goods, etc., etc. I sent one of these papers to each
house, and in a day or two went round to see who would subscribe an
agreement to pay these sixpences; it was unanimously sign'd, and for a
time well executed. All the inhabitants of the city were delighted with
the cleanliness of the pavement that surrounded the market, it being a
convenience to all, and this rais'd a general desire to have all the
streets paved, and made the people more willing to submit to a tax for
that purpose.

After some time I drew a bill for paving the city, and brought it into
the Assembly. It was just before I went to England, in 1757, and did not
pass till I was gone, [12] and then with an alteration in the mode of
assessment, which I thought not for the better, but with an additional
provision for lighting as well as paving the streets, which was a great
improvement. It was by a private person, the late Mr. John Clifton, his
giving a sample of the utility of lamps, by placing one at his door,
that the people were first impress'd with the idea of enlighting all the
city. The honour of this public benefit has also been ascrib'd to me,
but it belongs truly to that gentleman. I did but follow his example,
and have only some merit to claim respecting the form of our lamps, as
differing from the globe lamps we were at first supply'd with from
London. Those we found inconvenient in these respects: they admitted no
air below; the smoke, therefore, did not readily go out above, but
circulated in the globe, lodg'd on its inside, and soon obstructed the
light they were intended to afford; giving, besides, the daily trouble
of wiping them clean; and an accidental stroke on one of them would
demolish it, and render it totally useless. I therefore suggested the
composing them of four flat panes, with a long funnel above to draw up
the smoke, and crevices admitting air below, to facilitate the ascent of
the smoke; by this means they were kept clean, and did not grow dark in
a few hours, as the London lamps do, but continu'd bright till morning,
and an accidental stroke would generally break but a single pane, easily
repair'd.

[12] See votes.

I have sometimes wonder'd that the Londoners did not, from the effect
holes in the bottom of the globe lamps us'd at Vauxhall have in keeping
them clean, learn to have such holes in their street lamps. But, these
holes being made for another purpose, viz., to communicate flame more
suddenly to the wick by a little flax hanging down thro' them, the other
use, of letting in air, seems not to have been thought of; and
therefore, after the lamps have been lit a few hours, the streets of
London are very poorly illuminated.

The mention of these improvements puts me in mind of one I propos'd,
when in London, to Dr. Fothergill, who was among the best men I have
known, and a great promoter of useful projects. I had observ'd that the
streets, when dry, were never swept, and the light dust carried away;
but it was suffer'd to accumulate till wet weather reduc'd it to mud,
and then, after lying some days so deep on the pavement that there was
no crossing but in paths kept clean by poor people with brooms, it was
with great labour rak'd together and thrown up into carts open above,
the sides of which suffer'd some of the slush at every jolt on the
pavement to shake out and fall, sometimes to the annoyance of
foot-passengers. The reason given for not sweeping the dusty streets
was, that the dust would fly into the windows of shops and houses.

An accidental occurrence had instructed me how much sweeping might be
done in a little time. I found at my door in Craven-street, one morning,
a poor woman sweeping my pavement with a birch broom; she appeared very
pale and feeble, as just come out of a fit of sickness. I ask'd who
employ'd her to sweep there; she said, "Nobody, but I am very poor and
in distress, and I sweeps before gentlefolkses doors, and hopes they
will give me something." I bid her sweep the whole street clean, and I
would give her a shilling; this was at nine o'clock; at 12 she came for
the shilling. From the slowness I saw at first in her working, I could
scarce believe that the work was done so soon, and sent my servant to
examine it, who reported that the whole street was swept perfectly
clean, and all the dust plac'd in the gutter, which was in the middle;
and the next rain wash'd it quite away, so that the pavement and even
the kennel were perfectly clean.

I then judg'd that, if that feeble woman could sweep such a street in
three hours, a strong, active man might have done it in half the time.
And here let me remark the convenience of having but one gutter in such
a narrow street, running down its middle, instead of two, one on each
side, near the footway; for where all the rain that falls on a street
runs from the sides and meets in the middle, it forms there a current
strong enough to wash away all the mud it meets with; but when divided
into two channels, it is often too weak to cleanse either, and only
makes the mud it finds more fluid, so that the wheels of carriages and
feet of horses throw and dash it upon the foot-pavement, which is
thereby rendered foul and slippery, and sometimes splash it upon those
who are walking. My proposal, communicated to the good doctor, was as
follows:

"For the more effectual cleaning and keeping clean the streets of London
and Westminster, it is proposed that the several watchmen be contracted
with to have the dust swept up in dry seasons, and the mud rak'd up at
other times, each in the several streets and lanes of his round; that
they be furnish'd with brooms and other proper instruments for these
purposes, to be kept at their respective stands, ready to furnish the
poor people they may employ in the service.

"That in the dry summer months the dust be all swept up into heaps at
proper distances, before the shops and windows of houses are usually
opened, when the scavengers, with close-covered carts, shall also carry
it all away.

"That the mud, when rak'd up, be not left in heaps to be spread abroad
again by the wheels of carriages and trampling of horses, but that the
scavengers be provided with bodies of carts, not plac'd high upon
wheels, but low upon sliders, with lattice bottoms, which, being cover'd
with straw, will retain the mud thrown into them, and permit the water
to drain from it, whereby it will become much lighter, water making the
greatest part of its weight; these bodies of carts to be plac'd at
convenient distances, and the mud brought to them in wheel-barrows; they
remaining where plac'd till the mud is drain'd, and then horses brought
to draw them away."

I have since had doubts of the practicability of the latter part of this
proposal, on account of the narrowness of some streets, and the
difficulty of placing the draining-sleds so as not to encumber too much
the passage; but I am still of opinion that the former, requiring the
dust to be swept up and carry'd away before the shops are open, is very
practicable in the summer, when the days are long; for, in walking thro'
the Strand and Fleet-street one morning at seven o'clock, I observ'd
there was not one shop open, tho' it had been daylight and the sun up
above three hours; the inhabitants of London chusing voluntarily to live
much by candle-light, and sleep by sunshine, and yet often complain, a
little absurdly, of the duty on candles and the high price of tallow.

Some may think these trifling matters not worth minding or relating; but
when they consider that tho' dust blown into the eyes of a single
person, or into a single shop on a windy day, is but of small
importance, yet the great number of the instances in a populous city,
and its frequent repetitions give it weight and consequence, perhaps
they will not censure very severely those who bestow some attention to
affairs of this seemingly low nature. Human felicity is produc'd not so
much by great pieces of good fortune that seldom happen, as by little
advantages that occur every day. Thus, if you teach a poor young man to
shave himself, and keep his razor in order, you may contribute more to
the happiness of his life than in giving him a thousand guineas. The
money may be soon spent, the regret only remaining of having foolishly
consumed it; but in the other case, he escapes the frequent vexation of
waiting for barbers, and of their sometimes dirty fingers, offensive
breaths, and dull razors; he shaves when most convenient to him, and
enjoys daily the pleasure of its being done with a good instrument. With
these sentiments I have hazarded the few preceding pages, hoping they
may afford hints which some time or other may be useful to a city I
love, having lived many years in it very happily, and perhaps to some of
our towns in America.

Having been for some time employed by the postmaster-general of America
as his comptroller in regulating several offices, and bringing the
officers to account, I was, upon his death in 1753, appointed, jointly
with Mr. William Hunter, to succeed him, by a commission from the
postmaster-general in England. The American office never had hitherto
paid any thing to that of Britain. We were to have six hundred pounds a
year between us, if we could make that sum out of the profits of the
office. To do this, a variety of improvements were necessary; some of
these were inevitably at first expensive, so that in the first four
years the office became above nine hundred pounds in debt to us. But it
soon after began to repay us; and before I was displac'd by a freak of
the ministers, of which I shall speak hereafter, we had brought it to
yield three times as much clear revenue to the crown as the postoffice
of Ireland. Since that imprudent transaction, they have receiv'd from
it--not one farthing!

The business of the postoffice occasion'd my taking a journey this year
to New England, where the College of Cambridge, of their own motion,
presented me with the degree of Master of Arts. Yale College, in
Connecticut, had before made me a similar compliment. Thus, without
studying in any college, I came to partake of their honours. They were
conferr'd in consideration of my improvements and discoveries in the
electric branch of natural philosophy.

In 1754, war with France being again apprehended, a congress of
commissioners from the different colonies was, by an order of the Lords
of Trade, to be assembled at Albany, there to confer with the chiefs of
the Six Nations concerning the means of defending both their country and
ours. Governor Hamilton, having receiv'd this order, acquainted the
House with it, requesting they would furnish proper presents for the
Indians, to be given on this occasion; and naming the speaker (Mr.
Norris) and myself to join Mr. Thomas Penn and Mr. Secretary Peters as
commissioners to act for Pennsylvania. The House approv'd the
nomination, and provided the goods for the present, and tho' they did
not much like treating out of the provinces; and we met the other
commissioners at Albany about the middle of June.

In our way thither, I projected and drew a plan for the union of all the
colonies under one government, so far as might be necessary for defense,
and other important general purposes. As we pass'd thro' New York, I had
there shown my project to Mr. James Alexander and Mr. Kennedy, two
gentlemen of great knowledge in public affairs, and, being fortified by
their approbation, I ventur'd to lay it before the Congress. It then
appeared that several of the commissioners had form'd plans of the same
kind. A previous question was first taken, whether a union should be
established, which pass'd in the affirmative unanimously. A committee
was then appointed, one member from each colony, to consider the several
plans and report. Mine happen'd to be preferr'd, and, with a few
amendments, was accordingly reported.

By this plan the general government was to be administered by a
president-general, appointed and supported by the crown, and a grand
council was to be chosen by the representatives of the people of the
several colonies, met in their respective assemblies. The debates upon
it in Congress went on daily, hand in hand with the Indian business.
Many objections and difficulties were started, but at length they were
all overcome, and the plan was unanimously agreed to, and copies ordered
to be transmitted to the Board of Trade and to the assemblies of the
several provinces. Its fate was singular: the assemblies did not adopt
it, as they all thought there was too much prerogative in it, and in
England it was judg'd to have too much of the democratic.

The Board of Trade therefore did not approve of it, nor recommend it for
the approbation of his majesty; but another scheme was form'd, supposed
to answer the same purpose better, whereby the governors of the
provinces, with some members of their respective councils, were to meet
and order the raising of troops, building of forts, etc., and to draw on
the treasury of Great Britain for the expense, which was afterwards to
be refunded by an act of Parliament laying a tax on America. My plan,
with my reasons in support of it, is to be found among my political
papers that are printed.

Being the winter following in Boston, I had much conversation with
Governor Shirley upon both the plans. Part of what passed between us on
the occasion may also be seen among those papers. The different and
contrary reasons of dislike to my plan makes me suspect that it was
really the true medium; and I am still of opinion it would have been
happy for both sides the water if it had been adopted. The colonies, so
united, would have been sufficiently strong to have defended themselves;
there would then have been no need of troops from England; of course,
the subsequent pretence for taxing America, and the bloody contest it
occasioned, would have been avoided. But such mistakes are not new;
history is full of the errors of states and princes.

Look round the habitable world, how few

Know their own good, or, knowing it, pursue!

Those who govern, having much business on their hands, do not generally
like to take the trouble of considering and carrying into execution new
projects. The best public measures are therefore seldom adopted from
previous wisdom, but forc'd by the occasion.

The Governor of Pennsylvania, in sending it down to the Assembly,
express'd his approbation of the plan, "as appearing to him to be drawn
up with great clearness and strength of judgment, and therefore
recommended it as well worthy of their closest and most serious
attention." The House, however, by the management of a certain member,
took it up when I happen'd to be absent, which I thought not very fair,
and reprobated it without paying any attention to it at all, to my no
small mortification.

In my journey to Boston this year, I met at New York with our new
governor, Mr. Morris, just arriv'd there from England, with whom I had
been before intimately acquainted. He brought a commission to supersede
Mr. Hamilton, who, tir'd with the disputes his proprietary instructions
subjected him to, had resign'd. Mr. Morris ask'd me if I thought he must
expect as uncomfortable an administration. I said, "No; you may, on the
contrary, have a very comfortable one, if you will only take care not to
enter into any dispute with the Assembly." "My dear friend," says he,
pleasantly, "how can you advise my avoiding disputes? You know I love
disputing; it is one of my greatest pleasures; however, to show the
regard I have for your counsel, I promise you I will, if possible, avoid
them." He had some reason for loving to dispute, being eloquent, an
acute sophister, and, therefore, generally successful in argumentative
conversation. He had been brought up to it from a boy, his father, as I
have heard, accustoming his children to dispute with one another for his
diversion, while sitting at table after dinner; but I think the practice
was not wise; for, in the course of my observation, these disputing,
contradicting, and confuting people are generally unfortunate in their
affairs. They get victory sometimes, but they never get good will, which
would be of more use to them. We parted, he going to Philadelphia, and I
to Boston.

In returning, I met at New York with the votes of the Assembly, by which
it appear'd that, notwithstanding his promise to me, he and the House
were already in high contention; and it was a continual battle between
them as long as he retain'd the government. I had my share of it; for,
as soon as I got back to my seat in the Assembly, I was put on every
committee for answering his speeches and messages, and by the committees
always desired to make the drafts. Our answers, as well as his messages,
were often tart, and sometimes indecently abusive; and, as he knew I
wrote for the Assembly, one might have imagined that, when we met, we
could hardly avoid cutting throats; but he was so good-natur'd a man
that no personal difference between him and me was occasion'd by the
contest, and we often din'd together.

One afternoon, in the height of this public quarrel, we met in the
street. "Franklin," says he, "you must go home with me and spend the
evening; I am to have some company that you will like;" and, taking me
by the arm, he led me to his house. In gay conversation over our wine,
after supper, he told us, jokingly, that he much admir'd the idea of
Sancho Panza, who, when it was proposed to give him a government,
requested it might be a government of blacks, as then, if he could not
agree with his people, he might sell them. One of his friends, who sat
next to me, says, "Franklin, why do you continue to side with these
damn'd Quakers? Had not you better sell them? The proprietor would give
you a good price." "The governor," says I, "has not yet blacked them
enough." He, indeed, had labored hard to blacken the Assembly in all his
messages, but they wip'd off his coloring as fast as he laid it on, and
plac'd it, in return, thick upon his own face; so that, finding he was
likely to be negrofied himself, he, as well as Mr. Hamilton, grew tir'd
of the contest, and quitted the government.

[13] These public quarrels were all at bottom owing to the
proprietaries, our hereditary governors, who, when any expense was to be
incurred for the defense of their province, with incredible meanness
instructed their deputies to pass no act for levying the necessary
taxes, unless their vast estates were in the same act expressly excused;
and they had even taken bonds of these deputies to observe such
instructions. The Assemblies for three years held out against this
injustice, tho' constrained to bend at last. At length Captain Denny,
who was Governor Morris's successor, ventured to disobey those
instructions; how that was brought about I shall show hereafter.

[13] My acts in Morris's time, military, etc.--[Marg. note.]

But I am got forward too fast with my story: there are still some
transactions to be mention'd that happened during the administration of
Governor Morris.

War being in a manner commenced with France, the government of
Massachusetts Bay projected an attack upon Crown Point, and sent Mr.
Quincy to Pennsylvania, and Mr. Pownall, afterward Governor Pownall, to
New York, to solicit assistance. As I was in the Assembly, knew its
temper, and was Mr. Quincy's countryman, he appli'd to me for my
influence and assistance. I dictated his address to them, which was well
receiv'd. They voted an aid of ten thousand pounds, to be laid out in
provisions. But the governor refusing his assent to their bill (which
included this with other sums granted for the use of the crown), unless
a clause were inserted exempting the proprietary estate from bearing any
part of the tax that would be necessary, the Assembly, tho' very
desirous of making their grant to New England effectual, were at a loss
how to accomplish it. Mr. Quincy labored hard with the governor to
obtain his assent, but he was obstinate.

I then suggested a method of doing the business without the governor, by
orders on the trustees of the Loan Office, which, by law, the Assembly
had the right of drawing. There was, indeed, little or no money at that
time in the office, and therefore I propos'd that the orders should be
payable in a year, and to bear an interest of five per cent. With these
orders I suppos'd the provisions might easily be purchas'd. The
Assembly, with very little hesitation, adopted the proposal. The orders
were immediately printed, and I was one of the committee directed to
sign and dispose of them. The fund for paying them was the interest of
all the paper currency then extant in the province upon loan, together
with the revenue arising from the excise, which being known to be more
than sufficient, they obtain'd instant credit, and were not only
receiv'd in payment for the provisions, but many money'd people, who had
cash lying by them, vested it in those orders, which they found
advantageous, as they bore interest while upon hand, and might on any
occasion be used as money; so that they were eagerly all bought up, and
in a few weeks none of them were to be seen. Thus this important affair
was by my means compleated. My Quincy return'd thanks to the Assembly in
a handsome memorial, went home highly pleas'd with the success of his
embassy, and ever after bore for me the most cordial and affectionate
friendship.

The British government, not chusing to permit the union of the colonies
as propos'd at Albany, and to trust that union with their defense, lest
they should thereby grow too military, and feel their own strength,
suspicions and jealousies at this time being entertain'd of them, sent
over General Braddock with two regiments of regular English troops for
that purpose. He landed at Alexandria, in Virginia, and thence march'd
to Frederictown, in Maryland, where he halted for carriages. Our
Assembly apprehending, from some information, that he had conceived
violent prejudices against them, as averse to the service, wish'd me to
wait upon him, not as from them, but as postmaster-general, under the
guise of proposing to settle with him the mode of conducting with most
celerity and certainty the despatches between him and the governors of
the several provinces, with whom he must necessarily have continual
correspondence, and of which they propos'd to pay the expense. My son
accompanied me on this journey.

We found the general at Frederictown, waiting impatiently for the return
of those he had sent thro' the back parts of Maryland and Virginia to
collect waggons. I stayed with him several days, din'd with him daily,
and had full opportunity of removing all his prejudices, by the
information of what the Assembly had before his arrival actually done,
and were still willing to do, to facilitate his operations. When I was
about to depart, the returns of waggons to be obtained were brought in,
by which it appear'd that they amounted only to twenty-five, and not all
of those were in serviceable condition. The general and all the officers
were surpris'd, declar'd the expedition was then at an end, being
impossible, and exclaim'd against the ministers for ignorantly landing
them in a country destitute of the means of conveying their stores,
baggage, etc., not less than one hundred and fifty waggons being
necessary.

I happened to say I thought it was a pity they had not been landed
rather in Pennsylvania, as in that country almost every farmer had his
waggon. The general eagerly laid hold of my words, and said, "Then you,
sir, who are a man of interest there, can probably procure them for us;
and I beg you will undertake it." I ask'd what terms were to be offer'd
the owners of the waggons; and I was desir'd to put on paper the terms
that appeared to me necessary. This I did, and they were agreed to, and
a commission and instructions accordingly prepar'd immediately. What
those terms were will appear in the advertisement I publish'd as soon as
I arriv'd at Lancaster, which being, from the great and sudden effect it
produc'd, a piece of some curiosity, I shall insert it at length, as
follows:

"Advertisement.

"LANCASTER, April 26, 1755.

"Whereas, one hundred and fifty waggons, with four horses to each
waggon, and fifteen hundred saddle or pack horses, are wanted for the
service of his majesty's forces now about to rendezvous at Will's Creek,
and his excellency General Braddock having been pleased to empower me to
contract for the hire of the same, I hereby give notice that I shall
attend for that purpose at Lancaster from this day to next Wednesday
evening, and at York from next Thursday morning till Friday evening,
where I shall be ready to agree for waggons and teams, or single horses,
on the following terms, viz.: 1. That there shall be paid for each
waggon, with four good horses and a driver, fifteen shillings per diem;
and for each able horse with a pack-saddle, or other saddle and
furniture, two shillings per diem; and for each able horse without a
saddle, eighteen pence per diem. 2. That the pay commence from the time
of their joining the forces at Will's Creek, which must be on or before
the 20th of May ensuing, and that a reasonable allowance be paid over
and above for the time necessary for their travelling to Will's Creek
and home again after their discharge. 3. Each waggon and team, and every
saddle or pack horse, is to be valued by indifferent persons chosen
between me and the owner; and in case of the loss of any waggon, team,
or other horse in the service, the price according to such valuation is
to be allowed and paid. 4. Seven days' pay is to be advanced and paid in
hand by me to the owner of each waggon and team, or horse, at the time
of contracting, if required, and the remainder to be paid by General
Braddock, or by the paymaster of the army, at the time of their
discharge, or from time to time, as it shall be demanded. 5. No drivers
of waggons, or persons taking care of the hired horses, are on any
account to be called upon to do the duty of soldiers, or be otherwise
employed than in conducting or taking care of their carriages or horses.
6. All oats, Indian corn, or other forage that waggons or horses bring
to the camp, more than is necessary for the subsistence of the horses,
is to be taken for the use of the army, and a reasonable price paid for
the same.

"Note.--My son, William Franklin, is empowered to enter into like
contracts with any person in Cumberland county.

"B. Franklin."

"To the inhabitants of the Counties of Lancaster, York and Cumberland.

"Friends and Countrymen,

"Being occasionally at the camp at Frederic a few days since, I found
the general and officers extremely exasperated on account of their not
being supplied with horses and carriages, which had been expected from
this province, as most able to furnish them; but, through the
dissensions between our governor and Assembly, money had not been
provided, nor any steps taken for that purpose.

"It was proposed to send an armed force immediately into these counties,
to seize as many of the best carriages and horses as should be wanted,
and compel as many persons into the service as would be necessary to
drive and take care of them.

"I apprehended that the progress of British soldiers through these
counties on such an occasion, especially considering the temper they are
in, and their resentment against us, would be attended with many and
great inconveniences to the inhabitants, and therefore more willingly
took the trouble of trying first what might be done by fair and
equitable means. The people of these back counties have lately
complained to the Assembly that a sufficient currency was wanting; you
have an opportunity of receiving and dividing among you a very
considerable sum; for, if the service of this expedition should
continue, as it is more than probable it will, for one hundred and
twenty days, the hire of these waggons and horses will amount to upward
of thirty thousand pounds, which will be paid you in silver and gold of
the king's money.

"The service will be light and easy, for the army will scarce march
above twelve miles per day, and the waggons and baggage-horses, as they
carry those things that are absolutely necessary to the welfare of the
army, must march with the army, and no faster; and are, for the army's
sake, always placed where they can be most secure, whether in a march or
in a camp.

"If you are really, as I believe you are, good and loyal subjects to his
majesty, you may now do a most acceptable service, and make it easy to
yourselves; for three or four of such as can not separately spare from
the business of their plantations a waggon and four horses and a driver,
may do it together, one furnishing the waggon, another one or two
horses, and another the driver, and divide the pay proportionately
between you; but if you do not this service to your king and country
voluntarily, when such good pay and reasonable terms are offered to you,
your loyalty will be strongly suspected. The king's business must be
done; so many brave troops, come so far for your defense, must not stand
idle through your backwardness to do what may be reasonably expected
from you; waggons and horses must be had; violent measures will probably
be used, and you will be left to seek for a recompense where you can
find it, and your case, perhaps, be little pitied or regarded.

"I have no particular interest in this affair, as, except the
satisfaction of endeavoring to do good, I shall have only my labour for
my pains. If this method of obtaining the waggons and horses is not
likely to succeed, I am obliged to send word to the general in fourteen
days; and I suppose Sir John St. Clair, the hussar, with a body of
soldiers, will immediately enter the province for the purpose, which I
shall be sorry to hear, because I am very sincerely and truly your
friend and well-wisher,

B. Franklin."

I received of the general about eight hundred pounds, to be disbursed in
advance-money to the waggon owners, etc.; but that sum being
insufficient, I advanc'd upward of two hundred pounds more, and in two
weeks the one hundred and fifty waggons, with two hundred and fifty-nine
carrying horses, were on their march for the camp. The advertisement
promised payment according to the valuation, in case any waggon or horse
should be lost. The owners, however, alleging they did not know General
Braddock, or what dependence might be had on his promise, insisted on my
bond for the performance, which I accordingly gave them.

While I was at the camp, supping one evening with the officers of
Colonel Dunbar's regiment, he represented to me his concern for the
subalterns, who, he said, were generally not in affluence, and could ill
afford, in this dear country, to lay in the stores that might be
necessary in so long a march, thro' a wilderness, where nothing was to
be purchas'd. I commiserated their case, and resolved to endeavor
procuring them some relief. I said nothing, however, to him of my
intention, but wrote the next morning to the committee of the Assembly,
who had the disposition of some public money, warmly recommending the
case of these officers to their consideration, and proposing that a
present should be sent them of necessaries and refreshments. My son, who
had some experience of a camp life, and of its wants, drew up a list for
me, which I enclos'd in my letter. The committee approv'd, and used such
diligence that, conducted by my son, the stores arrived at the camp as
soon as the waggons. They consisted of twenty parcels, each containing

6 lbs. loaf sugar.            1 Gloucester cheese.
6 lbs. good Muscovado do.     1 kegg containing 20 lbs. good butter.
1 lb. good green tea.         2 doz. old Madeira wine.
1 lb. good bohea do.          2 gallons Jamaica spirits.
6 lbs. good ground coffee.    1 bottle flour of mustard.
6 lbs. chocolate.             2 well-cur'd hams.
1-2 cwt. best white biscuit.  1-2 dozen dry'd tongues.
1-2 lb. pepper.               6 lbs. rice.
1 quart best white wine       6 lbs. raisins.
vinegar.

These twenty parcels, well pack'd, were placed on as many horses, each
parcel, with the horse, being intended as a present for one officer.
They were very thankfully receiv'd, and the kindness acknowledg'd by
letters to me from the colonels of both regiments, in the most grateful
terms. The general, too, was highly satisfied with my conduct in
procuring him the waggons, etc., and readily paid my account of
disbursements, thanking me repeatedly, and requesting my farther
assistance in sending provisions after him. I undertook this also, and
was busily employ'd in it till we heard of his defeat, advancing for the
service of my own money, upwards of one thousand pounds sterling, of
which I sent him an account. It came to his hands, luckily for me, a few
days before the battle, and he return'd me immediately an order on the
paymaster for the round sum of one thousand pounds, leaving the
remainder to the next account. I consider this payment as good luck,
having never been able to obtain that remainder, of which more
hereafter.

This general was, I think, a brave man, and might probably have made a
figure as a good officer in some European war. But he had too much
self-confidence, too high an opinion of the validity of regular troops,
and too mean a one of both Americans and Indians. George Croghan, our
Indian interpreter, join'd him on his march with one hundred of those
people, who might have been of great use to his army as guides, scouts,
etc., if he had treated them kindly; but he slighted and neglected them,
and they gradually left him.

In conversation with him one day, he was giving me some account of his
intended progress. "After taking Fort Duquesne," says he, "I am to
proceed to Niagara; and, having taken that, to Frontenac, if the season
will allow time; and I suppose it will, for Duquesne can hardly detain
me above three or four days; and then I see nothing that can obstruct my
march to Niagara." Having before revolv'd in my mind the long line his
army must make in their march by a very narrow road, to be cut for them
thro' the woods and bushes, and also what I had read of a former defeat
of fifteen hundred French, who invaded the Iroquois country, I had
conceiv'd some doubts and some fears for the event of the campaign. But
I ventur'd only to say, "To be sure, sir, if you arrive well before
Duquesne, with these fine troops, so well provided with artillery, that
place not yet compleatly fortified, and as we hear with no very strong
garrison, can probably make but a short resistance. The only danger I
apprehend of obstruction to your march is from ambuscades of Indians,
who, by constant practice, are dexterous in laying and executing them;
and the slender line, near four miles long, which your army must make,
may expose it to be attack'd by surprise in its flanks, and to be cut
like a thread into several pieces, which, from their distance, can not
come up in time to support each other."

He smil'd at my ignorance, and reply'd, "These savages may, indeed, be a
formidable enemy to your raw American militia, but upon the king's
regular and disciplin'd troops, sir, it is impossible they should make
any impression." I was conscious of an impropriety in my disputing with
a military man in matters of his profession, and said no more. The
enemy, however, did not take the advantage of his army which I
apprehended its long line of march expos'd it to, but let it advance
without interruption till within nine miles of the place; and then, when
more in a body (for it had just passed a river, where the front had
halted till all were come over), and in a more open part of the woods
than any it had pass'd, attack'd its advanced guard by a heavy fire from
behind trees and bushes, which was the first intelligence the general
had of an enemy's being near him. This guard being disordered, the
general hurried the troops up to their assistance, which was done in
great confusion, thro' waggons, baggage, and cattle; and presently the
fire came upon their flank: the officers, being on horseback, were more
easily distinguish'd, pick'd out as marks, and fell very fast; and the
soldiers were crowded together in a huddle, having or hearing no orders,
and standing to be shot at till two-thirds of them were killed; and
then, being seiz'd with a panick, the whole fled with precipitation.

The waggoners took each a horse out of his team and scamper'd; their
example was immediately followed by others; so that all the waggons,
provisions, artillery, and stores were left to the enemy. The general,
being wounded, was brought off with difficulty; his secretary, Mr.
Shirley, was killed by his side; and out of eighty-six officers,
sixty-three were killed or wounded, and seven hundred and fourteen men
killed out of eleven hundred. These eleven hundred had been picked men
from the whole army; the rest had been left behind with Colonel Dunbar,
who was to follow with the heavier part of the stores, provisions, and
baggage. The flyers, not being pursu'd, arriv'd at Dunbar's camp, and
the panick they brought with them instantly seiz'd him and all his
people; and, tho' he had now above one thousand men, and the enemy who
had beaten Braddock did not at most exceed four hundred Indians and
French together, instead of proceeding, and endeavoring to recover some
of the lost honour, he ordered all the stores, ammunition, etc., to be
destroy'd, that he might have more horses to assist his flight towards
the settlements, and less lumber to remove. He was there met with
requests from the governors of Virginia, Maryland, and Pennsylvania,
that he would post his troops on the frontiers, so as to afford some
protection to the inhabitants; but he continu'd his hasty march thro'
all the country, not thinking himself safe till he arriv'd at
Philadelphia, where the inhabitants could protect him. This whole
transaction gave us Americans the first suspicion that our exalted ideas
of the prowess of British regulars had not been well founded.

In their first march, too, from their landing till they got beyond the
settlements, they had plundered and stripped the inhabitants, totally
ruining some poor families, besides insulting, abusing, and confining
the people if they remonstrated. This was enough to put us out of
conceit of such defenders, if we had really wanted any. How different
was the conduct of our French friends in 1781, who, during a march thro'
the most inhabited part of our country from Rhode Island to Virginia,
near seven hundred miles, occasioned not the smallest complaint for the
loss of a pig, a chicken, or even an apple.

Captain Orme, who was one of the general's aids-de-camp, and, being
grievously wounded, was brought off with him, and continu'd with him to
his death, which happen'd in a few days, told me that he was totally
silent all the first day, and at night only said, "Who would have
thought it?" That he was silent again the following day, saying only at
last, "We shall better know how to deal with them another time;" and
dy'd in a few minutes after.

The secretary's papers, with all the general's orders, instructions, and
correspondence, falling into the enemy's hands, they selected and
translated into French a number of the articles, which they printed, to
prove the hostile intentions of the British court before the declaration
of war. Among these I saw some letters of the general to the ministry,
speaking highly of the great service I had rendered the army, and
recommending me to their notice. David Hume, too, who was some years
after secretary to Lord Hertford, when minister in France, and afterward
to General Conway, when secretary of state, told me he had seen among
the papers in that office, letters from Braddock highly recommending me.
But, the expedition having been unfortunate, my service, it seems, was
not thought of much value, for those recommendations were never of any
use to me.

As to rewards from himself, I ask'd only one, which was, that he would
give orders to his officers not to enlist any more of our bought
servants, and that he would discharge such as had been already enlisted.
This he readily granted, and several were accordingly return'd to their
masters, on my application. Dunbar, when the command devolv'd on him,
was not so generous. He being at Philadelphia, on his retreat, or rather
flight, I apply'd to him for the discharge of the servants of three poor
farmers of Lancaster county that he had enlisted, reminding him of the
late general's orders on that head. He promised me that, if the masters
would come to him at Trenton, where he should be in a few days on his
march to New York, he would there deliver their men to them. They
accordingly were at the expense and trouble of going to Trenton, and
there he refus'd to perform his promise, to their great loss and
disappointment.

As soon as the loss of the waggons and horses was generally known, all
the owners came upon me for the valuation which I had given bond to pay.
Their demands gave me a great deal of trouble, my acquainting them that
the money was ready in the paymaster's hands, but that orders for paying
it must first be obtained from General Shirley, and my assuring them
that I had apply'd to that general by letter; but, he being at a
distance, an answer could not soon be receiv'd, and they must have
patience, all this was not sufficient to satisfy, and some began to sue
me. General Shirley at length relieved me from this terrible situation
by appointing commissioners to examine the claims, and ordering payment.
They amounted to near twenty thousand pound, which to pay would have
ruined me.

Before we had the news of this defeat, the two Doctors Bond came to me
with a subscription paper for raising money to defray the expense of a
grand firework, which it was intended to exhibit at a rejoicing on
receipt of the news of our taking Fort Duquesne. I looked grave, and
said it would, I thought, be time enough to prepare for the rejoicing
when we knew we should have occasion to rejoice. They seem'd surpris'd
that I did not immediately comply with their proposal. "Why the d--l!"
says one of them, "you surely don't suppose that the fort will not be
taken?" "I don't know that it will not be taken, but I know that the
events of war are subject to great uncertainty." I gave them the reasons
of my doubting; the subscription was dropt, and the projectors thereby
missed the mortification they would have undergone if the firework had
been prepared. Dr. Bond, on some other occasion afterward, said that he
did not like Franklin's forebodings.

Governor Morris, who had continually worried the Assembly with message
after message before the defeat of Braddock, to beat them into the
making of acts to raise money for the defense of the province, without
taxing, among others, the proprietary estates, and had rejected all
their bills for not having such an exempting clause, now redoubled his
attacks with more hope of success, the danger and necessity being
greater. The Assembly, however, continu'd firm, believing they had
justice on their side, and that it would be giving up an essential right
if they suffered the governor to amend their money-bills. In one of the
last, indeed, which was for granting fifty thousand pounds, his propos'd
amendment was only of a single word. The bill expressed "that all
estates, real and personal, were to be taxed, those of the proprietaries
not excepted." His amendment was, for not read only: a small, but very
material alteration. However, when the news of this disaster reached
England, our friends there, whom we had taken care to furnish with all
the Assembly's answers to the governor's messages, rais'd a clamor
against the proprietaries for their meanness and injustice in giving
their governor such instructions; some going so far as to say that, by
obstructing the defense of their province, they forfeited their right to
it. They were intimidated by this, and sent orders to their
receiver-general to add five thousand pounds of their money to whatever
sum might be given by the Assembly for such purpose.

This, being notified to the House, was accepted in lieu of their share
of a general tax, and a new bill was form'd, with an exempting clause,
which passed accordingly. By this act I was appointed one of the
commissioners for disposing of the money, sixty thousand pounds. I had
been active in modelling the bill and procuring its passage, and had, at
the same time, drawn a bill for establishing and disciplining of a
voluntary militia, which I carried thro' the House without much
difficulty, as care was taken in it to leave the Quakers at their
liberty. To promote the association necessary to form the militia, I
wrote a dialogue, [14] stating and answering all the objections I could
think of to such a militia, which was printed, and had, as I thought,
great effect.

[14] This dialogue and the militia act are in the "Gentleman's Magazine"
for February and March, 1756.--[Marg. note.]

While the several companies in the city and country were forming and
learning their exercise, the governor prevail'd with me to take charge
of our North-western frontier, which was infested by the enemy, and
provide for the defense of the inhabitants by raising troops and
building a line of forts. I undertook this military business, tho' I did
not conceive myself well qualified for it. He gave me a commission with
full powers, and a parcel of blank commissions for officers, to be given
to whom I thought fit. I had but little difficulty in raising men,
having soon five hundred and sixty under my command. My son, who had in
the preceding war been an officer in the army rais'd against Canada, was
my aid-de-camp, and of great use to me. The Indians had burned
Gnadenhut, a village settled by the Moravians, and massacred the
inhabitants; but the place was thought a good situation for one of the
forts.

In order to march thither, I assembled the companies at Bethlehem, the
chief establishment of those people. I was surprised to find it in so
good a posture of defense; the destruction of Gnadenhut had made them
apprehend danger. The principal buildings were defended by a stockade;
they had purchased a quantity of arms and ammunition from New York, and
had even plac'd quantities of small paving stones between the windows of
their high stone houses, for their women to throw down upon the heads of
any Indians that should attempt to force into them. The armed brethren,
too, kept watch, and reliev'd as methodically as in any garrison town.
In conversation with the bishop, Spangenberg, I mention'd this my
surprise; for, knowing they had obtained an act of Parliament exempting
them from military duties in the colonies, I had suppos'd they were
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms. He answer'd me that it was
not one of their established principles, but that, at the time of their
obtaining that act, it was thought to be a principle with many of their
people. On this occasion, however, they, to their surprise, found it
adopted by but a few. It seems they were either deceiv'd in themselves,
or deceiv'd the Parliament; but common sense, aided by present danger,
will sometimes be too strong for whimsical opinions.

It was the beginning of January when we set out upon this business of
building forts. I sent one detachment toward the Minisink, with
instructions to erect one for the security of that upper part of the
country, and another to the lower part, with similar instructions; and I
concluded to go myself with the rest of my force to Gnadenhut, where a
fort was tho't more immediately necessary. The Moravians procur'd me
five waggons for our tools, stores, baggage, etc.

Just before we left Bethlehem, eleven farmers, who had been driven from
their plantations by the Indians, came to me requesting a supply of
firearms, that they might go back and fetch off their cattle. I gave
them each a gun with suitable ammunition. We had not march'd many miles
before it began to rain, and it continued raining all day; there were no
habitations on the road to shelter us, till we arriv'd near night at the
house of a German, where, and in his barn, we were all huddled together,
as wet as water could make us. It was well we were not attack'd in our
march, for our arms were of the most ordinary sort, and our men could
not keep their gun locks dry. The Indians are dextrous in contrivances
for that purpose, which we had not. They met that day the eleven poor
farmers above mentioned, and killed ten of them. The one who escap'd
inform'd that his and his companions' guns would not go off, the priming
being wet with the rain.

The next day being fair, we continu'd our march, and arriv'd at the
desolated Gnadenhut. There was a saw-mill near, round which were left
several piles of boards, with which we soon hutted ourselves; an
operation the more necessary at that inclement season, as we had no
tents. Our first work was to bury more effectually the dead we found
there, who had been half interr'd by the country people.

The next morning our fort was plann'd and mark'd out, the circumference
measuring four hundred and fifty-five feet, which would require as many
palisades to be made of trees, one with another, of a foot diameter
each. Our axes, of which we had seventy, were immediately set to work to
cut down trees, and, our men being dextrous in the use of them, great
despatch was made. Seeing the trees fall so fast, I had the curiosity to
look at my watch when two men began to cut at a pine; in six minutes
they had it upon the ground, and I found it of fourteen inches diameter.
Each pine made three palisades of eighteen feet long, pointed at one
end. While these were preparing, our other men dug a trench all round,
of three feet deep, in which the palisades were to be planted; and, our
waggons, the bodys being taken off, and the fore and hind wheels
separated by taking out the pin which united the two parts of the perch,
we had ten carriages, with two horses each, to bring the palisades from
the woods to the spot. When they were set up, our carpenters built a
stage of boards all round within, about six feet high, for the men to
stand on when to fire thro' the loopholes. We had one swivel gun, which
we mounted on one of the angles, and fir'd it as soon as fix'd, to let
the Indians know, if any were within hearing, that we had such pieces;
and thus our fort, if such a magnificent name may be given to so
miserable a stockade, was finish'd in a week, though it rain'd so hard
every other day that the men could not work.

This gave me occasion to observe, that, when men are employ'd, they are
best content'd; for on the days they worked they were good-natur'd and
cheerful, and, with the consciousness of having done a good day's work,
they spent the evening jollily; but on our idle days they were mutinous
and quarrelsome, finding fault with their pork, the bread, etc., and in
continual ill-humor, which put me in mind of a sea-captain, whose rule
it was to keep his men constantly at work; and, when his mate once told
him that they had done every thing, and there was nothing further to
employ them about, "Oh," says he, "Make them scour the anchor."

This kind of fort, however contemptible, is a sufficient defense against
Indians, who have no cannon. Finding ourselves now posted securely, and
having a place to retreat to on occasion, we ventur'd out in parties to
scour the adjacent country. We met with no Indians, but we found the
places on the neighboring hills where they had lain to watch our
proceedings. There was an art in their contrivance of those places, that
seems worth mention. It being winter, a fire was necessary for them; but
a common fire on the surface of the ground would by its light have
discovered their position at a distance. They had therefore dug holes in
the ground about three feet diameter, and somewhat deeper; we saw where
they had with their hatchets cut off the charcoal from the sides of
burnt logs lying in the woods. With these coals they had made small
fires in the bottom of the holes, and we observ'd among the weeds and
grass the prints of their bodies, made by their laying all round, with
their legs hanging down in the holes to keep their feet warm, which,
with them, is an essential point. This kind of fire, so manag'd, could
not discover them, either by its light, flame, sparks, or even smoke: it
appear'd that their number was not great, and it seems they saw we were
too many to be attacked by them with prospect of advantage.

We had for our chaplain a zealous Presbyterian minister, Mr. Beatty, who
complained to me that the men did not generally attend his prayers and
exhortations. When they enlisted, they were promised, besides pay and
provisions, a gill of rum a day, which was punctually serv'd out to
them, half in the morning, and the other half in the evening; and I
observ'd they were as punctual in attending to receive it; upon which I
said to Mr. Beatty, "It is, perhaps, below the dignity of your
profession to act as steward of the rum, but if you were to deal it out
and only just after prayers, you would have them all about you." He
liked the tho't, undertook the office, and, with the help of a few hands
to measure out the liquor, executed it to satisfaction, and never were
prayers more generally and more punctually attended; so that I thought
this method preferable to the punishment inflicted by some military laws
for non-attendance on divine service.

I had hardly finish'd this business, and got my fort well stor'd with
provisions, when I receiv'd a letter from the governor, acquainting me
that he had call'd the Assembly, and wished my attendance there, if the
posture of affairs on the frontiers was such that my remaining there was
no longer necessary. My friends, too, of the Assembly, pressing me by
their letters to be, if possible, at the meeting, and my three intended
forts being now compleated, and the inhabitants contented to remain on
their farms under that protection, I resolved to return; the more
willingly, as a New England officer, Colonel Clapham, experienced in
Indian war, being on a visit to our establishment, consented to accept
the command. I gave him a commission, and, parading the garrison, had it
read before them, and introduc'd him to them as an officer who, from his
skill in military affairs, was much more fit to command them than
myself; and, giving them a little exhortation, took my leave. I was
escorted as far as Bethlehem, where I rested a few days to recover from
the fatigue I had undergone. The first night, being in a good bed, I
could hardly sleep, it was so different from my hard lodging on the
floor of our hut at Gnaden wrapt only in a blanket or two.

While at Bethlehem, I inquir'd a little into the practice of the
Moravians: some of them had accompanied me, and all were very kind to
me. I found they work'd for a common stock, eat at common tables, and
slept in common dormitories, great numbers together. In the dormitories
I observed loopholes, at certain distances all along just under the
ceiling, which I thought judiciously placed for change of air. I was at
their church, where I was entertain'd with good musick, the organ being
accompanied with violins, hautboys, flutes, clarinets, etc. I understood
that their sermons were not usually preached to mixed congregations of
men, women, and children, as is our common practice, but that they
assembled sometimes the married men, at other times their wives, then
the young men, the young women, and the little children, each division
by itself. The sermon I heard was to the latter, who came in and were
plac'd in rows on benches; the boys under the conduct of a young man,
their tutor, and the girls conducted by a young woman. The discourse
seem'd well adapted to their capacities, and was deliver'd in a
pleasing, familiar manner, coaxing them, as it were, to be good. They
behav'd very orderly, but looked pale and unhealthy, which made me
suspect they were kept too much within doors, or not allow'd sufficient
exercise.

I inquir'd concerning the Moravian marriages, whether the report was
true that they were by lot. I was told that lots were us'd only in
particular cases; that generally, when a young man found himself
dispos'd to marry, he inform'd the elders of his class, who consulted
the elder ladies that govern'd the young women. As these elders of the
different sexes were well acquainted with the tempers and dispositions
of their respective pupils, they could best judge what matches were
suitable, and their judgments were generally acquiesc'd in; but if, for
example, it should happen that two or three young women were found to be
equally proper for the young man, the lot was then recurred to. I
objected, if the matches are not made by the mutual choice of the
parties, some of them may chance to be very unhappy. "And so they may,"
answer'd my informer, "if you let the parties chuse for themselves;"
which, indeed, I could not deny.

Being returned to Philadelphia, I found the association went on
swimmingly, the inhabitants that were not Quakers having pretty
generally come into it, formed themselves into companies, and chose
their captains, lieutenants, and ensigns, according to the new law. Dr.
B. visited me, and gave me an account of the pains he had taken to
spread a general good liking to the law, and ascribed much to those
endeavors. I had had the vanity to ascribe all to my Dialogue; however,
not knowing but that he might be in the right, I let him enjoy his
opinion, which I take to be generally the best way in such cases. The
officers, meeting, chose me to be colonel of the regiment, which I this
time accepted. I forget how many companies we had, but we paraded about
twelve hundred well-looking men, with a company of artillery, who had
been furnished with six brass field-pieces, which they had become so
expert in the use of as to fire twelve times in a minute. The first time
I reviewed my regiment they accompanied me to my house, and would salute
me with some rounds fired before my door, which shook down and broke
several glasses of my electrical apparatus. And my new honour proved not
much less brittle; for all our commissions were soon after broken by a
repeal of the law in England.

During this short time of my colonelship, being about to set out on a
journey to Virginia, the officers of my regiment took it into their
heads that it would be proper for them to escort me out of town, as far
as the Lower Ferry. Just as I was getting on horseback they came to my
door, between thirty and forty, mounted, and all in their uniforms. I
had not been previously acquainted with the project, or I should have
prevented it, being naturally averse to the assuming of state on any
occasion; and I was a good deal chagrin'd at their appearance, as I
could not avoid their accompanying me. What made it worse was, that, as
soon as we began to move, they drew their swords and rode with them
naked all the way. Somebody wrote an account of this to the proprietor,
and it gave him great offense. No such honor had been paid him when in
the province, nor to any of his governors; and he said it was only
proper to princes of the blood royal, which may be true for aught I
know, who was, and still am, ignorant of the etiquette in such cases.

This silly affair, however, greatly increased his rancour against me,
which was before not a little, on account of my conduct in the Assembly
respecting the exemption of his estate from taxation, which I had always
oppos'd very warmly, and not without severe reflections on his meanness
and injustice of contending for it. He accused me to the ministry as
being the great obstacle to the king's service, preventing, by my
influence in the House, the proper form of the bills for raising money,
and he instanced this parade with my officers as a proof of my having an
intention to take the government of the province out of his hands by
force. He also applied to Sir Everard Fawkener, the postmaster-general,
to deprive me of my office; but it had no other effect than to procure
from Sir Everard a gentle admonition.

Notwithstanding the continual wrangle between the governor and the
House, in which I, as a member, had so large a share, there still
subsisted a civil intercourse between that gentleman and myself,
and we never had any personal difference. I have sometimes since thought
that his little or no resentment against me, for the answers it was
known I drew up to his messages, might be the effect of professional
habit, and that, being bred a lawyer, he might consider us both as
merely advocates for contending clients in a suit, he for the
proprietaries and I for the Assembly. He would, therefore, sometimes
call in a friendly way to advise with me on difficult points, and
sometimes, tho' not often, take my advice.

We acted in concert to supply Braddock's army with provisions; and, when
the shocking news arrived of his defeat, the governor sent in haste for
me, to consult with him on measures for preventing the desertion of the
back counties. I forget now the advice I gave; but I think it was, that
Dunbar should be written to, and prevail'd with, if possible, to post
his troops on the frontiers for their protection, till, by
re-enforcements from the colonies, he might be able to proceed on the
expedition. And, after my return from the frontier, he would have had me
undertake the conduct of such an expedition with provincial troops, for
the reduction of Fort Duquesne, Dunbar and his men being otherwise
employed; and he proposed to commission me as general. I had not so good
an opinion of my military abilities as he profess'd to have, and I
believe his professions must have exceeded his real sentiments; but
probably he might think that my popularity would facilitate the raising
of the men, and my influence in Assembly, the grant of money to pay
them, and that, perhaps, without taxing the proprietary estate. Finding
me not so forward to engage as he expected, the project was dropt, and
he soon after left the government, being superseded by Captain Denny.

Before I proceed in relating the part I had in public affairs under this
new governor's administration, it may not be amiss here to give some
account of the rise and progress of my philosophical reputation.

In 1746, being at Boston, I met there with a Dr. Spence, who was lately
arrived from Scotland, and show'd me some electric experiments. They
were imperfectly perform'd, as he was not very expert; but, being on a
subject quite new to me, they equally surpris'd and pleased me. Soon
after my return to Philadelphia, our library company receiv'd from Mr.
P. Collinson, Fellow of the Royal Society of London, a present of a
glass tube, with some account of the use of it in making such
experiments. I eagerly seized the opportunity of repeating what I had
seen at Boston; and, by much practice, acquir'd great readiness in
performing those, also, which we had an account of from England, adding
a number of new ones. I say much practice, for my house was continually
full, for some time, with people who came to see these new wonders.

To divide a little this incumbrance among my friends, I caused a number
of similar tubes to be blown at our glass-house, with which they
furnish'd themselves, so that we had at length several performers. Among
these, the principal was Mr. Kinnersley, an ingenious neighbor, who,
being out of business, I encouraged to undertake showing the experiments
for money, and drew up for him two lectures, in which the experiments
were rang'd in such order, and accompanied with such explanations in
such method, as that the foregoing should assist in comprehending the
following. He procur'd an elegant apparatus for the purpose, in which
all the little machines that I had roughly made for myself were nicely
form'd by instrument-makers. His lectures were well attended, and gave
great satisfaction; and after some time he went thro' the colonies,
exhibiting them in every capital town, and pick'd up some money. In the
West India islands, indeed, it was with difficulty the experiments could
be made, from the general moisture of the air.

Oblig'd as we were to Mr. Collinson for his present of the tube, etc., I
thought it right he should be inform'd of our success in using it, and
wrote him several letters containing accounts of our experiments. He got
them read in the Royal Society, where they were not at first thought
worth so much notice as to be printed in their Transactions. One paper,
which I wrote for Mr. Kinnersley, on the sameness of lightning with
electricity, I sent to Dr. Mitchel, an acquaintance of mine, and one of
the members also of that society, who wrote me word that it had been
read, but was laughed at by the connoisseurs. The papers, however, being
shown to Dr. Fothergill, he thought them of too much value to be
stifled, and advis'd the printing of them. Mr. Collinson then gave them
to Cave for publication in his Gentleman's Magazine; but he chose to
print them separately in a pamphlet, and Dr. Fothergill wrote the
preface. Cave, it seems, judged rightly for his profit, for by the
additions that arrived after they swell'd to a quarto volume, which has
had five editions, and cost him nothing for copy-money.

It was, however, some time before those papers were much taken notice of
in England. A copy of them happening to fall into the hands of the Count
de Buffon, a philosopher deservedly of great reputation in France, and,
indeed, all over Europe, he prevailed with M. Dalibard to translate them
into French, and they were printed at Paris. The publication offended
the Abbé Nollet, preceptor in Natural Philosophy to the royal family,
and an able experimenter, who had form'd and publish'd a theory of
electricity, which then had the general vogue. He could not at first
believe that such a work came from America, and said it must have been
fabricated by his enemies at Paris, to decry his system. Afterwards,
having been assur'd that there really existed such a person as Franklin
at Philadelphia, which he had doubted, he wrote and published a volume
of Letters, chiefly address'd to me, defending his theory, and denying
the verity of my experiments, and of the positions deduc'd from them.

I once purpos'd answering the abbé, and actually began the answer; but,
on consideration that my writings contain'd a description of experiments
which any one might repeat and verify, and if not to be verifi'd, could
not be defended; or of observations offer'd as conjectures, and not
delivered dogmatically, therefore not laying me under any obligation to
defend them; and reflecting that a dispute between two persons, writing
in different languages, might be lengthened greatly by mistranslations,
and thence misconceptions of one another's meaning, much of one of the
abbé's letters being founded on an error in the translation, I concluded
to let my papers shift for themselves, believing it was better to spend
what time I could spare from public business in making new experiments,
than in disputing about those already made. I therefore never answered
M. Nollet, and the event gave me no cause to repent my silence; for my
friend M. le Roy, of the Royal Academy of Sciences, took up my cause and
refuted him; my book was translated into the Italian, German, and Latin
languages; and the doctrine it contain'd was by degrees universally
adopted by the philosophers of Europe, in preference to that of the
abbé; so that he lived to see himself the last of his sect, except
Monsieur B------, of Paris, his élève and immediate disciple.

What gave my book the more sudden and general celebrity, was the success
of one of its proposed experiments, made by Messrs. Dalibard and De Lor
at Marly, for drawing lightning from the clouds. This engag'd the public
attention every where. M. de Lor, who had an apparatus for experimental
philosophy, and lectur'd in that branch of science, undertook to repeat
what he called the Philadelphia Experiments; and, after they were
performed before the king and court, all the curious of Paris flocked to
see them. I will not swell this narrative with an account of that
capital experiment, nor of the infinite pleasure I receiv'd in the
success of a similar one I made soon after with a kite at Philadelphia,
as both are to be found in the histories of electricity.

Dr. Wright, an English physician, when at Paris, wrote to a friend, who
was of the Royal Society, an account of the high esteem my experiments
were in among the learned abroad, and of their wonder that my writings
had been so little noticed in England. The society, on this, resum'd the
consideration of the letters that had been read to them; and the
celebrated Dr. Watson drew up a summary account of them, and of all I
had afterwards sent to England on the subject, which he accompanied with
some praise of the writer. This summary was then printed in their
Transactions; and some members of the society in London, particularly
the very ingenious Mr. Canton, having verified the experiment of
procuring lightning from the clouds by a pointed rod, and acquainting
them with the success, they soon made me more than amends for the slight
with which they had before treated me. Without my having made any
application for that honor, they chose me a member, and voted that I
should be excus'd the customary payments, which would have amounted to
twenty-five guineas; and ever since have given me their Transactions
gratis. They also presented me with the gold medal of Sir Godfrey Copley
for the year 1753, the delivery of which was accompanied by a very
handsome speech of the president, Lord Macclesfield, wherein I was
highly honoured.

Our new governor, Captain Denny, brought over for me the
before-mentioned medal from the Royal Society, which he presented to me
at an entertainment given him by the city. He accompanied it with very
polite expressions of his esteem for me, having, as he said, been long
acquainted with my character. After dinner, when the company, as was
customary at that time, were engag'd in drinking, he took me aside into
another room, and acquainted me that he had been advis'd by his friends
in England to cultivate a friendship with me, as one who was capable of
giving him the best advice, and of contributing most effectually to the
making his administration easy; that he therefore desired of all things
to have a good understanding with me, and he begg'd me to be assur'd of
his readiness on all occasions to render me every service that might be
in his power. He said much to me, also, of the proprietor's good
disposition towards the province, and of the advantage it might be to us
all, and to me in particular, if the opposition that had been so long
continu'd to his measures was dropt, and harmony restor'd between him
and the people; in effecting which, it was thought no one could be more
serviceable than myself; and I might depend on adequate acknowledgments
and recompenses, etc., etc. The drinkers, finding we did not return
immediately to the table, sent us a decanter of Madeira, which the
governor made liberal use of, and in proportion became more profuse of
his solicitations and promises.

My answers were to this purpose: that my circumstances, thanks to God,
were such as to make proprietary favours unnecessary to me; and that,
being a member of the Assembly, I could not possibly accept of any;
that, however, I had no personal enmity to the proprietary, and that,
whenever the public measures he propos'd should appear to be for the
good of the people, no one should espouse and forward them more
zealously than myself; my past opposition having been founded on this,
that the measures which had been urged were evidently intended to serve
the proprietary interest, with great prejudice to that of the people;
that I was much obliged to him (the governor) for his professions of
regard to me, and that he might rely on every thing in my power to make
his administration as easy as possible, hoping at the same time that he
had not brought with him the same unfortunate instruction his
predecessor had been hamper'd with.

On this he did not then explain himself; but when he afterwards came to
do business with the Assembly, they appear'd again, the disputes were
renewed, and I was as active as ever in the opposition, being the
penman, first, of the request to have a communication of the
instructions, and then of the remarks upon them, which may be found in
the votes of the time, and in the Historical Review I afterward
publish'd. But between us personally no enmity arose; we were often
together; he was a man of letters, had seen much of the world, and was
very entertaining and pleasing in conversation. He gave me the first
information that my old friend Jas. Ralph was still alive; that he was
esteem'd one of the best political writers in England; had been employ'd
in the dispute between Prince Frederic and the king, and had obtain'd a
pension of three hundred a year; that his reputation was indeed small as
a poet, Pope having damned his poetry in the Dunciad; but his prose was
thought as good as any man's.

[15] The Assembly finally finding the proprietary obstinately persisted
in manacling their deputies with instructions inconsistent not only with
the privileges of the people, but with the service of the crown,
resolv'd to petition the king against them, and appointed me their agent
to go over to England, to present and support the petition. The House
had sent up a bill to the governor, granting a sum of sixty thousand
pounds for the king's use (ten thousand pounds of which was subjected to
the orders of the then general, Lord Loudoun), which the governor
absolutely refus'd to pass, in compliance with his instructions.

[15] The many unanimous resolves of the Assembly--what date?--[Marg.
note.]

I had agreed with Captain Morris, of the paquet at New York, for my
passage, and my stores were put on board, when Lord Loudoun arriv'd at
Philadelphia, expressly, as he told me, to endeavor an accommodation
between the governor and Assembly, that his majesty's service might not
be obstructed by their dissensions. Accordingly, he desir'd the governor
and myself to meet him, that he might hear what was to be said on both
sides. We met and discuss'd the business. In behalf of the Assembly, I
urg'd all the various arguments that may be found in the public papers
of that time, which were of my writing, and are printed with the minutes
of the Assembly; and the governor pleaded his instructions; the bond he
had given to observe them, and his ruin if he disobey'd, yet seemed not
unwilling to hazard himself if Lord Loudoun would advise it. This his
lordship did not chuse to do, though I once thought I had nearly
prevail'd with him to do it; but finally he rather chose to urge the
compliance of the Assembly; and he entreated me to use my endeavours
with them for that purpose, declaring that he would spare none of the
king's troops for the defense of our frontiers, and that, if we did not
continue to provide for that defense ourselves, they must remain expos'd
to the enemy.

I acquainted the House with what had pass'd, and, presenting them with a
set of resolutions I had drawn up, declaring our rights, and that we did
not relinquish our claim to those rights, but only suspended the
exercise of them on this occasion thro' force, against which we
protested, they at length agreed to drop that bill, and frame another
conformable to the proprietary instructions. This of course the governor
pass'd, and I was then at liberty to proceed on my voyage. But, in the
meantime, the paquet had sailed with my sea-stores, which was some loss
to me, and my only recompense was his lordship's thanks for my service,
all the credit of obtaining the accommodation falling to his share.

He set out for New York before me; and, as the time for dispatching the
paquet-boats was at his disposition, and there were two then remaining
there, one of which, he said, was to sail very soon, I requested to know
the precise time, that I might not miss her by any delay of mine. His
answer was, "I have given out that she is to sail on Saturday next; but
I may let you know, entre nous, that if you are there by Monday morning,
you will be in time, but do not delay longer." By some accidental
hinderance at a ferry, it was Monday noon before I arrived, and I was
much afraid she might have sailed, as the wind was fair; but I was soon
made easy by the information that she was still in the harbor, and would
not move till the next day. One would imagine that I was now on the very
point of departing for Europe. I thought so; but I was not then so well
acquainted with his lordship's character, of which indecision was one of
the strongest features. I shall give some instances. It was about the
beginning of April that I came to New York, and I think it was near the
end of June before we sail'd. There were then two of the paquet-boats,
which had been long in port, but were detained for the general's
letters, which were always to be ready to-morrow. Another paquet
arriv'd; she too was detain'd; and, before we sail'd, a fourth was
expected. Ours was the first to be dispatch'd, as having been there
longest. Passengers were engag'd in all, and some extremely impatient to
be gone, and the merchants uneasy about their letters, and the orders
they had given for insurance (it being war time) for fall goods! but
their anxiety avail'd nothing; his lordship's letters were not ready;
and yet whoever waited on him found him always at his desk, pen in hand,
and concluded he must needs write abundantly.

Going myself one morning to pay my respects, I found in his antechamber
one Innis, a messenger of Philadelphia, who had come from thence express
with a paquet from Governor Denny for the General. He delivered to me
some letters from my friends there, which occasion'd my inquiring when
he was to return, and where he lodg'd, that I might send some letters by
him. He told me he was order'd to call to-morrow at nine for the
general's answer to the governor, and should set off immediately. I put
my letters into his hands the same day. A fortnight after I met him
again in the same place. "So, you are soon return'd, Innis?" "Returned!
no, I am not gone yet." "How so?" "I have called here by order every
morning these two weeks past for his lordship's letter, and it is not
yet ready." "Is it possible, when he is so great a writer? for I see him
constantly at his escritoire." "Yes," says Innis, "but he is like St.
George on the signs, always on horseback, and never rides on." This
observation of the messenger was, it seems, well founded; for, when in
England, I understood that Mr. Pitt gave it as one reason for removing
this general, and sending Generals Amherst and Wolfe, that the minister
never heard from him, and could not know what he was doing.

This daily expectation of sailing, and all the three paquets going down
to Sandy Hook, to join the fleet there, the passengers thought it best
to be on board, lest by a sudden order the ships should sail, and they
be left behind. There, if I remember right, we were about six weeks,
consuming our sea-stores, and oblig'd to procure more. At length the
fleet sail'd, the General and all his army on board, bound to Louisburg,
with intent to besiege and take that fortress; all the paquet-boats in
company ordered to attend the General's ship, ready to receive his
dispatches when they should be ready. We were out five days before we
got a letter with leave to part, and then our ship quitted the fleet and
steered for England. The other two paquets he still detained, carried
them with him to Halifax, where he stayed some time to exercise the men
in sham attacks upon sham forts, then alter'd his mind as to besieging
Louisburg, and return'd to New York, with all his troops, together with
the two paquets above mentioned, and all their passengers! During his
absence the French and savages had taken Fort George, on the frontier of
that province, and the savages had massacred many of the garrison after
capitulation.

I saw afterwards in London Captain Bonnell, who commanded one of those
paquets. He told me that, when he had been detain'd a month, he
acquainted his lordship that his ship was grown foul, to a degree that
must necessarily hinder her fast sailing, a point of consequence for a
paquet-boat, and requested an allowance of time to heave her down and
clean her bottom. He was asked how long that would require. He answer'd,
three days. The general replied, "If you can do it in one day, I give
leave; otherwise not; for you must certainly sail the day after
to-morrow." So he never obtain'd leave, though detained afterwards from
day to day during full three months.

I saw also in London one of Bonnell's passengers, who was so enrag'd
against his lordship for deceiving and detaining him so long at New
York, and then carrying him to Halifax and back again, that he swore he
would sue for damages. Whether he did or not, I never heard; but, as he
represented the injury to his affairs, it was very considerable.

On the whole, I wonder'd much how such a man came to be intrusted with
so important a business as the conduct of a great army; but, having
since seen more of the great world, and the means of obtaining, and
motives for giving places, my wonder is diminished. General Shirley, on
whom the command of the army devolved upon the death of Braddock, would,
in my opinion, if continued in place, have made a much better campaign
than that of Loudoun in 1757, which was frivolous, expensive, and
disgraceful to our nation beyond conception; for, tho' Shirley was not a
bred soldier, he was sensible and sagacious in himself, and attentive to
good advice from others, capable of forming judicious plans, and quick
and active in carrying them into execution. Loudoun, instead of
defending the colonies with his great army, left them totally expos'd
while he paraded idly at Halifax, by which means Fort George was lost,
besides, he derang'd all our mercantile operations, and distress'd our
trade, by a long embargo on the exportation of provisions, on pretence
of keeping supplies from being obtain'd by the enemy, but in reality for
beating down their price in favor of the contractors, in whose profits,
it was said, perhaps from suspicion only, he had a share. And, when at
length the embargo was taken off, by neglecting to send notice of it to
Charlestown, the Carolina fleet was detain'd near three months longer,
whereby their bottoms were so much damaged by the worm that a great part
of them foundered in their passage home.

Shirley was, I believe, sincerely glad of being relieved from so
burdensome a charge as the conduct of an army must be to a man
unacquainted with military business. I was at the entertainment given by
the city of New York to Lord Loudoun, on his taking upon him the
command. Shirley, tho' thereby superseded, was present also. There was a
great company of officers, citizens, and strangers, and, some chairs
having been borrowed in the neighborhood, there was one among them very
low, which fell to the lot of Mr. Shirley. Perceiving it as I sat by
him, I said, "They have given you, sir, too low a seat." "No matter,"
says he, "Mr. Franklin, I find a low seat the easiest."

While I was, as afore mention'd, detain'd at New York, I receiv'd all
the accounts of the provisions, etc., that I had furnish'd to Braddock,
some of which accounts could not sooner be obtain'd from the different
persons I had employ'd to assist in the business. I presented them to
Lord Loudoun, desiring to be paid the ballance. He caus'd them to be
regularly examined by the proper officer, who, after comparing every
article with its voucher, certified them to be right; and the balance
due for which his lordship promis'd to give me an order on the
paymaster. This was, however, put off from time to time; and, tho' I
call'd often for it by appointment, I did not get it. At length, just
before my departure, he told me he had, on better consideration,
concluded not to mix his accounts with those of his predecessors. "And
you," says he, "when in England, have only to exhibit your accounts at
the treasury, and you will be paid immediately."

I mention'd, but without effect, the great and unexpected expense I had
been put to by being detain'd so long at New York, as a reason for my
desiring to be presently paid; and on my observing that it was not right
I should be put to any further trouble or delay in obtaining the money I
had advanc'd, as I charged no commission for my service, "O, sir," says
he, "you must not think of persuading us that you are no gainer; we
understand better those affairs, and know that every one concerned in
supplying the army finds means, in the doing it, to fill his own
pockets." I assur'd him that was not my case, and that I had not
pocketed a farthing; but he appear'd clearly not to believe me; and,
indeed, I have since learnt that immense fortunes are often made in such
employments. As to my ballance, I am not paid it to this day, of which
more hereafter.

Our captain of the paquet had boasted much, before we sailed, of the
swiftness of his ship; unfortunately, when we came to sea, she proved
the dullest of ninety-six sail, to his no small mortification. After
many conjectures respecting the cause, when we were near another ship
almost as dull as ours, which, however, gain'd upon us, the captain
ordered all hands to come aft, and stand as near the ensign staff as
possible. We were, passengers included, about forty persons. While we
stood there, the ship mended her pace, and soon left her neighbour far
behind, which prov'd clearly what our captain suspected, that she was
loaded too much by the head. The casks of water, it seems, had been all
plac'd forward; these he therefore order'd to be mov'd further aft, on
which the ship recover'd her character, and proved the sailer in the
fleet.

The captain said she had once gone at the rate of thirteen knots, which
is accounted thirteen miles per hour. We had on board, as a passenger,
Captain Kennedy, of the Navy, who contended that it was impossible, and
that no ship ever sailed so fast, and that there must have been some
error in the division of the log-line, or some mistake in heaving the
log. A wager ensu'd between the two captains, to be decided when there
should be sufficient wind. Kennedy thereupon examin'd rigorously the
log-line, and, being satisfi'd with that, he determin'd to throw the log
himself. Accordingly some days after, when the wind blew very fair and
fresh, and the captain of the paquet, Lutwidge, said he believ'd she
then went at the rate of thirteen knots, Kennedy made the experiment,
and own'd his wager lost.

The above fact I give for the sake of the following observation. It has
been remark'd, as an imperfection in the art of ship-building, that it
can never be known, till she is tried, whether a new ship will or will
not be a good sailer; for that the model of a good-sailing ship has been
exactly follow'd in a new one, which has prov'd, on the contrary,
remarkably dull. I apprehend that this may partly be occasion'd by the
different opinions of seamen respecting the modes of lading, rigging,
and sailing of a ship; each has his system; and the same vessel, laden
by the judgment and orders of one captain, shall sail better or worse
than when by the orders of another. Besides, it scarce ever happens that
a ship is form'd, fitted for the sea, and sail'd by the same person. One
man builds the hull, another rigs her, a third lades and sails her. No
one of these has the advantage of knowing all the ideas and experience
of the others, and, therefore, can not draw just conclusions from a
combination of the whole.

Even in the simple operation of sailing when at sea, I have often
observ'd different judgments in the officers who commanded the
successive watches, the wind being the same. One would have the sails
trimm'd sharper or flatter than another, so that they seem'd to have no
certain rule to govern by. Yet I think a set of experiments might be
instituted, first, to determine the most proper form of the hull for
swift sailing; next, the best dimensions and properest place for the
masts: then the form and quantity of sails, and their position, as the
wind may be; and, lastly, the disposition of the lading. This is an age
of experiments, and I think a set accurately made and combin'd would be
of great use. I am persuaded, therefore, that ere long some ingenious
philosopher will undertake it, to whom I wish success.

We were several times chas'd in our passage, but outsail'd every thing,
and in thirty days had soundings. We had a good observation, and the
captain judg'd himself so near our port, Falmouth, that, if we made a
good run in the night, we might be off the mouth of that harbor in the
morning, and by running in the night might escape the notice of the
enemy's privateers, who often crus'd near the entrance of the channel.
Accordingly, all the sail was set that we could possibly make, and the
wind being very fresh and fair, we went right before it, and made great
way. The captain, after his observation, shap'd his course, as he
thought, so as to pass wide of the Scilly Isles; but it seems there is
sometimes a strong indraught setting up St. George's Channel, which
deceives seamen and caused the loss of Sir Cloudesley Shovel's squadron.
This indraught was probably the cause of what happened to us.

We had a watchman plac'd in the bow, to whom they often called, "Look
well out before there," and he as often answered, "Ay ay;" but perhaps
had his eyes shut, and was half asleep at the time, they sometimes
answering, as is said, mechanically; for he did not see a light just
before us, which had been hid by the studdingsails from the man at the
helm, and from the rest of the watch, but by an accidental yaw of the
ship was discover'd, and occasion'd a great alarm, we being very near
it, the light appearing to me as big as a cart-wheel. It was midnight,
and our captain fast asleep; but Captain Kennedy, jumping upon deck, and
seeing the danger, ordered the ship to wear round, all sails standing;
an operation dangerous to the masts, but it carried us clear, and we
escaped shipwreck, for we were running right upon the rocks on which the
light-house was erected. This deliverance impressed me strongly with the
utility of light-houses, and made me resolve to encourage the building
more of them in America, if I should live to return there.

In the morning it was found by the soundings, etc., that we were near
our port, but a thick fog hid the land from our sight. About nine
o'clock the fog began to rise, and seem'd to be lifted up from the water
like the curtain at a play-house, discovering underneath, the town of
Falmouth, the vessels in its harbor, and the fields that surrounded it.
This was a most pleasing spectacle to those who had been so long without
any other prospects than the uniform view of a vacant ocean, and it gave
us the more pleasure as we were now free from the anxieties which the
state of war occasion'd.

I set out immediately, with my son, for London, and we only stopt a
little by the way to view Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain, and Lord
Pembroke's house and gardens, with his very curious antiquities at
Wilton. We arrived in London the 27th of July, 1757. [16]

[16] Here terminates the Autobiography, as published by Wm. Temple
Franklin and his successors. What follows was written in the last year
of Dr. Franklin's life, and was first printed (in English) in Mr.
Bigelow's edition of 1868.--Ed.

As soon as I was settled in a lodging Mr. Charles had provided for me, I
went to visit Dr. Fothergill, to whom I was strongly recommended, and
whose counsel respecting my proceedings I was advis'd to obtain. He was
against an immediate complaint to government, and thought the
proprietaries should first be personally appli'd to, who might possibly
be induc'd by the interposition and persuasion of some private friends,
to accommodate matters amicably. I then waited on my old friend and
correspondent, Mr. Peter Collinson, who told me that John Hanbury, the
great Virginia merchant, had requested to be informed when I should
arrive, that he might carry me to Lord Granville's, who was then
President of the Council and wished to see me as soon as possible. I
agreed to go with him the next morning. Accordingly Mr. Hanbury called
for me and took me in his carriage to that nobleman's, who receiv'd me
with great civility; and after some questions respecting the present
state of affairs in America and discourse thereupon, he said to me: "You
Americans have wrong ideas of the nature of your constitution; you
contend that the king's instructions to his governors are not laws, and
think yourselves at liberty to regard or disregard them at your own
discretion. But those instructions are not like the pocket instructions
given to a minister going abroad, for regulating his conduct in some
trifling point of ceremony. They are first drawn up by judges learned in
the laws; they are then considered, debated, and perhaps amended in
Council, after which they are signed by the king. They are then, so far
as they relate to you, the law of the land, for the king is the
Legislator of the Colonies." I told his lordship this was new doctrine
to me. I had always understood from our charters that our laws were to
be made by our Assemblies, to be presented indeed to the king for his
royal assent, but that being once given the king could not repeal or
alter them. And as the Assemblies could not make permanent laws without
his assent, so neither could he make a law for them without theirs. He
assur'd me I was totally mistaken. I did not think so, however, and his
lordship's conversation having a little alarm'd me as to what might be
the sentiments of the court concerning us, I wrote it down as soon as I
return'd to my lodgings. I recollected that about 20 years before, a
clause in a bill brought into Parliament by the ministry had propos'd to
make the king's instructions laws in the colonies, but the clause was
thrown out by the Commons, for which we adored them as our friends and
friends of liberty, till by their conduct towards us in 1765 it seem'd
that they had refus'd that point of sovereignty to the king only that
they might reserve it for themselves.

After some days, Dr. Fothergill having spoken to the proprietaries, they
agreed to a meeting with me at Mr. T. Penn's house in Spring Garden. The
conversation at first consisted of mutual declarations of disposition to
reasonable accommodations, but I suppose each party had its own ideas of
what should be meant by reasonable. We then went into consideration of
our several points of complaint, which I enumerated. The proprietaries
justify'd their conduct as well as they could, and I the Assembly's. We
now appeared very wide, and so far from each other in our opinions as to
discourage all hope of agreement. However, it was concluded that I
should give them the heads of our complaints in writing, and they
promis'd then to consider them. I did so soon after, but they put the
paper into the hands of their solicitor, Ferdinand John Paris, who
managed for them all their law business in their great suit with the
neighbouring proprietary of Maryland, Lord Baltimore, which had
subsisted 70 years, and wrote for them all their papers and messages in
their dispute with the Assembly. He was a proud, angry man, and as I had
occasionally in the answers of the Assembly treated his papers with some
severity, they being really weak in point of argument and haughty in
expression, he had conceived a mortal enmity to me, which discovering
itself whenever we met, I declin'd the proprietary's proposal that he
and I should discuss the heads of complaint between our two selves, and
refus'd treating with any one but them. They then by his advice put the
paper into the hands of the Attorney and Solicitor-General for their
opinion and counsel upon it, where it lay unanswered a year wanting
eight days, during which time I made frequent demands of an answer from
the proprietaries, but without obtaining any other than that they had
not yet received the opinion of the Attorney and Solicitor-General. What
it was when they did receive it I never learnt, for they did not
communicate it to me, but sent a long message to the Assembly drawn and
signed by Paris, reciting my paper, complaining of its want of
formality, as a rudeness on my part, and giving a flimsy justification
of their conduct, adding that they should be willing to accommodate
matters if the Assembly would send out some person of candour to treat
with them for that purpose, intimating thereby that I was not such.

The want of formality or rudeness was, probably, my not having address'd
the paper to them with their assum'd titles of True and Absolute
Proprietaries of the Province of Pennsylvania, which I omitted as not
thinking it necessary in a paper, the intention of which was only to
reduce to a certainty by writing, what in conversation I had delivered
viva voce.

But during this delay, the Assembly having prevailed with Gov'r Denny to
pass an act taxing the proprietary estate in common with the estates of
the people, which was the grand point in dispute, they omitted answering
the message.

When this act however came over, the proprietaries, counselled by Paris,
determined to oppose its receiving the royal assent. Accordingly they
petition'd the king in Council, and a hearing was appointed in which two
lawyers were employ'd by them against the act, and two by me in support
of it. They alledg'd that the act was intended to load the proprietary
estate in order to spare those of the people, and that if it were
suffer'd to continue in force, and the proprietaries who were in odium
with the people, left to their mercy in proportioning the taxes, they
would inevitably be ruined. We reply'd that the act had no such
intention, and would have no such effect. That the assessors were honest
and discreet men under an oath to assess fairly and equitably, and that
any advantage each of them might expect in lessening his own tax by
augmenting that of the proprietaries was too trifling to induce them to
perjure themselves. This is the purport of what I remember as urged by
both sides, except that we insisted strongly on the mischievous
consequences that must attend a repeal, for that the money, £100,000,
being printed and given to the king's use, expended in his service, and
now spread among the people, the repeal would strike it dead in their
hands to the ruin of many, and the total discouragement of future
grants, and the selfishness of the proprietors in soliciting such a
general catastrophe, merely from a groundless fear of their estate being
taxed too highly, was insisted on in the strongest terms. On this, Lord
Mansfield, one of the counsel rose, and beckoning me took me into the
clerk's chamber, while the lawyers were pleading, and asked me if I was
really of opinion that no injury would be done the proprietary estate in
the execution of the act. I said certainly. "Then," says he, "you can
have little objection to enter into an engagement to assure that point."
I answer'd, "None at all." He then call'd in Paris, and after some
discourse, his lordship's proposition was accepted on both sides; a
paper to the purpose was drawn up by the Clerk of the Council, which I
sign'd with Mr. Charles, who was also an Agent of the Province for their
ordinary affairs, when Lord Mansfield returned to the Council Chamber,
where finally the law was allowed to pass. Some changes were however
recommended and we also engaged they should be made by a subsequent law,
but the Assembly did not think them necessary; for one year's tax having
been levied by the act before the order of Council arrived, they
appointed a committee to examine the proceedings of the assessors, and
on this committee they put several particular friends of the
proprietaries. After a full enquiry, they unanimously sign'd a report
that they found the tax had been assess'd with perfect equity.

The Assembly looked into my entering into the first part of the
engagement, as an essential service to the Province, since it secured
the credit of the paper money then spread over all the country. They
gave me their thanks in form when I return'd. But the proprietaries were
enraged at Governor Denny for having pass'd the act, and turn'd him out
with threats of suing him for breach of instructions which he had given
bond to observe. He, however, having done it at the instance of the
General, and for His Majesty's service, and having some powerful
interests at court, despis'd the threats and they were never put in
execution....