

CHAPTER I. Looking-Glass house

One thing was certain, that the WHITE kitten had had nothing to do with
it:--it was the black kitten’s fault entirely. For the white kitten had
been having its face washed by the old cat for the last quarter of
an hour (and bearing it pretty well, considering); so you see that it
COULDN’T have had any hand in the mischief.

The way Dinah washed her children’s faces was this: first she held the
poor thing down by its ear with one paw, and then with the other paw she
rubbed its face all over, the wrong way, beginning at the nose: and
just now, as I said, she was hard at work on the white kitten, which was
lying quite still and trying to purr--no doubt feeling that it was all
meant for its good.

But the black kitten had been finished with earlier in the afternoon,
and so, while Alice was sitting curled up in a corner of the great
arm-chair, half talking to herself and half asleep, the kitten had been
having a grand game of romps with the ball of worsted Alice had been
trying to wind up, and had been rolling it up and down till it had all
come undone again; and there it was, spread over the hearth-rug, all
knots and tangles, with the kitten running after its own tail in the
middle.

‘Oh, you wicked little thing!’ cried Alice, catching up the kitten, and
giving it a little kiss to make it understand that it was in disgrace.
‘Really, Dinah ought to have taught you better manners! You OUGHT,
Dinah, you know you ought!’ she added, looking reproachfully at the old
cat, and speaking in as cross a voice as she could manage--and then she
scrambled back into the arm-chair, taking the kitten and the worsted
with her, and began winding up the ball again. But she didn’t get on
very fast, as she was talking all the time, sometimes to the kitten, and
sometimes to herself. Kitty sat very demurely on her knee, pretending to
watch the progress of the winding, and now and then putting out one
paw and gently touching the ball, as if it would be glad to help, if it
might.

‘Do you know what to-morrow is, Kitty?’ Alice began. ‘You’d have guessed
if you’d been up in the window with me--only Dinah was making you tidy,
so you couldn’t. I was watching the boys getting in sticks for the
bonfire--and it wants plenty of sticks, Kitty! Only it got so cold, and
it snowed so, they had to leave off. Never mind, Kitty, we’ll go and
see the bonfire to-morrow.’ Here Alice wound two or three turns of the
worsted round the kitten’s neck, just to see how it would look: this led
to a scramble, in which the ball rolled down upon the floor, and yards
and yards of it got unwound again.

‘Do you know, I was so angry, Kitty,’ Alice went on as soon as they were
comfortably settled again, ‘when I saw all the mischief you had been
doing, I was very nearly opening the window, and putting you out into
the snow! And you’d have deserved it, you little mischievous darling!
What have you got to say for yourself? Now don’t interrupt me!’ she
went on, holding up one finger. ‘I’m going to tell you all your faults.
Number one: you squeaked twice while Dinah was washing your face this
morning. Now you can’t deny it, Kitty: I heard you! What’s that you
say?’ (pretending that the kitten was speaking.) ‘Her paw went into your
eye? Well, that’s YOUR fault, for keeping your eyes open--if you’d
shut them tight up, it wouldn’t have happened. Now don’t make any more
excuses, but listen! Number two: you pulled Snowdrop away by the tail
just as I had put down the saucer of milk before her! What, you were
thirsty, were you? How do you know she wasn’t thirsty too? Now for
number three: you unwound every bit of the worsted while I wasn’t
looking!

‘That’s three faults, Kitty, and you’ve not been punished for any of
them yet. You know I’m saving up all your punishments for Wednesday
week--Suppose they had saved up all MY punishments!’ she went on,
talking more to herself than the kitten. ‘What WOULD they do at the end
of a year? I should be sent to prison, I suppose, when the day came.
Or--let me see--suppose each punishment was to be going without a
dinner: then, when the miserable day came, I should have to go without
fifty dinners at once! Well, I shouldn’t mind THAT much! I’d far rather
go without them than eat them!

‘Do you hear the snow against the window-panes, Kitty? How nice and soft
it sounds! Just as if some one was kissing the window all over outside.
I wonder if the snow LOVES the trees and fields, that it kisses them so
gently? And then it covers them up snug, you know, with a white quilt;
and perhaps it says, “Go to sleep, darlings, till the summer comes
again.” And when they wake up in the summer, Kitty, they dress
themselves all in green, and dance about--whenever the wind blows--oh,
that’s very pretty!’ cried Alice, dropping the ball of worsted to clap
her hands. ‘And I do so WISH it was true! I’m sure the woods look sleepy
in the autumn, when the leaves are getting brown.

‘Kitty, can you play chess? Now, don’t smile, my dear, I’m asking it
seriously. Because, when we were playing just now, you watched just as
if you understood it: and when I said “Check!” you purred! Well, it WAS
a nice check, Kitty, and really I might have won, if it hadn’t been for
that nasty Knight, that came wiggling down among my pieces. Kitty, dear,
let’s pretend--’ And here I wish I could tell you half the things Alice
used to say, beginning with her favourite phrase ‘Let’s pretend.’ She
had had quite a long argument with her sister only the day before--all
because Alice had begun with ‘Let’s pretend we’re kings and queens;’ and
her sister, who liked being very exact, had argued that they couldn’t,
because there were only two of them, and Alice had been reduced at last
to say, ‘Well, YOU can be one of them then, and I’LL be all the rest.’
And once she had really frightened her old nurse by shouting suddenly in
her ear, ‘Nurse! Do let’s pretend that I’m a hungry hyaena, and you’re a
bone.’

But this is taking us away from Alice’s speech to the kitten. ‘Let’s
pretend that you’re the Red Queen, Kitty! Do you know, I think if you
sat up and folded your arms, you’d look exactly like her. Now do try,
there’s a dear!’ And Alice got the Red Queen off the table, and set it
up before the kitten as a model for it to imitate: however, the thing
didn’t succeed, principally, Alice said, because the kitten wouldn’t
fold its arms properly. So, to punish it, she held it up to the
Looking-glass, that it might see how sulky it was--‘and if you’re not
good directly,’ she added, ‘I’ll put you through into Looking-glass
House. How would you like THAT?’

‘Now, if you’ll only attend, Kitty, and not talk so much, I’ll tell you
all my ideas about Looking-glass House. First, there’s the room you can
see through the glass--that’s just the same as our drawing room, only
the things go the other way. I can see all of it when I get upon a
chair--all but the bit behind the fireplace. Oh! I do so wish I could
see THAT bit! I want so much to know whether they’ve a fire in the
winter: you never CAN tell, you know, unless our fire smokes, and then
smoke comes up in that room too--but that may be only pretence, just to
make it look as if they had a fire. Well then, the books are something
like our books, only the words go the wrong way; I know that, because
I’ve held up one of our books to the glass, and then they hold up one in
the other room.

‘How would you like to live in Looking-glass House, Kitty? I wonder if
they’d give you milk in there? Perhaps Looking-glass milk isn’t good
to drink--But oh, Kitty! now we come to the passage. You can just see a
little PEEP of the passage in Looking-glass House, if you leave the door
of our drawing-room wide open: and it’s very like our passage as far
as you can see, only you know it may be quite different on beyond.
Oh, Kitty! how nice it would be if we could only get through into
Looking-glass House! I’m sure it’s got, oh! such beautiful things in it!
Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting through into it, somehow, Kitty.
Let’s pretend the glass has got all soft like gauze, so that we can get
through. Why, it’s turning into a sort of mist now, I declare! It’ll be
easy enough to get through--’ She was up on the chimney-piece while she
said this, though she hardly knew how she had got there. And certainly
the glass WAS beginning to melt away, just like a bright silvery mist.

In another moment Alice was through the glass, and had jumped lightly
down into the Looking-glass room. The very first thing she did was
to look whether there was a fire in the fireplace, and she was quite
pleased to find that there was a real one, blazing away as brightly as
the one she had left behind. ‘So I shall be as warm here as I was in the
old room,’ thought Alice: ‘warmer, in fact, because there’ll be no one
here to scold me away from the fire. Oh, what fun it’ll be, when they
see me through the glass in here, and can’t get at me!’

Then she began looking about, and noticed that what could be seen from
the old room was quite common and uninteresting, but that all the rest
was as different as possible. For instance, the pictures on the
wall next the fire seemed to be all alive, and the very clock on
the chimney-piece (you know you can only see the back of it in the
Looking-glass) had got the face of a little old man, and grinned at her.

‘They don’t keep this room so tidy as the other,’ Alice thought to
herself, as she noticed several of the chessmen down in the hearth among
the cinders: but in another moment, with a little ‘Oh!’ of surprise, she
was down on her hands and knees watching them. The chessmen were walking
about, two and two!

‘Here are the Red King and the Red Queen,’ Alice said (in a whisper, for
fear of frightening them), ‘and there are the White King and the White
Queen sitting on the edge of the shovel--and here are two castles
walking arm in arm--I don’t think they can hear me,’ she went on, as she
put her head closer down, ‘and I’m nearly sure they can’t see me. I feel
somehow as if I were invisible--’

Here something began squeaking on the table behind Alice, and made her
turn her head just in time to see one of the White Pawns roll over and
begin kicking: she watched it with great curiosity to see what would
happen next.

‘It is the voice of my child!’ the White Queen cried out as she rushed
past the King, so violently that she knocked him over among the cinders.
‘My precious Lily! My imperial kitten!’ and she began scrambling wildly
up the side of the fender.

‘Imperial fiddlestick!’ said the King, rubbing his nose, which had been
hurt by the fall. He had a right to be a LITTLE annoyed with the Queen,
for he was covered with ashes from head to foot.

Alice was very anxious to be of use, and, as the poor little Lily was
nearly screaming herself into a fit, she hastily picked up the Queen and
set her on the table by the side of her noisy little daughter.

The Queen gasped, and sat down: the rapid journey through the air had
quite taken away her breath and for a minute or two she could do nothing
but hug the little Lily in silence. As soon as she had recovered her
breath a little, she called out to the White King, who was sitting
sulkily among the ashes, ‘Mind the volcano!’

‘What volcano?’ said the King, looking up anxiously into the fire, as if
he thought that was the most likely place to find one.

‘Blew--me--up,’ panted the Queen, who was still a little out of breath.
‘Mind you come up--the regular way--don’t get blown up!’

Alice watched the White King as he slowly struggled up from bar to bar,
till at last she said, ‘Why, you’ll be hours and hours getting to the
table, at that rate. I’d far better help you, hadn’t I?’ But the King
took no notice of the question: it was quite clear that he could neither
hear her nor see her.

So Alice picked him up very gently, and lifted him across more slowly
than she had lifted the Queen, that she mightn’t take his breath away:
but, before she put him on the table, she thought she might as well dust
him a little, he was so covered with ashes.

She said afterwards that she had never seen in all her life such a face
as the King made, when he found himself held in the air by an invisible
hand, and being dusted: he was far too much astonished to cry out, but
his eyes and his mouth went on getting larger and larger, and rounder
and rounder, till her hand shook so with laughing that she nearly let
him drop upon the floor.

‘Oh! PLEASE don’t make such faces, my dear!’ she cried out, quite
forgetting that the King couldn’t hear her. ‘You make me laugh so that
I can hardly hold you! And don’t keep your mouth so wide open! All the
ashes will get into it--there, now I think you’re tidy enough!’ she
added, as she smoothed his hair, and set him upon the table near the
Queen.

The King immediately fell flat on his back, and lay perfectly still: and
Alice was a little alarmed at what she had done, and went round the room
to see if she could find any water to throw over him. However, she could
find nothing but a bottle of ink, and when she got back with it she
found he had recovered, and he and the Queen were talking together in a
frightened whisper--so low, that Alice could hardly hear what they said.

The King was saying, ‘I assure, you my dear, I turned cold to the very
ends of my whiskers!’

To which the Queen replied, ‘You haven’t got any whiskers.’

‘The horror of that moment,’ the King went on, ‘I shall never, NEVER
forget!’

‘You will, though,’ the Queen said, ‘if you don’t make a memorandum of
it.’

Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous
memorandum-book out of his pocket, and began writing. A sudden thought
struck her, and she took hold of the end of the pencil, which came some
way over his shoulder, and began writing for him.

The poor King looked puzzled and unhappy, and struggled with the pencil
for some time without saying anything; but Alice was too strong for him,
and at last he panted out, ‘My dear! I really MUST get a thinner pencil.
I can’t manage this one a bit; it writes all manner of things that I
don’t intend--’

‘What manner of things?’ said the Queen, looking over the book (in which
Alice had put ‘THE WHITE KNIGHT IS SLIDING DOWN THE POKER. HE BALANCES
VERY BADLY’) ‘That’s not a memorandum of YOUR feelings!’

There was a book lying near Alice on the table, and while she sat
watching the White King (for she was still a little anxious about him,
and had the ink all ready to throw over him, in case he fainted again),
she turned over the leaves, to find some part that she could read,
‘--for it’s all in some language I don’t know,’ she said to herself.

It was like this.


             YKCOWREBBAJ

     sevot yhtils eht dna,gillirb sawT’
      ebaw eht ni elbmig dna eryg diD
        ,sevogorob eht erew ysmim llA
       .ebargtuo shtar emom eht dnA


She puzzled over this for some time, but at last a bright thought struck
her. ‘Why, it’s a Looking-glass book, of course! And if I hold it up to
a glass, the words will all go the right way again.’

This was the poem that Alice read.


             JABBERWOCKY

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

     ‘Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
      The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
     Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
      The frumious Bandersnatch!’

     He took his vorpal sword in hand:
      Long time the manxome foe he sought--
     So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
      And stood awhile in thought.

     And as in uffish thought he stood,
      The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
     Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
      And burbled as it came!

     One, two! One, two! And through and through
      The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
     He left it dead, and with its head
      He went galumphing back.

     ‘And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?
      Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
     O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!’
      He chortled in his joy.

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.


‘It seems very pretty,’ she said when she had finished it, ‘but it’s
RATHER hard to understand!’ (You see she didn’t like to confess, even
to herself, that she couldn’t make it out at all.) ‘Somehow it seems
to fill my head with ideas--only I don’t exactly know what they are!
However, SOMEBODY killed SOMETHING: that’s clear, at any rate--’

‘But oh!’ thought Alice, suddenly jumping up, ‘if I don’t make haste I
shall have to go back through the Looking-glass, before I’ve seen what
the rest of the house is like! Let’s have a look at the garden first!’
She was out of the room in a moment, and ran down stairs--or, at least,
it wasn’t exactly running, but a new invention of hers for getting down
stairs quickly and easily, as Alice said to herself. She just kept the
tips of her fingers on the hand-rail, and floated gently down without
even touching the stairs with her feet; then she floated on through the
hall, and would have gone straight out at the door in the same way, if
she hadn’t caught hold of the door-post. She was getting a little giddy
with so much floating in the air, and was rather glad to find herself
walking again in the natural way.




CHAPTER II. The Garden of Live Flowers

‘I should see the garden far better,’ said Alice to herself, ‘if I could
get to the top of that hill: and here’s a path that leads straight to
it--at least, no, it doesn’t do that--’ (after going a few yards along
the path, and turning several sharp corners), ‘but I suppose it will
at last. But how curiously it twists! It’s more like a corkscrew than a
path! Well, THIS turn goes to the hill, I suppose--no, it doesn’t! This
goes straight back to the house! Well then, I’ll try it the other way.’

And so she did: wandering up and down, and trying turn after turn, but
always coming back to the house, do what she would. Indeed, once, when
she turned a corner rather more quickly than usual, she ran against it
before she could stop herself.

‘It’s no use talking about it,’ Alice said, looking up at the house and
pretending it was arguing with her. ‘I’m NOT going in again yet. I know
I should have to get through the Looking-glass again--back into the old
room--and there’d be an end of all my adventures!’

So, resolutely turning her back upon the house, she set out once more
down the path, determined to keep straight on till she got to the hill.
For a few minutes all went on well, and she was just saying, ‘I really
SHALL do it this time--’ when the path gave a sudden twist and shook
itself (as she described it afterwards), and the next moment she found
herself actually walking in at the door.

‘Oh, it’s too bad!’ she cried. ‘I never saw such a house for getting in
the way! Never!’

However, there was the hill full in sight, so there was nothing to be
done but start again. This time she came upon a large flower-bed, with a
border of daisies, and a willow-tree growing in the middle.

‘O Tiger-lily,’ said Alice, addressing herself to one that was waving
gracefully about in the wind, ‘I WISH you could talk!’

‘We CAN talk,’ said the Tiger-lily: ‘when there’s anybody worth talking
to.’

Alice was so astonished that she could not speak for a minute: it quite
seemed to take her breath away. At length, as the Tiger-lily only went
on waving about, she spoke again, in a timid voice--almost in a whisper.
‘And can ALL the flowers talk?’

‘As well as YOU can,’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘And a great deal louder.’

‘It isn’t manners for us to begin, you know,’ said the Rose, ‘and I
really was wondering when you’d speak! Said I to myself, “Her face has
got SOME sense in it, though it’s not a clever one!” Still, you’re the
right colour, and that goes a long way.’

‘I don’t care about the colour,’ the Tiger-lily remarked. ‘If only her
petals curled up a little more, she’d be all right.’

Alice didn’t like being criticised, so she began asking questions.
‘Aren’t you sometimes frightened at being planted out here, with nobody
to take care of you?’

‘There’s the tree in the middle,’ said the Rose: ‘what else is it good
for?’

‘But what could it do, if any danger came?’ Alice asked.

‘It says “Bough-wough!”’ cried a Daisy: ‘that’s why its branches are
called boughs!’

‘Didn’t you know THAT?’ cried another Daisy, and here they all began
shouting together, till the air seemed quite full of little shrill
voices. ‘Silence, every one of you!’ cried the Tiger-lily, waving itself
passionately from side to side, and trembling with excitement. ‘They
know I can’t get at them!’ it panted, bending its quivering head towards
Alice, ‘or they wouldn’t dare to do it!’

‘Never mind!’ Alice said in a soothing tone, and stooping down to the
daisies, who were just beginning again, she whispered, ‘If you don’t
hold your tongues, I’ll pick you!’

There was silence in a moment, and several of the pink daisies turned
white.

‘That’s right!’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘The daisies are worst of all. When
one speaks, they all begin together, and it’s enough to make one wither
to hear the way they go on!’

‘How is it you can all talk so nicely?’ Alice said, hoping to get it
into a better temper by a compliment. ‘I’ve been in many gardens before,
but none of the flowers could talk.’

‘Put your hand down, and feel the ground,’ said the Tiger-lily. ‘Then
you’ll know why.’

Alice did so. ‘It’s very hard,’ she said, ‘but I don’t see what that has
to do with it.’

‘In most gardens,’ the Tiger-lily said, ‘they make the beds too soft--so
that the flowers are always asleep.’

This sounded a very good reason, and Alice was quite pleased to know it.
‘I never thought of that before!’ she said.

‘It’s MY opinion that you never think AT ALL,’ the Rose said in a rather
severe tone.

‘I never saw anybody that looked stupider,’ a Violet said, so suddenly,
that Alice quite jumped; for it hadn’t spoken before.

‘Hold YOUR tongue!’ cried the Tiger-lily. ‘As if YOU ever saw anybody!
You keep your head under the leaves, and snore away there, till you know
no more what’s going on in the world, than if you were a bud!’

‘Are there any more people in the garden besides me?’ Alice said, not
choosing to notice the Rose’s last remark.

‘There’s one other flower in the garden that can move about like you,’
said the Rose. ‘I wonder how you do it--’ (‘You’re always wondering,’
said the Tiger-lily), ‘but she’s more bushy than you are.’

‘Is she like me?’ Alice asked eagerly, for the thought crossed her mind,
‘There’s another little girl in the garden, somewhere!’

‘Well, she has the same awkward shape as you,’ the Rose said, ‘but she’s
redder--and her petals are shorter, I think.’

‘Her petals are done up close, almost like a dahlia,’ the Tiger-lily
interrupted: ‘not tumbled about anyhow, like yours.’

‘But that’s not YOUR fault,’ the Rose added kindly: ‘you’re beginning
to fade, you know--and then one can’t help one’s petals getting a little
untidy.’

Alice didn’t like this idea at all: so, to change the subject, she asked
‘Does she ever come out here?’

‘I daresay you’ll see her soon,’ said the Rose. ‘She’s one of the thorny
kind.’

‘Where does she wear the thorns?’ Alice asked with some curiosity.

‘Why all round her head, of course,’ the Rose replied. ‘I was wondering
YOU hadn’t got some too. I thought it was the regular rule.’

‘She’s coming!’ cried the Larkspur. ‘I hear her footstep, thump, thump,
thump, along the gravel-walk!’

Alice looked round eagerly, and found that it was the Red Queen. ‘She’s
grown a good deal!’ was her first remark. She had indeed: when Alice
first found her in the ashes, she had been only three inches high--and
here she was, half a head taller than Alice herself!

‘It’s the fresh air that does it,’ said the Rose: ‘wonderfully fine air
it is, out here.’

‘I think I’ll go and meet her,’ said Alice, for, though the flowers were
interesting enough, she felt that it would be far grander to have a talk
with a real Queen.

‘You can’t possibly do that,’ said the Rose: ‘_I_ should advise you to
walk the other way.’

This sounded nonsense to Alice, so she said nothing, but set off at
once towards the Red Queen. To her surprise, she lost sight of her in a
moment, and found herself walking in at the front-door again.

A little provoked, she drew back, and after looking everywhere for the
queen (whom she spied out at last, a long way off), she thought she
would try the plan, this time, of walking in the opposite direction.

It succeeded beautifully. She had not been walking a minute before she
found herself face to face with the Red Queen, and full in sight of the
hill she had been so long aiming at.

‘Where do you come from?’ said the Red Queen. ‘And where are you going?
Look up, speak nicely, and don’t twiddle your fingers all the time.’

Alice attended to all these directions, and explained, as well as she
could, that she had lost her way.

‘I don’t know what you mean by YOUR way,’ said the Queen: ‘all the ways
about here belong to ME--but why did you come out here at all?’ she
added in a kinder tone. ‘Curtsey while you’re thinking what to say, it
saves time.’

Alice wondered a little at this, but she was too much in awe of the
Queen to disbelieve it. ‘I’ll try it when I go home,’ she thought to
herself, ‘the next time I’m a little late for dinner.’

‘It’s time for you to answer now,’ the Queen said, looking at her watch:
‘open your mouth a LITTLE wider when you speak, and always say “your
Majesty.”’

‘I only wanted to see what the garden was like, your Majesty--’

‘That’s right,’ said the Queen, patting her on the head, which Alice
didn’t like at all, ‘though, when you say “garden,”--I’VE seen gardens,
compared with which this would be a wilderness.’

Alice didn’t dare to argue the point, but went on: ‘--and I thought I’d
try and find my way to the top of that hill--’

‘When you say “hill,”’ the Queen interrupted, ‘_I_ could show you hills,
in comparison with which you’d call that a valley.’

‘No, I shouldn’t,’ said Alice, surprised into contradicting her at last:
‘a hill CAN’T be a valley, you know. That would be nonsense--’

The Red Queen shook her head, ‘You may call it “nonsense” if you like,’
she said, ‘but I’VE heard nonsense, compared with which that would be as
sensible as a dictionary!’

Alice curtseyed again, as she was afraid from the Queen’s tone that she
was a LITTLE offended: and they walked on in silence till they got to
the top of the little hill.

For some minutes Alice stood without speaking, looking out in all
directions over the country--and a most curious country it was. There
were a number of tiny little brooks running straight across it from side
to side, and the ground between was divided up into squares by a number
of little green hedges, that reached from brook to brook.

‘I declare it’s marked out just like a large chessboard!’ Alice said at
last. ‘There ought to be some men moving about somewhere--and so there
are!’ She added in a tone of delight, and her heart began to beat quick
with excitement as she went on. ‘It’s a great huge game of chess that’s
being played--all over the world--if this IS the world at all, you know.
Oh, what fun it is! How I WISH I was one of them! I wouldn’t mind being
a Pawn, if only I might join--though of course I should LIKE to be a
Queen, best.’

She glanced rather shyly at the real Queen as she said this, but her
companion only smiled pleasantly, and said, ‘That’s easily managed. You
can be the White Queen’s Pawn, if you like, as Lily’s too young to
play; and you’re in the Second Square to begin with: when you get to
the Eighth Square you’ll be a Queen--’ Just at this moment, somehow or
other, they began to run.

Alice never could quite make out, in thinking it over afterwards, how it
was that they began: all she remembers is, that they were running hand
in hand, and the Queen went so fast that it was all she could do to keep
up with her: and still the Queen kept crying ‘Faster! Faster!’ but Alice
felt she COULD NOT go faster, though she had not breath left to say so.

The most curious part of the thing was, that the trees and the other
things round them never changed their places at all: however fast they
went, they never seemed to pass anything. ‘I wonder if all the things
move along with us?’ thought poor puzzled Alice. And the Queen seemed to
guess her thoughts, for she cried, ‘Faster! Don’t try to talk!’

Not that Alice had any idea of doing THAT. She felt as if she would
never be able to talk again, she was getting so much out of breath: and
still the Queen cried ‘Faster! Faster!’ and dragged her along. ‘Are we
nearly there?’ Alice managed to pant out at last.

‘Nearly there!’ the Queen repeated. ‘Why, we passed it ten minutes ago!
Faster!’ And they ran on for a time in silence, with the wind whistling
in Alice’s ears, and almost blowing her hair off her head, she fancied.

‘Now! Now!’ cried the Queen. ‘Faster! Faster!’ And they went so fast
that at last they seemed to skim through the air, hardly touching the
ground with their feet, till suddenly, just as Alice was getting quite
exhausted, they stopped, and she found herself sitting on the ground,
breathless and giddy.

The Queen propped her up against a tree, and said kindly, ‘You may rest
a little now.’

Alice looked round her in great surprise. ‘Why, I do believe we’ve been
under this tree the whole time! Everything’s just as it was!’

‘Of course it is,’ said the Queen, ‘what would you have it?’

‘Well, in OUR country,’ said Alice, still panting a little, ‘you’d
generally get to somewhere else--if you ran very fast for a long time,
as we’ve been doing.’

‘A slow sort of country!’ said the Queen. ‘Now, HERE, you see, it takes
all the running YOU can do, to keep in the same place. If you want to
get somewhere else, you must run at least twice as fast as that!’

‘I’d rather not try, please!’ said Alice. ‘I’m quite content to stay
here--only I AM so hot and thirsty!’

‘I know what YOU’D like!’ the Queen said good-naturedly, taking a little
box out of her pocket. ‘Have a biscuit?’

Alice thought it would not be civil to say ‘No,’ though it wasn’t at all
what she wanted. So she took it, and ate it as well as she could: and it
was VERY dry; and she thought she had never been so nearly choked in all
her life.

‘While you’re refreshing yourself,’ said the Queen, ‘I’ll just take
the measurements.’ And she took a ribbon out of her pocket, marked in
inches, and began measuring the ground, and sticking little pegs in here
and there.

‘At the end of two yards,’ she said, putting in a peg to mark the
distance, ‘I shall give you your directions--have another biscuit?’

‘No, thank you,’ said Alice: ‘one’s QUITE enough!’

‘Thirst quenched, I hope?’ said the Queen.

Alice did not know what to say to this, but luckily the Queen did not
wait for an answer, but went on. ‘At the end of THREE yards I shall
repeat them--for fear of your forgetting them. At the end of FOUR, I
shall say good-bye. And at the end of FIVE, I shall go!’

She had got all the pegs put in by this time, and Alice looked on
with great interest as she returned to the tree, and then began slowly
walking down the row.

At the two-yard peg she faced round, and said, ‘A pawn goes two squares
in its first move, you know. So you’ll go VERY quickly through the Third
Square--by railway, I should think--and you’ll find yourself in the
Fourth Square in no time. Well, THAT square belongs to Tweedledum and
Tweedledee--the Fifth is mostly water--the Sixth belongs to Humpty
Dumpty--But you make no remark?’

‘I--I didn’t know I had to make one--just then,’ Alice faltered out.

‘You SHOULD have said, “It’s extremely kind of you to tell me all
this”--however, we’ll suppose it said--the Seventh Square is all
forest--however, one of the Knights will show you the way--and in the
Eighth Square we shall be Queens together, and it’s all feasting and
fun!’ Alice got up and curtseyed, and sat down again.

At the next peg the Queen turned again, and this time she said, ‘Speak
in French when you can’t think of the English for a thing--turn out your
toes as you walk--and remember who you are!’ She did not wait for Alice
to curtsey this time, but walked on quickly to the next peg, where she
turned for a moment to say ‘good-bye,’ and then hurried on to the last.

How it happened, Alice never knew, but exactly as she came to the last
peg, she was gone. Whether she vanished into the air, or whether she
ran quickly into the wood (‘and she CAN run very fast!’ thought Alice),
there was no way of guessing, but she was gone, and Alice began to
remember that she was a Pawn, and that it would soon be time for her to
move.




CHAPTER III. Looking-Glass Insects

Of course the first thing to do was to make a grand survey of the
country she was going to travel through. ‘It’s something very like
learning geography,’ thought Alice, as she stood on tiptoe in hopes of
being able to see a little further. ‘Principal rivers--there ARE none.
Principal mountains--I’m on the only one, but I don’t think it’s got any
name. Principal towns--why, what ARE those creatures, making honey down
there? They can’t be bees--nobody ever saw bees a mile off, you know--’
and for some time she stood silent, watching one of them that was
bustling about among the flowers, poking its proboscis into them, ‘just
as if it was a regular bee,’ thought Alice.

However, this was anything but a regular bee: in fact it was an
elephant--as Alice soon found out, though the idea quite took her breath
away at first. ‘And what enormous flowers they must be!’ was her next
idea. ‘Something like cottages with the roofs taken off, and stalks put
to them--and what quantities of honey they must make! I think I’ll go
down and--no, I won’t JUST yet,’ she went on, checking herself just as
she was beginning to run down the hill, and trying to find some excuse
for turning shy so suddenly. ‘It’ll never do to go down among them
without a good long branch to brush them away--and what fun it’ll be
when they ask me how I like my walk. I shall say--“Oh, I like it well
enough--“’ (here came the favourite little toss of the head), ‘“only it
was so dusty and hot, and the elephants did tease so!”’

‘I think I’ll go down the other way,’ she said after a pause: ‘and
perhaps I may visit the elephants later on. Besides, I do so want to get
into the Third Square!’

So with this excuse she ran down the hill and jumped over the first of
the six little brooks.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Tickets, please!’ said the Guard, putting his head in at the window.
In a moment everybody was holding out a ticket: they were about the same
size as the people, and quite seemed to fill the carriage.

‘Now then! Show your ticket, child!’ the Guard went on, looking angrily
at Alice. And a great many voices all said together (‘like the chorus of
a song,’ thought Alice), ‘Don’t keep him waiting, child! Why, his time
is worth a thousand pounds a minute!’

‘I’m afraid I haven’t got one,’ Alice said in a frightened tone: ‘there
wasn’t a ticket-office where I came from.’ And again the chorus of
voices went on. ‘There wasn’t room for one where she came from. The land
there is worth a thousand pounds an inch!’

‘Don’t make excuses,’ said the Guard: ‘you should have bought one from
the engine-driver.’ And once more the chorus of voices went on with ‘The
man that drives the engine. Why, the smoke alone is worth a thousand
pounds a puff!’

Alice thought to herself, ‘Then there’s no use in speaking.’ The
voices didn’t join in this time, as she hadn’t spoken, but to her
great surprise, they all THOUGHT in chorus (I hope you understand what
THINKING IN CHORUS means--for I must confess that _I_ don’t), ‘Better
say nothing at all. Language is worth a thousand pounds a word!’

‘I shall dream about a thousand pounds tonight, I know I shall!’ thought
Alice.

All this time the Guard was looking at her, first through a telescope,
then through a microscope, and then through an opera-glass. At last he
said, ‘You’re travelling the wrong way,’ and shut up the window and went
away.

‘So young a child,’ said the gentleman sitting opposite to her (he was
dressed in white paper), ‘ought to know which way she’s going, even if
she doesn’t know her own name!’

A Goat, that was sitting next to the gentleman in white, shut his
eyes and said in a loud voice, ‘She ought to know her way to the
ticket-office, even if she doesn’t know her alphabet!’

There was a Beetle sitting next to the Goat (it was a very queer
carriage-full of passengers altogether), and, as the rule seemed to be
that they should all speak in turn, HE went on with ‘She’ll have to go
back from here as luggage!’

Alice couldn’t see who was sitting beyond the Beetle, but a hoarse voice
spoke next. ‘Change engines--’ it said, and was obliged to leave off.

‘It sounds like a horse,’ Alice thought to herself. And an extremely
small voice, close to her ear, said, ‘You might make a joke on
that--something about “horse” and “hoarse,” you know.’

Then a very gentle voice in the distance said, ‘She must be labelled
“Lass, with care,” you know--’

And after that other voices went on (‘What a number of people there are
in the carriage!’ thought Alice), saying, ‘She must go by post, as she’s
got a head on her--’ ‘She must be sent as a message by the telegraph--’
‘She must draw the train herself the rest of the way--’ and so on.

But the gentleman dressed in white paper leaned forwards and whispered
in her ear, ‘Never mind what they all say, my dear, but take a
return-ticket every time the train stops.’

‘Indeed I shan’t!’ Alice said rather impatiently. ‘I don’t belong to
this railway journey at all--I was in a wood just now--and I wish I
could get back there.’

‘You might make a joke on THAT,’ said the little voice close to her ear:
‘something about “you WOULD if you could,” you know.’

‘Don’t tease so,’ said Alice, looking about in vain to see where the
voice came from; ‘if you’re so anxious to have a joke made, why don’t
you make one yourself?’

The little voice sighed deeply: it was VERY unhappy, evidently, and
Alice would have said something pitying to comfort it, ‘If it would only
sigh like other people!’ she thought. But this was such a wonderfully
small sigh, that she wouldn’t have heard it at all, if it hadn’t come
QUITE close to her ear. The consequence of this was that it tickled her
ear very much, and quite took off her thoughts from the unhappiness of
the poor little creature.

‘I know you are a friend,’ the little voice went on; ‘a dear friend, and
an old friend. And you won’t hurt me, though I AM an insect.’

‘What kind of insect?’ Alice inquired a little anxiously. What she
really wanted to know was, whether it could sting or not, but she
thought this wouldn’t be quite a civil question to ask.

‘What, then you don’t--’ the little voice began, when it was drowned by
a shrill scream from the engine, and everybody jumped up in alarm, Alice
among the rest.

The Horse, who had put his head out of the window, quietly drew it in
and said, ‘It’s only a brook we have to jump over.’ Everybody seemed
satisfied with this, though Alice felt a little nervous at the idea of
trains jumping at all. ‘However, it’ll take us into the Fourth Square,
that’s some comfort!’ she said to herself. In another moment she felt
the carriage rise straight up into the air, and in her fright she caught
at the thing nearest to her hand, which happened to be the Goat’s beard.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

But the beard seemed to melt away as she touched it, and she found
herself sitting quietly under a tree--while the Gnat (for that was the
insect she had been talking to) was balancing itself on a twig just over
her head, and fanning her with its wings.

It certainly was a VERY large Gnat: ‘about the size of a chicken,’ Alice
thought. Still, she couldn’t feel nervous with it, after they had been
talking together so long.

‘--then you don’t like all insects?’ the Gnat went on, as quietly as if
nothing had happened.

‘I like them when they can talk,’ Alice said. ‘None of them ever talk,
where _I_ come from.’

‘What sort of insects do you rejoice in, where YOU come from?’ the Gnat
inquired.

‘I don’t REJOICE in insects at all,’ Alice explained, ‘because I’m
rather afraid of them--at least the large kinds. But I can tell you the
names of some of them.’

‘Of course they answer to their names?’ the Gnat remarked carelessly.

‘I never knew them to do it.’

‘What’s the use of their having names,’ the Gnat said, ‘if they won’t
answer to them?’

‘No use to THEM,’ said Alice; ‘but it’s useful to the people who name
them, I suppose. If not, why do things have names at all?’

‘I can’t say,’ the Gnat replied. ‘Further on, in the wood down there,
they’ve got no names--however, go on with your list of insects: you’re
wasting time.’

‘Well, there’s the Horse-fly,’ Alice began, counting off the names on
her fingers.

‘All right,’ said the Gnat: ‘half way up that bush, you’ll see a
Rocking-horse-fly, if you look. It’s made entirely of wood, and gets
about by swinging itself from branch to branch.’

‘What does it live on?’ Alice asked, with great curiosity.

‘Sap and sawdust,’ said the Gnat. ‘Go on with the list.’

Alice looked up at the Rocking-horse-fly with great interest, and made
up her mind that it must have been just repainted, it looked so bright
and sticky; and then she went on.

‘And there’s the Dragon-fly.’

‘Look on the branch above your head,’ said the Gnat, ‘and there you’ll
find a snap-dragon-fly. Its body is made of plum-pudding, its wings of
holly-leaves, and its head is a raisin burning in brandy.’

‘And what does it live on?’

‘Frumenty and mince pie,’ the Gnat replied; ‘and it makes its nest in a
Christmas box.’

‘And then there’s the Butterfly,’ Alice went on, after she had taken
a good look at the insect with its head on fire, and had thought to
herself, ‘I wonder if that’s the reason insects are so fond of flying
into candles--because they want to turn into Snap-dragon-flies!’

‘Crawling at your feet,’ said the Gnat (Alice drew her feet back in
some alarm), ‘you may observe a Bread-and-Butterfly. Its wings are thin
slices of Bread-and-butter, its body is a crust, and its head is a lump
of sugar.’

‘And what does IT live on?’

‘Weak tea with cream in it.’

A new difficulty came into Alice’s head. ‘Supposing it couldn’t find
any?’ she suggested.

‘Then it would die, of course.’

‘But that must happen very often,’ Alice remarked thoughtfully.

‘It always happens,’ said the Gnat.

After this, Alice was silent for a minute or two, pondering. The Gnat
amused itself meanwhile by humming round and round her head: at last
it settled again and remarked, ‘I suppose you don’t want to lose your
name?’

‘No, indeed,’ Alice said, a little anxiously.

‘And yet I don’t know,’ the Gnat went on in a careless tone: ‘only think
how convenient it would be if you could manage to go home without it!
For instance, if the governess wanted to call you to your lessons, she
would call out “come here--,” and there she would have to leave off,
because there wouldn’t be any name for her to call, and of course you
wouldn’t have to go, you know.’

‘That would never do, I’m sure,’ said Alice: ‘the governess would never
think of excusing me lessons for that. If she couldn’t remember my name,
she’d call me “Miss!” as the servants do.’

‘Well, if she said “Miss,” and didn’t say anything more,’ the Gnat
remarked, ‘of course you’d miss your lessons. That’s a joke. I wish YOU
had made it.’

‘Why do you wish _I_ had made it?’ Alice asked. ‘It’s a very bad one.’

But the Gnat only sighed deeply, while two large tears came rolling down
its cheeks.

‘You shouldn’t make jokes,’ Alice said, ‘if it makes you so unhappy.’

Then came another of those melancholy little sighs, and this time the
poor Gnat really seemed to have sighed itself away, for, when Alice
looked up, there was nothing whatever to be seen on the twig, and, as
she was getting quite chilly with sitting still so long, she got up and
walked on.

She very soon came to an open field, with a wood on the other side of
it: it looked much darker than the last wood, and Alice felt a LITTLE
timid about going into it. However, on second thoughts, she made up her
mind to go on: ‘for I certainly won’t go BACK,’ she thought to herself,
and this was the only way to the Eighth Square.

‘This must be the wood,’ she said thoughtfully to herself, ‘where
things have no names. I wonder what’ll become of MY name when I go in?
I shouldn’t like to lose it at all--because they’d have to give me
another, and it would be almost certain to be an ugly one. But then
the fun would be trying to find the creature that had got my old
name! That’s just like the advertisements, you know, when people lose
dogs--“ANSWERS TO THE NAME OF ‘DASH:’ HAD ON A BRASS COLLAR”--just fancy
calling everything you met “Alice,” till one of them answered! Only they
wouldn’t answer at all, if they were wise.’

She was rambling on in this way when she reached the wood: it looked
very cool and shady. ‘Well, at any rate it’s a great comfort,’ she
said as she stepped under the trees, ‘after being so hot, to get into
the--into WHAT?’ she went on, rather surprised at not being able to
think of the word. ‘I mean to get under the--under the--under THIS, you
know!’ putting her hand on the trunk of the tree. ‘What DOES it call
itself, I wonder? I do believe it’s got no name--why, to be sure it
hasn’t!’

She stood silent for a minute, thinking: then she suddenly began again.
‘Then it really HAS happened, after all! And now, who am I? I WILL
remember, if I can! I’m determined to do it!’ But being determined
didn’t help much, and all she could say, after a great deal of puzzling,
was, ‘L, I KNOW it begins with L!’

Just then a Fawn came wandering by: it looked at Alice with its large
gentle eyes, but didn’t seem at all frightened. ‘Here then! Here then!’
Alice said, as she held out her hand and tried to stroke it; but it only
started back a little, and then stood looking at her again.

‘What do you call yourself?’ the Fawn said at last. Such a soft sweet
voice it had!

‘I wish I knew!’ thought poor Alice. She answered, rather sadly,
‘Nothing, just now.’

‘Think again,’ it said: ‘that won’t do.’

Alice thought, but nothing came of it. ‘Please, would you tell me
what YOU call yourself?’ she said timidly. ‘I think that might help a
little.’

‘I’ll tell you, if you’ll move a little further on,’ the Fawn said. ‘I
can’t remember here.’

So they walked on together though the wood, Alice with her arms clasped
lovingly round the soft neck of the Fawn, till they came out into
another open field, and here the Fawn gave a sudden bound into the air,
and shook itself free from Alice’s arms. ‘I’m a Fawn!’ it cried out in a
voice of delight, ‘and, dear me! you’re a human child!’ A sudden look of
alarm came into its beautiful brown eyes, and in another moment it had
darted away at full speed.

Alice stood looking after it, almost ready to cry with vexation at
having lost her dear little fellow-traveller so suddenly. ‘However, I
know my name now.’ she said, ‘that’s SOME comfort. Alice--Alice--I won’t
forget it again. And now, which of these finger-posts ought I to follow,
I wonder?’

It was not a very difficult question to answer, as there was only one
road through the wood, and the two finger-posts both pointed along it.
‘I’ll settle it,’ Alice said to herself, ‘when the road divides and they
point different ways.’

But this did not seem likely to happen. She went on and on, a long way,
but wherever the road divided there were sure to be two finger-posts
pointing the same way, one marked ‘TO TWEEDLEDUM’S HOUSE’ and the other
‘TO THE HOUSE OF TWEEDLEDEE.’

‘I do believe,’ said Alice at last, ‘that they live in the same house! I
wonder I never thought of that before--But I can’t stay there long. I’ll
just call and say “how d’you do?” and ask them the way out of the wood.
If I could only get to the Eighth Square before it gets dark!’ So she
wandered on, talking to herself as she went, till, on turning a sharp
corner, she came upon two fat little men, so suddenly that she could not
help starting back, but in another moment she recovered herself, feeling
sure that they must be.




CHAPTER IV. Tweedledum And Tweedledee

They were standing under a tree, each with an arm round the other’s
neck, and Alice knew which was which in a moment, because one of them
had ‘DUM’ embroidered on his collar, and the other ‘DEE.’ ‘I suppose
they’ve each got “TWEEDLE” round at the back of the collar,’ she said to
herself.

They stood so still that she quite forgot they were alive, and she was
just looking round to see if the word “TWEEDLE” was written at the back
of each collar, when she was startled by a voice coming from the one
marked ‘DUM.’

‘If you think we’re wax-works,’ he said, ‘you ought to pay, you know.
Wax-works weren’t made to be looked at for nothing, nohow!’

‘Contrariwise,’ added the one marked ‘DEE,’ ‘if you think we’re alive,
you ought to speak.’

‘I’m sure I’m very sorry,’ was all Alice could say; for the words of the
old song kept ringing through her head like the ticking of a clock, and
she could hardly help saying them out loud:--


     ‘Tweedledum and Tweedledee
      Agreed to have a battle;
     For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
      Had spoiled his nice new rattle.

     Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
      As black as a tar-barrel;
     Which frightened both the heroes so,
      They quite forgot their quarrel.’

‘I know what you’re thinking about,’ said Tweedledum: ‘but it isn’t so,
nohow.’

‘Contrariwise,’ continued Tweedledee, ‘if it was so, it might be; and if
it were so, it would be; but as it isn’t, it ain’t. That’s logic.’

‘I was thinking,’ Alice said very politely, ‘which is the best way out
of this wood: it’s getting so dark. Would you tell me, please?’

But the little men only looked at each other and grinned.

They looked so exactly like a couple of great schoolboys, that Alice
couldn’t help pointing her finger at Tweedledum, and saying ‘First Boy!’

‘Nohow!’ Tweedledum cried out briskly, and shut his mouth up again with
a snap.

‘Next Boy!’ said Alice, passing on to Tweedledee, though she felt quite
certain he would only shout out ‘Contrariwise!’ and so he did.

‘You’ve been wrong!’ cried Tweedledum. ‘The first thing in a visit is to
say “How d’ye do?” and shake hands!’ And here the two brothers gave each
other a hug, and then they held out the two hands that were free, to
shake hands with her.

Alice did not like shaking hands with either of them first, for fear
of hurting the other one’s feelings; so, as the best way out of the
difficulty, she took hold of both hands at once: the next moment they
were dancing round in a ring. This seemed quite natural (she remembered
afterwards), and she was not even surprised to hear music playing: it
seemed to come from the tree under which they were dancing, and it was
done (as well as she could make it out) by the branches rubbing one
across the other, like fiddles and fiddle-sticks.

‘But it certainly WAS funny,’ (Alice said afterwards, when she was
telling her sister the history of all this,) ‘to find myself singing
“HERE WE GO ROUND THE MULBERRY BUSH.” I don’t know when I began it, but
somehow I felt as if I’d been singing it a long long time!’

The other two dancers were fat, and very soon out of breath. ‘Four times
round is enough for one dance,’ Tweedledum panted out, and they left
off dancing as suddenly as they had begun: the music stopped at the same
moment.

Then they let go of Alice’s hands, and stood looking at her for a
minute: there was a rather awkward pause, as Alice didn’t know how to
begin a conversation with people she had just been dancing with. ‘It
would never do to say “How d’ye do?” NOW,’ she said to herself: ‘we seem
to have got beyond that, somehow!’

‘I hope you’re not much tired?’ she said at last.

‘Nohow. And thank you VERY much for asking,’ said Tweedledum.

‘So much obliged!’ added Tweedledee. ‘You like poetry?’

‘Ye-es, pretty well--SOME poetry,’ Alice said doubtfully. ‘Would you
tell me which road leads out of the wood?’

‘What shall I repeat to her?’ said Tweedledee, looking round at
Tweedledum with great solemn eyes, and not noticing Alice’s question.

‘“THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER” is the longest,’ Tweedledum replied,
giving his brother an affectionate hug.

Tweedledee began instantly:

       ‘The sun was shining--’

Here Alice ventured to interrupt him. ‘If it’s VERY long,’ she said, as
politely as she could, ‘would you please tell me first which road--’

Tweedledee smiled gently, and began again:

     ‘The sun was shining on the sea,
      Shining with all his might:
     He did his very best to make
      The billows smooth and bright--
     And this was odd, because it was
      The middle of the night.

     The moon was shining sulkily,
      Because she thought the sun
     Had got no business to be there
      After the day was done--
     “It’s very rude of him,” she said,
      “To come and spoil the fun!”

     The sea was wet as wet could be,
      The sands were dry as dry.
     You could not see a cloud, because
      No cloud was in the sky:
     No birds were flying over head--
      There were no birds to fly.

     The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Were walking close at hand;
     They wept like anything to see
      Such quantities of sand:
     “If this were only cleared away,”
       They said, “it WOULD be grand!”

     “If seven maids with seven mops
      Swept it for half a year,
     Do you suppose,” the Walrus said,
      “That they could get it clear?”
      “I doubt it,” said the Carpenter,
      And shed a bitter tear.

     “O Oysters, come and walk with us!”
       The Walrus did beseech.
     “A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
      Along the briny beach:
     We cannot do with more than four,
      To give a hand to each.”

     The eldest Oyster looked at him.
      But never a word he said:
     The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
      And shook his heavy head--
     Meaning to say he did not choose
      To leave the oyster-bed.

     But four young oysters hurried up,
      All eager for the treat:
     Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
      Their shoes were clean and neat--
     And this was odd, because, you know,
      They hadn’t any feet.

     Four other Oysters followed them,
      And yet another four;
     And thick and fast they came at last,
      And more, and more, and more--
     All hopping through the frothy waves,
      And scrambling to the shore.

     The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Walked on a mile or so,
     And then they rested on a rock
      Conveniently low:
     And all the little Oysters stood
      And waited in a row.

     “The time has come,” the Walrus said,
      “To talk of many things:
     Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
      Of cabbages--and kings--
     And why the sea is boiling hot--
      And whether pigs have wings.”

     “But wait a bit,” the Oysters cried,
      “Before we have our chat;
     For some of us are out of breath,
      And all of us are fat!”
      “No hurry!” said the Carpenter.
      They thanked him much for that.

     “A loaf of bread,” the Walrus said,
      “Is what we chiefly need:
     Pepper and vinegar besides
      Are very good indeed--
     Now if you’re ready Oysters dear,
      We can begin to feed.”

     “But not on us!” the Oysters cried,
      Turning a little blue,
     “After such kindness, that would be
      A dismal thing to do!”
      “The night is fine,” the Walrus said
      “Do you admire the view?

     “It was so kind of you to come!
      And you are very nice!”
      The Carpenter said nothing but
      “Cut us another slice:
     I wish you were not quite so deaf--
      I’ve had to ask you twice!”

     “It seems a shame,” the Walrus said,
      “To play them such a trick,
     After we’ve brought them out so far,
      And made them trot so quick!”
      The Carpenter said nothing but
      “The butter’s spread too thick!”

     “I weep for you,” the Walrus said.
      “I deeply sympathize.”
      With sobs and tears he sorted out
      Those of the largest size.
     Holding his pocket handkerchief
      Before his streaming eyes.

     “O Oysters,” said the Carpenter.
      “You’ve had a pleasant run!
     Shall we be trotting home again?”
       But answer came there none--
     And that was scarcely odd, because
      They’d eaten every one.’

‘I like the Walrus best,’ said Alice: ‘because you see he was a LITTLE
sorry for the poor oysters.’

‘He ate more than the Carpenter, though,’ said Tweedledee. ‘You see he
held his handkerchief in front, so that the Carpenter couldn’t count how
many he took: contrariwise.’

‘That was mean!’ Alice said indignantly. ‘Then I like the Carpenter
best--if he didn’t eat so many as the Walrus.’

‘But he ate as many as he could get,’ said Tweedledum.

This was a puzzler. After a pause, Alice began, ‘Well! They were BOTH
very unpleasant characters--’ Here she checked herself in some alarm,
at hearing something that sounded to her like the puffing of a large
steam-engine in the wood near them, though she feared it was more likely
to be a wild beast. ‘Are there any lions or tigers about here?’ she
asked timidly.

‘It’s only the Red King snoring,’ said Tweedledee.

‘Come and look at him!’ the brothers cried, and they each took one of
Alice’s hands, and led her up to where the King was sleeping.

‘Isn’t he a LOVELY sight?’ said Tweedledum.

Alice couldn’t say honestly that he was. He had a tall red night-cap on,
with a tassel, and he was lying crumpled up into a sort of untidy heap,
and snoring loud--‘fit to snore his head off!’ as Tweedledum remarked.

‘I’m afraid he’ll catch cold with lying on the damp grass,’ said Alice,
who was a very thoughtful little girl.

‘He’s dreaming now,’ said Tweedledee: ‘and what do you think he’s
dreaming about?’

Alice said ‘Nobody can guess that.’

‘Why, about YOU!’ Tweedledee exclaimed, clapping his hands triumphantly.
‘And if he left off dreaming about you, where do you suppose you’d be?’

‘Where I am now, of course,’ said Alice.

‘Not you!’ Tweedledee retorted contemptuously. ‘You’d be nowhere. Why,
you’re only a sort of thing in his dream!’

‘If that there King was to wake,’ added Tweedledum, ‘you’d go
out--bang!--just like a candle!’

‘I shouldn’t!’ Alice exclaimed indignantly. ‘Besides, if I’M only a sort
of thing in his dream, what are YOU, I should like to know?’

‘Ditto’ said Tweedledum.

‘Ditto, ditto’ cried Tweedledee.

He shouted this so loud that Alice couldn’t help saying, ‘Hush! You’ll
be waking him, I’m afraid, if you make so much noise.’

‘Well, it no use YOUR talking about waking him,’ said Tweedledum, ‘when
you’re only one of the things in his dream. You know very well you’re
not real.’

‘I AM real!’ said Alice and began to cry.

‘You won’t make yourself a bit realler by crying,’ Tweedledee remarked:
‘there’s nothing to cry about.’

‘If I wasn’t real,’ Alice said--half-laughing through her tears, it all
seemed so ridiculous--‘I shouldn’t be able to cry.’

‘I hope you don’t suppose those are real tears?’ Tweedledum interrupted
in a tone of great contempt.

‘I know they’re talking nonsense,’ Alice thought to herself: ‘and it’s
foolish to cry about it.’ So she brushed away her tears, and went on as
cheerfully as she could. ‘At any rate I’d better be getting out of the
wood, for really it’s coming on very dark. Do you think it’s going to
rain?’

Tweedledum spread a large umbrella over himself and his brother, and
looked up into it. ‘No, I don’t think it is,’ he said: ‘at least--not
under HERE. Nohow.’

‘But it may rain OUTSIDE?’

‘It may--if it chooses,’ said Tweedledee: ‘we’ve no objection.
Contrariwise.’

‘Selfish things!’ thought Alice, and she was just going to say
‘Good-night’ and leave them, when Tweedledum sprang out from under the
umbrella and seized her by the wrist.

‘Do you see THAT?’ he said, in a voice choking with passion, and
his eyes grew large and yellow all in a moment, as he pointed with a
trembling finger at a small white thing lying under the tree.

‘It’s only a rattle,’ Alice said, after a careful examination of the
little white thing. ‘Not a rattleSNAKE, you know,’ she added hastily,
thinking that he was frightened: ‘only an old rattle--quite old and
broken.’

‘I knew it was!’ cried Tweedledum, beginning to stamp about wildly and
tear his hair. ‘It’s spoilt, of course!’ Here he looked at Tweedledee,
who immediately sat down on the ground, and tried to hide himself under
the umbrella.

Alice laid her hand upon his arm, and said in a soothing tone, ‘You
needn’t be so angry about an old rattle.’

‘But it isn’t old!’ Tweedledum cried, in a greater fury than ever. ‘It’s
new, I tell you--I bought it yesterday--my nice new RATTLE!’ and his
voice rose to a perfect scream.

All this time Tweedledee was trying his best to fold up the umbrella,
with himself in it: which was such an extraordinary thing to do, that it
quite took off Alice’s attention from the angry brother. But he couldn’t
quite succeed, and it ended in his rolling over, bundled up in the
umbrella, with only his head out: and there he lay, opening and shutting
his mouth and his large eyes--‘looking more like a fish than anything
else,’ Alice thought.

‘Of course you agree to have a battle?’ Tweedledum said in a calmer
tone.

‘I suppose so,’ the other sulkily replied, as he crawled out of the
umbrella: ‘only SHE must help us to dress up, you know.’

So the two brothers went off hand-in-hand into the wood, and returned
in a minute with their arms full of things--such as bolsters, blankets,
hearth-rugs, table-cloths, dish-covers and coal-scuttles. ‘I hope you’re
a good hand at pinning and tying strings?’ Tweedledum remarked. ‘Every
one of these things has got to go on, somehow or other.’

Alice said afterwards she had never seen such a fuss made about anything
in all her life--the way those two bustled about--and the quantity of
things they put on--and the trouble they gave her in tying strings and
fastening buttons--‘Really they’ll be more like bundles of old clothes
than anything else, by the time they’re ready!’ she said to herself, as
she arranged a bolster round the neck of Tweedledee, ‘to keep his head
from being cut off,’ as he said.

‘You know,’ he added very gravely, ‘it’s one of the most serious things
that can possibly happen to one in a battle--to get one’s head cut off.’

Alice laughed aloud: but she managed to turn it into a cough, for fear
of hurting his feelings.

‘Do I look very pale?’ said Tweedledum, coming up to have his helmet
tied on. (He CALLED it a helmet, though it certainly looked much more
like a saucepan.)

‘Well--yes--a LITTLE,’ Alice replied gently.

‘I’m very brave generally,’ he went on in a low voice: ‘only to-day I
happen to have a headache.’

‘And I’VE got a toothache!’ said Tweedledee, who had overheard the
remark. ‘I’m far worse off than you!’

‘Then you’d better not fight to-day,’ said Alice, thinking it a good
opportunity to make peace.

‘We MUST have a bit of a fight, but I don’t care about going on long,’
said Tweedledum. ‘What’s the time now?’

Tweedledee looked at his watch, and said ‘Half-past four.’

‘Let’s fight till six, and then have dinner,’ said Tweedledum.

‘Very well,’ the other said, rather sadly: ‘and SHE can watch us--only
you’d better not come VERY close,’ he added: ‘I generally hit everything
I can see--when I get really excited.’

‘And _I_ hit everything within reach,’ cried Tweedledum, ‘whether I can
see it or not!’

Alice laughed. ‘You must hit the TREES pretty often, I should think,’
she said.

Tweedledum looked round him with a satisfied smile. ‘I don’t suppose,’
he said, ‘there’ll be a tree left standing, for ever so far round, by
the time we’ve finished!’

‘And all about a rattle!’ said Alice, still hoping to make them a LITTLE
ashamed of fighting for such a trifle.

‘I shouldn’t have minded it so much,’ said Tweedledum, ‘if it hadn’t
been a new one.’

‘I wish the monstrous crow would come!’ thought Alice.

‘There’s only one sword, you know,’ Tweedledum said to his brother:
‘but you can have the umbrella--it’s quite as sharp. Only we must begin
quick. It’s getting as dark as it can.’

‘And darker,’ said Tweedledee.

It was getting dark so suddenly that Alice thought there must be a
thunderstorm coming on. ‘What a thick black cloud that is!’ she said.
‘And how fast it comes! Why, I do believe it’s got wings!’

‘It’s the crow!’ Tweedledum cried out in a shrill voice of alarm: and
the two brothers took to their heels and were out of sight in a moment.

Alice ran a little way into the wood, and stopped under a large tree.
‘It can never get at me HERE,’ she thought: ‘it’s far too large to
squeeze itself in among the trees. But I wish it wouldn’t flap its wings
so--it makes quite a hurricane in the wood--here’s somebody’s shawl
being blown away!’




CHAPTER V. Wool and Water

She caught the shawl as she spoke, and looked about for the owner: in
another moment the White Queen came running wildly through the wood,
with both arms stretched out wide, as if she were flying, and Alice very
civilly went to meet her with the shawl.

‘I’m very glad I happened to be in the way,’ Alice said, as she helped
her to put on her shawl again.

The White Queen only looked at her in a helpless frightened sort of way,
and kept repeating something in a whisper to herself that sounded like
‘bread-and-butter, bread-and-butter,’ and Alice felt that if there was
to be any conversation at all, she must manage it herself. So she began
rather timidly: ‘Am I addressing the White Queen?’

‘Well, yes, if you call that a-dressing,’ The Queen said. ‘It isn’t MY
notion of the thing, at all.’

Alice thought it would never do to have an argument at the very
beginning of their conversation, so she smiled and said, ‘If your
Majesty will only tell me the right way to begin, I’ll do it as well as
I can.’

‘But I don’t want it done at all!’ groaned the poor Queen. ‘I’ve been
a-dressing myself for the last two hours.’

It would have been all the better, as it seemed to Alice, if she had got
some one else to dress her, she was so dreadfully untidy. ‘Every
single thing’s crooked,’ Alice thought to herself, ‘and she’s all over
pins!--may I put your shawl straight for you?’ she added aloud.

‘I don’t know what’s the matter with it!’ the Queen said, in a
melancholy voice. ‘It’s out of temper, I think. I’ve pinned it here, and
I’ve pinned it there, but there’s no pleasing it!’

‘It CAN’T go straight, you know, if you pin it all on one side,’ Alice
said, as she gently put it right for her; ‘and, dear me, what a state
your hair is in!’

‘The brush has got entangled in it!’ the Queen said with a sigh. ‘And I
lost the comb yesterday.’

Alice carefully released the brush, and did her best to get the hair
into order. ‘Come, you look rather better now!’ she said, after altering
most of the pins. ‘But really you should have a lady’s maid!’

‘I’m sure I’ll take you with pleasure!’ the Queen said. ‘Twopence a
week, and jam every other day.’

Alice couldn’t help laughing, as she said, ‘I don’t want you to hire
ME--and I don’t care for jam.’

‘It’s very good jam,’ said the Queen.

‘Well, I don’t want any TO-DAY, at any rate.’

‘You couldn’t have it if you DID want it,’ the Queen said. ‘The rule is,
jam to-morrow and jam yesterday--but never jam to-day.’

‘It MUST come sometimes to “jam to-day,”’ Alice objected.

‘No, it can’t,’ said the Queen. ‘It’s jam every OTHER day: to-day isn’t
any OTHER day, you know.’

‘I don’t understand you,’ said Alice. ‘It’s dreadfully confusing!’

‘That’s the effect of living backwards,’ the Queen said kindly: ‘it
always makes one a little giddy at first--’

‘Living backwards!’ Alice repeated in great astonishment. ‘I never heard
of such a thing!’

‘--but there’s one great advantage in it, that one’s memory works both
ways.’

‘I’m sure MINE only works one way,’ Alice remarked. ‘I can’t remember
things before they happen.’

‘It’s a poor sort of memory that only works backwards,’ the Queen
remarked.

‘What sort of things do YOU remember best?’ Alice ventured to ask.

‘Oh, things that happened the week after next,’ the Queen replied in a
careless tone. ‘For instance, now,’ she went on, sticking a large piece
of plaster on her finger as she spoke, ‘there’s the King’s
Messenger. He’s in prison now, being punished: and the trial doesn’t
even begin till next Wednesday: and of course the crime comes last of
all.’

‘Suppose he never commits the crime?’ said Alice.

‘That would be all the better, wouldn’t it?’ the Queen said, as she
bound the plaster round her finger with a bit of ribbon.

Alice felt there was no denying THAT. ‘Of course it would be all
the better,’ she said: ‘but it wouldn’t be all the better his being
punished.’

‘You’re wrong THERE, at any rate,’ said the Queen: ‘were YOU ever
punished?’

‘Only for faults,’ said Alice.

‘And you were all the better for it, I know!’ the Queen said
triumphantly.

‘Yes, but then I HAD done the things I was punished for,’ said Alice:
‘that makes all the difference.’

‘But if you HADN’T done them,’ the Queen said, ‘that would have been
better still; better, and better, and better!’ Her voice went higher
with each ‘better,’ till it got quite to a squeak at last.

Alice was just beginning to say ‘There’s a mistake somewhere--,’ when
the Queen began screaming so loud that she had to leave the sentence
unfinished. ‘Oh, oh, oh!’ shouted the Queen, shaking her hand about as
if she wanted to shake it off. ‘My finger’s bleeding! Oh, oh, oh, oh!’

Her screams were so exactly like the whistle of a steam-engine, that
Alice had to hold both her hands over her ears.

‘What IS the matter?’ she said, as soon as there was a chance of making
herself heard. ‘Have you pricked your finger?’

‘I haven’t pricked it YET,’ the Queen said, ‘but I soon shall--oh, oh,
oh!’

‘When do you expect to do it?’ Alice asked, feeling very much inclined
to laugh.

‘When I fasten my shawl again,’ the poor Queen groaned out: ‘the brooch
will come undone directly. Oh, oh!’ As she said the words the brooch
flew open, and the Queen clutched wildly at it, and tried to clasp it
again.

‘Take care!’ cried Alice. ‘You’re holding it all crooked!’ And she
caught at the brooch; but it was too late: the pin had slipped, and the
Queen had pricked her finger.

‘That accounts for the bleeding, you see,’ she said to Alice with a
smile. ‘Now you understand the way things happen here.’

‘But why don’t you scream now?’ Alice asked, holding her hands ready to
put over her ears again.

‘Why, I’ve done all the screaming already,’ said the Queen. ‘What would
be the good of having it all over again?’

By this time it was getting light. ‘The crow must have flown away, I
think,’ said Alice: ‘I’m so glad it’s gone. I thought it was the night
coming on.’

‘I wish _I_ could manage to be glad!’ the Queen said. ‘Only I never
can remember the rule. You must be very happy, living in this wood, and
being glad whenever you like!’

‘Only it is so VERY lonely here!’ Alice said in a melancholy voice; and
at the thought of her loneliness two large tears came rolling down her
cheeks.

‘Oh, don’t go on like that!’ cried the poor Queen, wringing her hands in
despair. ‘Consider what a great girl you are. Consider what a long way
you’ve come to-day. Consider what o’clock it is. Consider anything, only
don’t cry!’

Alice could not help laughing at this, even in the midst of her tears.
‘Can YOU keep from crying by considering things?’ she asked.

‘That’s the way it’s done,’ the Queen said with great decision: ‘nobody
can do two things at once, you know. Let’s consider your age to begin
with--how old are you?’

‘I’m seven and a half exactly.’

‘You needn’t say “exactually,”’ the Queen remarked: ‘I can believe
it without that. Now I’ll give YOU something to believe. I’m just one
hundred and one, five months and a day.’

‘I can’t believe THAT!’ said Alice.

‘Can’t you?’ the Queen said in a pitying tone. ‘Try again: draw a long
breath, and shut your eyes.’

Alice laughed. ‘There’s no use trying,’ she said: ‘one CAN’T believe
impossible things.’

‘I daresay you haven’t had much practice,’ said the Queen. ‘When I was
your age, I always did it for half-an-hour a day. Why, sometimes I’ve
believed as many as six impossible things before breakfast. There goes
the shawl again!’

The brooch had come undone as she spoke, and a sudden gust of wind blew
the Queen’s shawl across a little brook. The Queen spread out her arms
again, and went flying after it, and this time she succeeded in catching
it for herself. ‘I’ve got it!’ she cried in a triumphant tone. ‘Now you
shall see me pin it on again, all by myself!’

‘Then I hope your finger is better now?’ Alice said very politely, as
she crossed the little brook after the Queen.

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

‘Oh, much better!’ cried the Queen, her voice rising to a squeak as she
went on. ‘Much be-etter! Be-etter! Be-e-e-etter! Be-e-ehh!’ The last
word ended in a long bleat, so like a sheep that Alice quite started.

She looked at the Queen, who seemed to have suddenly wrapped herself up
in wool. Alice rubbed her eyes, and looked again. She couldn’t make out
what had happened at all. Was she in a shop? And was that really--was it
really a SHEEP that was sitting on the other side of the counter? Rub as
she could, she could make nothing more of it: she was in a little dark
shop, leaning with her elbows on the counter, and opposite to her was
an old Sheep, sitting in an arm-chair knitting, and every now and then
leaving off to look at her through a great pair of spectacles.

‘What is it you want to buy?’ the Sheep said at last, looking up for a
moment from her knitting.

‘I don’t QUITE know yet,’ Alice said, very gently. ‘I should like to
look all round me first, if I might.’

‘You may look in front of you, and on both sides, if you like,’ said the
Sheep: ‘but you can’t look ALL round you--unless you’ve got eyes at the
back of your head.’

But these, as it happened, Alice had NOT got: so she contented herself
with turning round, looking at the shelves as she came to them.

The shop seemed to be full of all manner of curious things--but the
oddest part of it all was, that whenever she looked hard at any shelf,
to make out exactly what it had on it, that particular shelf was always
quite empty: though the others round it were crowded as full as they
could hold.

‘Things flow about so here!’ she said at last in a plaintive tone, after
she had spent a minute or so in vainly pursuing a large bright thing,
that looked sometimes like a doll and sometimes like a work-box, and was
always in the shelf next above the one she was looking at. ‘And this one
is the most provoking of all--but I’ll tell you what--’ she added, as a
sudden thought struck her, ‘I’ll follow it up to the very top shelf of
all. It’ll puzzle it to go through the ceiling, I expect!’

But even this plan failed: the ‘thing’ went through the ceiling as
quietly as possible, as if it were quite used to it.

‘Are you a child or a teetotum?’ the Sheep said, as she took up another
pair of needles. ‘You’ll make me giddy soon, if you go on turning round
like that.’ She was now working with fourteen pairs at once, and Alice
couldn’t help looking at her in great astonishment.

‘How CAN she knit with so many?’ the puzzled child thought to herself.
‘She gets more and more like a porcupine every minute!’

‘Can you row?’ the Sheep asked, handing her a pair of knitting-needles
as she spoke.

‘Yes, a little--but not on land--and not with needles--’ Alice was
beginning to say, when suddenly the needles turned into oars in her
hands, and she found they were in a little boat, gliding along between
banks: so there was nothing for it but to do her best.

‘Feather!’ cried the Sheep, as she took up another pair of needles.

This didn’t sound like a remark that needed any answer, so Alice said
nothing, but pulled away. There was something very queer about the
water, she thought, as every now and then the oars got fast in it, and
would hardly come out again.

‘Feather! Feather!’ the Sheep cried again, taking more needles. ‘You’ll
be catching a crab directly.’

‘A dear little crab!’ thought Alice. ‘I should like that.’

‘Didn’t you hear me say “Feather”?’ the Sheep cried angrily, taking up
quite a bunch of needles.

‘Indeed I did,’ said Alice: ‘you’ve said it very often--and very loud.
Please, where ARE the crabs?’

‘In the water, of course!’ said the Sheep, sticking some of the needles
into her hair, as her hands were full. ‘Feather, I say!’

‘WHY do you say “feather” so often?’ Alice asked at last, rather vexed.
‘I’m not a bird!’

‘You are,’ said the Sheep: ‘you’re a little goose.’

This offended Alice a little, so there was no more conversation for a
minute or two, while the boat glided gently on, sometimes among beds of
weeds (which made the oars stick fast in the water, worse then ever),
and sometimes under trees, but always with the same tall river-banks
frowning over their heads.

‘Oh, please! There are some scented rushes!’ Alice cried in a sudden
transport of delight. ‘There really are--and SUCH beauties!’

‘You needn’t say “please” to ME about ‘em,’ the Sheep said, without
looking up from her knitting: ‘I didn’t put ‘em there, and I’m not going
to take ‘em away.’

‘No, but I meant--please, may we wait and pick some?’ Alice pleaded. ‘If
you don’t mind stopping the boat for a minute.’

‘How am _I_ to stop it?’ said the Sheep. ‘If you leave off rowing, it’ll
stop of itself.’

So the boat was left to drift down the stream as it would, till it
glided gently in among the waving rushes. And then the little sleeves
were carefully rolled up, and the little arms were plunged in elbow-deep
to get the rushes a good long way down before breaking them off--and for
a while Alice forgot all about the Sheep and the knitting, as she
bent over the side of the boat, with just the ends of her tangled hair
dipping into the water--while with bright eager eyes she caught at one
bunch after another of the darling scented rushes.

‘I only hope the boat won’t tipple over!’ she said to herself. ‘Oh, WHAT
a lovely one! Only I couldn’t quite reach it.’ ‘And it certainly DID
seem a little provoking (‘almost as if it happened on purpose,’ she
thought) that, though she managed to pick plenty of beautiful rushes as
the boat glided by, there was always a more lovely one that she couldn’t
reach.

‘The prettiest are always further!’ she said at last, with a sigh at the
obstinacy of the rushes in growing so far off, as, with flushed cheeks
and dripping hair and hands, she scrambled back into her place, and
began to arrange her new-found treasures.

What mattered it to her just then that the rushes had begun to fade, and
to lose all their scent and beauty, from the very moment that she
picked them? Even real scented rushes, you know, last only a very little
while--and these, being dream-rushes, melted away almost like snow, as
they lay in heaps at her feet--but Alice hardly noticed this, there were
so many other curious things to think about.

They hadn’t gone much farther before the blade of one of the oars got
fast in the water and WOULDN’T come out again (so Alice explained it
afterwards), and the consequence was that the handle of it caught her
under the chin, and, in spite of a series of little shrieks of ‘Oh, oh,
oh!’ from poor Alice, it swept her straight off the seat, and down among
the heap of rushes.

However, she wasn’t hurt, and was soon up again: the Sheep went on with
her knitting all the while, just as if nothing had happened. ‘That was
a nice crab you caught!’ she remarked, as Alice got back into her place,
very much relieved to find herself still in the boat.

‘Was it? I didn’t see it,’ Said Alice, peeping cautiously over the side
of the boat into the dark water. ‘I wish it hadn’t let go--I should
so like to see a little crab to take home with me!’ But the Sheep only
laughed scornfully, and went on with her knitting.

‘Are there many crabs here?’ said Alice.

‘Crabs, and all sorts of things,’ said the Sheep: ‘plenty of choice,
only make up your mind. Now, what DO you want to buy?’

‘To buy!’ Alice echoed in a tone that was half astonished and half
frightened--for the oars, and the boat, and the river, had vanished all
in a moment, and she was back again in the little dark shop.

‘I should like to buy an egg, please,’ she said timidly. ‘How do you
sell them?’

‘Fivepence farthing for one--Twopence for two,’ the Sheep replied.

‘Then two are cheaper than one?’ Alice said in a surprised tone, taking
out her purse.

‘Only you MUST eat them both, if you buy two,’ said the Sheep.

‘Then I’ll have ONE, please,’ said Alice, as she put the money down on
the counter. For she thought to herself, ‘They mightn’t be at all nice,
you know.’

The Sheep took the money, and put it away in a box: then she said ‘I
never put things into people’s hands--that would never do--you must get
it for yourself.’ And so saying, she went off to the other end of the
shop, and set the egg upright on a shelf.

‘I wonder WHY it wouldn’t do?’ thought Alice, as she groped her way
among the tables and chairs, for the shop was very dark towards the end.
‘The egg seems to get further away the more I walk towards it. Let me
see, is this a chair? Why, it’s got branches, I declare! How very odd to
find trees growing here! And actually here’s a little brook! Well, this
is the very queerest shop I ever saw!’

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *


So she went on, wondering more and more at every step, as everything
turned into a tree the moment she came up to it, and she quite expected
the egg to do the same.




CHAPTER VI. Humpty Dumpty

However, the egg only got larger and larger, and more and more human:
when she had come within a few yards of it, she saw that it had eyes
and a nose and mouth; and when she had come close to it, she saw clearly
that it was HUMPTY DUMPTY himself. ‘It can’t be anybody else!’ she said
to herself. ‘I’m as certain of it, as if his name were written all over
his face.’

It might have been written a hundred times, easily, on that enormous
face. Humpty Dumpty was sitting with his legs crossed, like a Turk, on
the top of a high wall--such a narrow one that Alice quite wondered how
he could keep his balance--and, as his eyes were steadily fixed in the
opposite direction, and he didn’t take the least notice of her, she
thought he must be a stuffed figure after all.

‘And how exactly like an egg he is!’ she said aloud, standing with her
hands ready to catch him, for she was every moment expecting him to
fall.

‘It’s VERY provoking,’ Humpty Dumpty said after a long silence, looking
away from Alice as he spoke, ‘to be called an egg--VERY!’

‘I said you LOOKED like an egg, Sir,’ Alice gently explained. ‘And some
eggs are very pretty, you know’ she added, hoping to turn her remark
into a sort of a compliment.

‘Some people,’ said Humpty Dumpty, looking away from her as usual, ‘have
no more sense than a baby!’

Alice didn’t know what to say to this: it wasn’t at all like
conversation, she thought, as he never said anything to HER; in fact,
his last remark was evidently addressed to a tree--so she stood and
softly repeated to herself:--


     ‘Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
     Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
     All the King’s horses and all the King’s men
     Couldn’t put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.’


‘That last line is much too long for the poetry,’ she added, almost out
loud, forgetting that Humpty Dumpty would hear her.

‘Don’t stand there chattering to yourself like that,’ Humpty Dumpty
said, looking at her for the first time, ‘but tell me your name and your
business.’

‘My NAME is Alice, but--’

‘It’s a stupid enough name!’ Humpty Dumpty interrupted impatiently.
‘What does it mean?’

‘MUST a name mean something?’ Alice asked doubtfully.

‘Of course it must,’ Humpty Dumpty said with a short laugh: ‘MY name
means the shape I am--and a good handsome shape it is, too. With a name
like yours, you might be any shape, almost.’

‘Why do you sit out here all alone?’ said Alice, not wishing to begin an
argument.

‘Why, because there’s nobody with me!’ cried Humpty Dumpty. ‘Did you
think I didn’t know the answer to THAT? Ask another.’

‘Don’t you think you’d be safer down on the ground?’ Alice went on, not
with any idea of making another riddle, but simply in her good-natured
anxiety for the queer creature. ‘That wall is so VERY narrow!’

‘What tremendously easy riddles you ask!’ Humpty Dumpty growled out. ‘Of
course I don’t think so! Why, if ever I DID fall off--which there’s no
chance of--but IF I did--’ Here he pursed up his lips and looked so solemn
and grand that Alice could hardly help laughing. ‘IF I did fall,’ he
went on, ‘THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--ah, you may turn pale, if you like!
You didn’t think I was going to say that, did you? THE KING HAS PROMISED ME--
WITH HIS VERY OWN MOUTH--to--to--’

‘To send all his horses and all his men,’ Alice interrupted, rather
unwisely.

‘Now I declare that’s too bad!’ Humpty Dumpty cried, breaking into a
sudden passion. ‘You’ve been listening at doors--and behind trees--and
down chimneys--or you couldn’t have known it!’

‘I haven’t, indeed!’ Alice said very gently. ‘It’s in a book.’

‘Ah, well! They may write such things in a BOOK,’ Humpty Dumpty said in
a calmer tone. ‘That’s what you call a History of England, that is.
Now, take a good look at me! I’m one that has spoken to a King, _I_ am:
mayhap you’ll never see such another: and to show you I’m not proud, you
may shake hands with me!’ And he grinned almost from ear to ear, as he
leant forwards (and as nearly as possible fell off the wall in doing so)
and offered Alice his hand. She watched him a little anxiously as she
took it. ‘If he smiled much more, the ends of his mouth might meet
behind,’ she thought: ‘and then I don’t know what would happen to his
head! I’m afraid it would come off!’

‘Yes, all his horses and all his men,’ Humpty Dumpty went on. ‘They’d
pick me up again in a minute, THEY would! However, this conversation is
going on a little too fast: let’s go back to the last remark but one.’

‘I’m afraid I can’t quite remember it,’ Alice said very politely.

‘In that case we start fresh,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘and it’s my turn
to choose a subject--’ (‘He talks about it just as if it was a game!’
thought Alice.) ‘So here’s a question for you. How old did you say you
were?’

Alice made a short calculation, and said ‘Seven years and six months.’

‘Wrong!’ Humpty Dumpty exclaimed triumphantly. ‘You never said a word
like it!’

‘I though you meant “How old ARE you?”’ Alice explained.

‘If I’d meant that, I’d have said it,’ said Humpty Dumpty.

Alice didn’t want to begin another argument, so she said nothing.

‘Seven years and six months!’ Humpty Dumpty repeated thoughtfully. ‘An
uncomfortable sort of age. Now if you’d asked MY advice, I’d have said
“Leave off at seven”--but it’s too late now.’

‘I never ask advice about growing,’ Alice said indignantly.

‘Too proud?’ the other inquired.

Alice felt even more indignant at this suggestion. ‘I mean,’ she said,
‘that one can’t help growing older.’

‘ONE can’t, perhaps,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘but TWO can. With proper
assistance, you might have left off at seven.’

‘What a beautiful belt you’ve got on!’ Alice suddenly remarked.

(They had had quite enough of the subject of age, she thought: and if
they really were to take turns in choosing subjects, it was her turn
now.) ‘At least,’ she corrected herself on second thoughts, ‘a beautiful
cravat, I should have said--no, a belt, I mean--I beg your pardon!’ she
added in dismay, for Humpty Dumpty looked thoroughly offended, and she
began to wish she hadn’t chosen that subject. ‘If I only knew,’ she
thought to herself, ‘which was neck and which was waist!’

Evidently Humpty Dumpty was very angry, though he said nothing for a
minute or two. When he DID speak again, it was in a deep growl.

‘It is a--MOST--PROVOKING--thing,’ he said at last, ‘when a person
doesn’t know a cravat from a belt!’

‘I know it’s very ignorant of me,’ Alice said, in so humble a tone that
Humpty Dumpty relented.

‘It’s a cravat, child, and a beautiful one, as you say. It’s a present
from the White King and Queen. There now!’

‘Is it really?’ said Alice, quite pleased to find that she HAD chosen a
good subject, after all.

‘They gave it me,’ Humpty Dumpty continued thoughtfully, as he crossed
one knee over the other and clasped his hands round it, ‘they gave it
me--for an un-birthday present.’

‘I beg your pardon?’ Alice said with a puzzled air.

‘I’m not offended,’ said Humpty Dumpty.

‘I mean, what IS an un-birthday present?’

‘A present given when it isn’t your birthday, of course.’

Alice considered a little. ‘I like birthday presents best,’ she said at
last.

‘You don’t know what you’re talking about!’ cried Humpty Dumpty. ‘How
many days are there in a year?’

‘Three hundred and sixty-five,’ said Alice.

‘And how many birthdays have you?’

‘One.’

‘And if you take one from three hundred and sixty-five, what remains?’

‘Three hundred and sixty-four, of course.’

Humpty Dumpty looked doubtful. ‘I’d rather see that done on paper,’ he
said.

Alice couldn’t help smiling as she took out her memorandum-book, and
worked the sum for him:


               365
                1
               ____

               364
               ___

Humpty Dumpty took the book, and looked at it carefully. ‘That seems to
be done right--’ he began.

‘You’re holding it upside down!’ Alice interrupted.

‘To be sure I was!’ Humpty Dumpty said gaily, as she turned it round for
him. ‘I thought it looked a little queer. As I was saying, that SEEMS
to be done right--though I haven’t time to look it over thoroughly just
now--and that shows that there are three hundred and sixty-four days
when you might get un-birthday presents--’

‘Certainly,’ said Alice.

‘And only ONE for birthday presents, you know. There’s glory for you!’

‘I don’t know what you mean by “glory,”’ Alice said.

Humpty Dumpty smiled contemptuously. ‘Of course you don’t--till I tell
you. I meant “there’s a nice knock-down argument for you!”’

‘But “glory” doesn’t mean “a nice knock-down argument,”’ Alice objected.

‘When _I_ use a word,’ Humpty Dumpty said in rather a scornful tone, ‘it
means just what I choose it to mean--neither more nor less.’

‘The question is,’ said Alice, ‘whether you CAN make words mean so many
different things.’

‘The question is,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘which is to be master--that’s
all.’

Alice was too much puzzled to say anything, so after a minute Humpty
Dumpty began again. ‘They’ve a temper, some of them--particularly verbs,
they’re the proudest--adjectives you can do anything with, but not
verbs--however, _I_ can manage the whole lot of them! Impenetrability!
That’s what _I_ say!’

‘Would you tell me, please,’ said Alice ‘what that means?’

‘Now you talk like a reasonable child,’ said Humpty Dumpty, looking very
much pleased. ‘I meant by “impenetrability” that we’ve had enough of
that subject, and it would be just as well if you’d mention what you
mean to do next, as I suppose you don’t mean to stop here all the rest
of your life.’

‘That’s a great deal to make one word mean,’ Alice said in a thoughtful
tone.

‘When I make a word do a lot of work like that,’ said Humpty Dumpty, ‘I
always pay it extra.’

‘Oh!’ said Alice. She was too much puzzled to make any other remark.

‘Ah, you should see ‘em come round me of a Saturday night,’ Humpty
Dumpty went on, wagging his head gravely from side to side: ‘for to get
their wages, you know.’

(Alice didn’t venture to ask what he paid them with; and so you see I
can’t tell YOU.)

‘You seem very clever at explaining words, Sir,’ said Alice. ‘Would you
kindly tell me the meaning of the poem called “Jabberwocky”?’

‘Let’s hear it,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘I can explain all the poems that
were ever invented--and a good many that haven’t been invented just
yet.’

This sounded very hopeful, so Alice repeated the first verse:

     ‘Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
     All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

‘That’s enough to begin with,’ Humpty Dumpty interrupted: ‘there
are plenty of hard words there. “BRILLIG” means four o’clock in the
afternoon--the time when you begin BROILING things for dinner.’

‘That’ll do very well,’ said Alice: ‘and “SLITHY”?’

‘Well, “SLITHY” means “lithe and slimy.” “Lithe” is the same as
“active.” You see it’s like a portmanteau--there are two meanings packed
up into one word.’

‘I see it now,’ Alice remarked thoughtfully: ‘and what are “TOVES”?’

‘Well, “TOVES” are something like badgers--they’re something like
lizards--and they’re something like corkscrews.’

‘They must be very curious looking creatures.’

‘They are that,’ said Humpty Dumpty: ‘also they make their nests under
sun-dials--also they live on cheese.’

‘And what’s the “GYRE” and to “GIMBLE”?’

‘To “GYRE” is to go round and round like a gyroscope. To “GIMBLE” is to
make holes like a gimlet.’

‘And “THE WABE” is the grass-plot round a sun-dial, I suppose?’ said
Alice, surprised at her own ingenuity.

‘Of course it is. It’s called “WABE,” you know, because it goes a long
way before it, and a long way behind it--’

‘And a long way beyond it on each side,’ Alice added.

‘Exactly so. Well, then, “MIMSY” is “flimsy and miserable” (there’s
another portmanteau for you). And a “BOROGOVE” is a thin shabby-looking
bird with its feathers sticking out all round--something like a live
mop.’

‘And then “MOME RATHS”?’ said Alice. ‘I’m afraid I’m giving you a great
deal of trouble.’

‘Well, a “RATH” is a sort of green pig: but “MOME” I’m not certain
about. I think it’s short for “from home”--meaning that they’d lost
their way, you know.’

‘And what does “OUTGRABE” mean?’

‘Well, “OUTGRABING” is something between bellowing and whistling, with a
kind of sneeze in the middle: however, you’ll hear it done, maybe--down
in the wood yonder--and when you’ve once heard it you’ll be QUITE
content. Who’s been repeating all that hard stuff to you?’

‘I read it in a book,’ said Alice. ‘But I had some poetry repeated to
me, much easier than that, by--Tweedledee, I think it was.’

‘As to poetry, you know,’ said Humpty Dumpty, stretching out one of his
great hands, ‘_I_ can repeat poetry as well as other folk, if it comes
to that--’

‘Oh, it needn’t come to that!’ Alice hastily said, hoping to keep him
from beginning.

‘The piece I’m going to repeat,’ he went on without noticing her remark,
‘was written entirely for your amusement.’

Alice felt that in that case she really OUGHT to listen to it, so she
sat down, and said ‘Thank you’ rather sadly.


     ‘In winter, when the fields are white,
     I sing this song for your delight--


only I don’t sing it,’ he added, as an explanation.

‘I see you don’t,’ said Alice.

‘If you can SEE whether I’m singing or not, you’ve sharper eyes than
most.’ Humpty Dumpty remarked severely. Alice was silent.


     ‘In spring, when woods are getting green,
     I’ll try and tell you what I mean.’


‘Thank you very much,’ said Alice.


     ‘In summer, when the days are long,
     Perhaps you’ll understand the song:
     In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
     Take pen and ink, and write it down.’


‘I will, if I can remember it so long,’ said Alice.

‘You needn’t go on making remarks like that,’ Humpty Dumpty said:
‘they’re not sensible, and they put me out.’

     ‘I sent a message to the fish:
     I told them “This is what I wish.”

     The little fishes of the sea,
     They sent an answer back to me.

     The little fishes’ answer was
     “We cannot do it, Sir, because--“’


‘I’m afraid I don’t quite understand,’ said Alice.

‘It gets easier further on,’ Humpty Dumpty replied.


     ‘I sent to them again to say
     “It will be better to obey.”

     The fishes answered with a grin,
     “Why, what a temper you are in!”

     I told them once, I told them twice:
     They would not listen to advice.

     I took a kettle large and new,
     Fit for the deed I had to do.

     My heart went hop, my heart went thump;
     I filled the kettle at the pump.

     Then some one came to me and said,
     “The little fishes are in bed.”

     I said to him, I said it plain,
     “Then you must wake them up again.”

     I said it very loud and clear;
     I went and shouted in his ear.’


Humpty Dumpty raised his voice almost to a scream as he repeated this
verse, and Alice thought with a shudder, ‘I wouldn’t have been the
messenger for ANYTHING!’


     ‘But he was very stiff and proud;
     He said “You needn’t shout so loud!”

     And he was very proud and stiff;
     He said “I’d go and wake them, if--”

     I took a corkscrew from the shelf:
     I went to wake them up myself.

     And when I found the door was locked,
     I pulled and pushed and kicked and knocked.

     And when I found the door was shut,
     I tried to turn the handle, but--’


There was a long pause.

‘Is that all?’ Alice timidly asked.

‘That’s all,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘Good-bye.’

This was rather sudden, Alice thought: but, after such a VERY strong
hint that she ought to be going, she felt that it would hardly be civil
to stay. So she got up, and held out her hand. ‘Good-bye, till we meet
again!’ she said as cheerfully as she could.

‘I shouldn’t know you again if we DID meet,’ Humpty Dumpty replied in
a discontented tone, giving her one of his fingers to shake; ‘you’re so
exactly like other people.’

‘The face is what one goes by, generally,’ Alice remarked in a
thoughtful tone.

‘That’s just what I complain of,’ said Humpty Dumpty. ‘Your face is the
same as everybody has--the two eyes, so--’ (marking their places in the
air with this thumb) ‘nose in the middle, mouth under. It’s always the
same. Now if you had the two eyes on the same side of the nose, for
instance--or the mouth at the top--that would be SOME help.’

‘It wouldn’t look nice,’ Alice objected. But Humpty Dumpty only shut his
eyes and said ‘Wait till you’ve tried.’

Alice waited a minute to see if he would speak again, but as he never
opened his eyes or took any further notice of her, she said ‘Good-bye!’
once more, and, getting no answer to this, she quietly walked away:
but she couldn’t help saying to herself as she went, ‘Of all the
unsatisfactory--’ (she repeated this aloud, as it was a great comfort to
have such a long word to say) ‘of all the unsatisfactory people I EVER
met--’ She never finished the sentence, for at this moment a heavy crash
shook the forest from end to end.




CHAPTER VII. The Lion and the Unicorn

The next moment soldiers came running through the wood, at first in twos
and threes, then ten or twenty together, and at last in such crowds that
they seemed to fill the whole forest. Alice got behind a tree, for fear
of being run over, and watched them go by.

She thought that in all her life she had never seen soldiers so
uncertain on their feet: they were always tripping over something or
other, and whenever one went down, several more always fell over him, so
that the ground was soon covered with little heaps of men.

Then came the horses. Having four feet, these managed rather better than
the foot-soldiers: but even THEY stumbled now and then; and it seemed
to be a regular rule that, whenever a horse stumbled the rider fell off
instantly. The confusion got worse every moment, and Alice was very glad
to get out of the wood into an open place, where she found the White
King seated on the ground, busily writing in his memorandum-book.

‘I’ve sent them all!’ the King cried in a tone of delight, on seeing
Alice. ‘Did you happen to meet any soldiers, my dear, as you came
through the wood?’

‘Yes, I did,’ said Alice: ‘several thousand, I should think.’

‘Four thousand two hundred and seven, that’s the exact number,’ the King
said, referring to his book. ‘I couldn’t send all the horses, you know,
because two of them are wanted in the game. And I haven’t sent the two
Messengers, either. They’re both gone to the town. Just look along the
road, and tell me if you can see either of them.’

‘I see nobody on the road,’ said Alice.

‘I only wish _I_ had such eyes,’ the King remarked in a fretful tone.
‘To be able to see Nobody! And at that distance, too! Why, it’s as much
as _I_ can do to see real people, by this light!’

All this was lost on Alice, who was still looking intently along
the road, shading her eyes with one hand. ‘I see somebody now!’ she
exclaimed at last. ‘But he’s coming very slowly--and what curious
attitudes he goes into!’ (For the messenger kept skipping up and down,
and wriggling like an eel, as he came along, with his great hands spread
out like fans on each side.)

‘Not at all,’ said the King. ‘He’s an Anglo-Saxon Messenger--and those
are Anglo-Saxon attitudes. He only does them when he’s happy. His name
is Haigha.’ (He pronounced it so as to rhyme with ‘mayor.’)

‘I love my love with an H,’ Alice couldn’t help beginning, ‘because
he is Happy. I hate him with an H, because he is Hideous. I fed him
with--with--with Ham-sandwiches and Hay. His name is Haigha, and he
lives--’

‘He lives on the Hill,’ the King remarked simply, without the least idea
that he was joining in the game, while Alice was still hesitating for
the name of a town beginning with H. ‘The other Messenger’s called
Hatta. I must have TWO, you know--to come and go. One to come, and one
to go.’

‘I beg your pardon?’ said Alice.

‘It isn’t respectable to beg,’ said the King.

‘I only meant that I didn’t understand,’ said Alice. ‘Why one to come
and one to go?’

‘Didn’t I tell you?’ the King repeated impatiently. ‘I must have Two--to
fetch and carry. One to fetch, and one to carry.’

At this moment the Messenger arrived: he was far too much out of breath
to say a word, and could only wave his hands about, and make the most
fearful faces at the poor King.

‘This young lady loves you with an H,’ the King said, introducing Alice
in the hope of turning off the Messenger’s attention from himself--but
it was no use--the Anglo-Saxon attitudes only got more extraordinary
every moment, while the great eyes rolled wildly from side to side.

‘You alarm me!’ said the King. ‘I feel faint--Give me a ham sandwich!’

On which the Messenger, to Alice’s great amusement, opened a bag that
hung round his neck, and handed a sandwich to the King, who devoured it
greedily.

‘Another sandwich!’ said the King.

‘There’s nothing but hay left now,’ the Messenger said, peeping into the
bag.

‘Hay, then,’ the King murmured in a faint whisper.

Alice was glad to see that it revived him a good deal. ‘There’s nothing
like eating hay when you’re faint,’ he remarked to her, as he munched
away.

‘I should think throwing cold water over you would be better,’ Alice
suggested: ‘or some sal-volatile.’

‘I didn’t say there was nothing BETTER,’ the King replied. ‘I said there
was nothing LIKE it.’ Which Alice did not venture to deny.

‘Who did you pass on the road?’ the King went on, holding out his hand
to the Messenger for some more hay.

‘Nobody,’ said the Messenger.

‘Quite right,’ said the King: ‘this young lady saw him too. So of course
Nobody walks slower than you.’

‘I do my best,’ the Messenger said in a sulky tone. ‘I’m sure nobody
walks much faster than I do!’

‘He can’t do that,’ said the King, ‘or else he’d have been here first.
However, now you’ve got your breath, you may tell us what’s happened in
the town.’

‘I’ll whisper it,’ said the Messenger, putting his hands to his mouth
in the shape of a trumpet, and stooping so as to get close to the King’s
ear. Alice was sorry for this, as she wanted to hear the news too.
However, instead of whispering, he simply shouted at the top of his
voice ‘They’re at it again!’

‘Do you call THAT a whisper?’ cried the poor King, jumping up and
shaking himself. ‘If you do such a thing again, I’ll have you buttered!
It went through and through my head like an earthquake!’

‘It would have to be a very tiny earthquake!’ thought Alice. ‘Who are at
it again?’ she ventured to ask.

‘Why the Lion and the Unicorn, of course,’ said the King.

‘Fighting for the crown?’

‘Yes, to be sure,’ said the King: ‘and the best of the joke is, that
it’s MY crown all the while! Let’s run and see them.’ And they trotted
off, Alice repeating to herself, as she ran, the words of the old
song:--


   ‘The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the crown:
   The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
   Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;
   Some gave them plum-cake and drummed them out of town.’


‘Does--the one--that wins--get the crown?’ she asked, as well as she
could, for the run was putting her quite out of breath.

‘Dear me, no!’ said the King. ‘What an idea!’

‘Would you--be good enough,’ Alice panted out, after running a little
further, ‘to stop a minute--just to get--one’s breath again?’

‘I’m GOOD enough,’ the King said, ‘only I’m not strong enough. You see,
a minute goes by so fearfully quick. You might as well try to stop a
Bandersnatch!’

Alice had no more breath for talking, so they trotted on in silence,
till they came in sight of a great crowd, in the middle of which the
Lion and Unicorn were fighting. They were in such a cloud of dust, that
at first Alice could not make out which was which: but she soon managed
to distinguish the Unicorn by his horn.

They placed themselves close to where Hatta, the other messenger, was
standing watching the fight, with a cup of tea in one hand and a piece
of bread-and-butter in the other.

‘He’s only just out of prison, and he hadn’t finished his tea when
he was sent in,’ Haigha whispered to Alice: ‘and they only give them
oyster-shells in there--so you see he’s very hungry and thirsty. How
are you, dear child?’ he went on, putting his arm affectionately round
Hatta’s neck.

Hatta looked round and nodded, and went on with his bread and butter.

‘Were you happy in prison, dear child?’ said Haigha.

Hatta looked round once more, and this time a tear or two trickled down
his cheek: but not a word would he say.

‘Speak, can’t you!’ Haigha cried impatiently. But Hatta only munched
away, and drank some more tea.

‘Speak, won’t you!’ cried the King. ‘How are they getting on with the
fight?’

Hatta made a desperate effort, and swallowed a large piece of
bread-and-butter. ‘They’re getting on very well,’ he said in a choking
voice: ‘each of them has been down about eighty-seven times.’

‘Then I suppose they’ll soon bring the white bread and the brown?’ Alice
ventured to remark.

‘It’s waiting for ‘em now,’ said Hatta: ‘this is a bit of it as I’m
eating.’

There was a pause in the fight just then, and the Lion and the Unicorn
sat down, panting, while the King called out ‘Ten minutes allowed for
refreshments!’ Haigha and Hatta set to work at once, carrying rough
trays of white and brown bread. Alice took a piece to taste, but it was
VERY dry.

‘I don’t think they’ll fight any more to-day,’ the King said to Hatta:
‘go and order the drums to begin.’ And Hatta went bounding away like a
grasshopper.

For a minute or two Alice stood silent, watching him. Suddenly she
brightened up. ‘Look, look!’ she cried, pointing eagerly. ‘There’s the
White Queen running across the country! She came flying out of the wood
over yonder--How fast those Queens CAN run!’

‘There’s some enemy after her, no doubt,’ the King said, without even
looking round. ‘That wood’s full of them.’

‘But aren’t you going to run and help her?’ Alice asked, very much
surprised at his taking it so quietly.

‘No use, no use!’ said the King. ‘She runs so fearfully quick. You might
as well try to catch a Bandersnatch! But I’ll make a memorandum about
her, if you like--She’s a dear good creature,’ he repeated softly to
himself, as he opened his memorandum-book. ‘Do you spell “creature” with
a double “e”?’

At this moment the Unicorn sauntered by them, with his hands in his
pockets. ‘I had the best of it this time?’ he said to the King, just
glancing at him as he passed.

‘A little--a little,’ the King replied, rather nervously. ‘You shouldn’t
have run him through with your horn, you know.’

‘It didn’t hurt him,’ the Unicorn said carelessly, and he was going
on, when his eye happened to fall upon Alice: he turned round rather
instantly, and stood for some time looking at her with an air of the
deepest disgust.

‘What--is--this?’ he said at last.

‘This is a child!’ Haigha replied eagerly, coming in front of Alice
to introduce her, and spreading out both his hands towards her in an
Anglo-Saxon attitude. ‘We only found it to-day. It’s as large as life,
and twice as natural!’

‘I always thought they were fabulous monsters!’ said the Unicorn. ‘Is it
alive?’

‘It can talk,’ said Haigha, solemnly.

The Unicorn looked dreamily at Alice, and said ‘Talk, child.’

Alice could not help her lips curling up into a smile as she began: ‘Do
you know, I always thought Unicorns were fabulous monsters, too! I never
saw one alive before!’

‘Well, now that we HAVE seen each other,’ said the Unicorn, ‘if you’ll
believe in me, I’ll believe in you. Is that a bargain?’

‘Yes, if you like,’ said Alice.

‘Come, fetch out the plum-cake, old man!’ the Unicorn went on, turning
from her to the King. ‘None of your brown bread for me!’

‘Certainly--certainly!’ the King muttered, and beckoned to Haigha. ‘Open
the bag!’ he whispered. ‘Quick! Not that one--that’s full of hay!’

Haigha took a large cake out of the bag, and gave it to Alice to hold,
while he got out a dish and carving-knife. How they all came out of it
Alice couldn’t guess. It was just like a conjuring-trick, she thought.

The Lion had joined them while this was going on: he looked very
tired and sleepy, and his eyes were half shut. ‘What’s this!’ he said,
blinking lazily at Alice, and speaking in a deep hollow tone that
sounded like the tolling of a great bell.

‘Ah, what IS it, now?’ the Unicorn cried eagerly. ‘You’ll never guess!
_I_ couldn’t.’

The Lion looked at Alice wearily. ‘Are you animal--vegetable--or
mineral?’ he said, yawning at every other word.

‘It’s a fabulous monster!’ the Unicorn cried out, before Alice could
reply.

‘Then hand round the plum-cake, Monster,’ the Lion said, lying down and
putting his chin on his paws. ‘And sit down, both of you,’ (to the King
and the Unicorn): ‘fair play with the cake, you know!’

The King was evidently very uncomfortable at having to sit down between
the two great creatures; but there was no other place for him.

‘What a fight we might have for the crown, NOW!’ the Unicorn said,
looking slyly up at the crown, which the poor King was nearly shaking
off his head, he trembled so much.

‘I should win easy,’ said the Lion.

‘I’m not so sure of that,’ said the Unicorn.

‘Why, I beat you all round the town, you chicken!’ the Lion replied
angrily, half getting up as he spoke.

Here the King interrupted, to prevent the quarrel going on: he was very
nervous, and his voice quite quivered. ‘All round the town?’ he
said. ‘That’s a good long way. Did you go by the old bridge, or the
market-place? You get the best view by the old bridge.’

‘I’m sure I don’t know,’ the Lion growled out as he lay down again.
‘There was too much dust to see anything. What a time the Monster is,
cutting up that cake!’

Alice had seated herself on the bank of a little brook, with the great
dish on her knees, and was sawing away diligently with the knife. ‘It’s
very provoking!’ she said, in reply to the Lion (she was getting quite
used to being called ‘the Monster’). ‘I’ve cut several slices already,
but they always join on again!’

‘You don’t know how to manage Looking-glass cakes,’ the Unicorn
remarked. ‘Hand it round first, and cut it afterwards.’

This sounded nonsense, but Alice very obediently got up, and carried the
dish round, and the cake divided itself into three pieces as she did so.
‘NOW cut it up,’ said the Lion, as she returned to her place with the
empty dish.

‘I say, this isn’t fair!’ cried the Unicorn, as Alice sat with the knife
in her hand, very much puzzled how to begin. ‘The Monster has given the
Lion twice as much as me!’

‘She’s kept none for herself, anyhow,’ said the Lion. ‘Do you like
plum-cake, Monster?’

But before Alice could answer him, the drums began.

Where the noise came from, she couldn’t make out: the air seemed full
of it, and it rang through and through her head till she felt quite
deafened. She started to her feet and sprang across the little brook in
her terror,

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

and had just time to see the Lion and the Unicorn rise to their feet,
with angry looks at being interrupted in their feast, before she dropped
to her knees, and put her hands over her ears, vainly trying to shut out
the dreadful uproar.

‘If THAT doesn’t “drum them out of town,”’ she thought to herself,
‘nothing ever will!’




CHAPTER VIII. ‘It’s my own Invention’

After a while the noise seemed gradually to die away, till all was dead
silence, and Alice lifted up her head in some alarm. There was no one
to be seen, and her first thought was that she must have been dreaming
about the Lion and the Unicorn and those queer Anglo-Saxon Messengers.
However, there was the great dish still lying at her feet, on which she
had tried to cut the plum-cake, ‘So I wasn’t dreaming, after all,’ she
said to herself, ‘unless--unless we’re all part of the same dream. Only
I do hope it’s MY dream, and not the Red King’s! I don’t like belonging
to another person’s dream,’ she went on in a rather complaining tone:
‘I’ve a great mind to go and wake him, and see what happens!’

At this moment her thoughts were interrupted by a loud shouting of
‘Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!’ and a Knight dressed in crimson armour came
galloping down upon her, brandishing a great club. Just as he reached
her, the horse stopped suddenly: ‘You’re my prisoner!’ the Knight cried,
as he tumbled off his horse.

Startled as she was, Alice was more frightened for him than for herself
at the moment, and watched him with some anxiety as he mounted again.
As soon as he was comfortably in the saddle, he began once more ‘You’re
my--’ but here another voice broke in ‘Ahoy! Ahoy! Check!’ and Alice
looked round in some surprise for the new enemy.

This time it was a White Knight. He drew up at Alice’s side, and tumbled
off his horse just as the Red Knight had done: then he got on again,
and the two Knights sat and looked at each other for some time without
speaking. Alice looked from one to the other in some bewilderment.

‘She’s MY prisoner, you know!’ the Red Knight said at last.

‘Yes, but then _I_ came and rescued her!’ the White Knight replied.

‘Well, we must fight for her, then,’ said the Red Knight, as he took up
his helmet (which hung from the saddle, and was something the shape of a
horse’s head), and put it on.

‘You will observe the Rules of Battle, of course?’ the White Knight
remarked, putting on his helmet too.

‘I always do,’ said the Red Knight, and they began banging away at each
other with such fury that Alice got behind a tree to be out of the way
of the blows.

‘I wonder, now, what the Rules of Battle are,’ she said to herself, as
she watched the fight, timidly peeping out from her hiding-place: ‘one
Rule seems to be, that if one Knight hits the other, he knocks him off
his horse, and if he misses, he tumbles off himself--and another Rule
seems to be that they hold their clubs with their arms, as if they were
Punch and Judy--What a noise they make when they tumble! Just like
a whole set of fire-irons falling into the fender! And how quiet the
horses are! They let them get on and off them just as if they were
tables!’

Another Rule of Battle, that Alice had not noticed, seemed to be that
they always fell on their heads, and the battle ended with their both
falling off in this way, side by side: when they got up again, they
shook hands, and then the Red Knight mounted and galloped off.

‘It was a glorious victory, wasn’t it?’ said the White Knight, as he
came up panting.

‘I don’t know,’ Alice said doubtfully. ‘I don’t want to be anybody’s
prisoner. I want to be a Queen.’

‘So you will, when you’ve crossed the next brook,’ said the White
Knight. ‘I’ll see you safe to the end of the wood--and then I must go
back, you know. That’s the end of my move.’

‘Thank you very much,’ said Alice. ‘May I help you off with your
helmet?’ It was evidently more than he could manage by himself; however,
she managed to shake him out of it at last.

‘Now one can breathe more easily,’ said the Knight, putting back his
shaggy hair with both hands, and turning his gentle face and large mild
eyes to Alice. She thought she had never seen such a strange-looking
soldier in all her life.

He was dressed in tin armour, which seemed to fit him very badly, and
he had a queer-shaped little deal box fastened across his shoulder,
upside-down, and with the lid hanging open. Alice looked at it with
great curiosity.

‘I see you’re admiring my little box.’ the Knight said in a friendly
tone. ‘It’s my own invention--to keep clothes and sandwiches in. You see
I carry it upside-down, so that the rain can’t get in.’

‘But the things can get OUT,’ Alice gently remarked. ‘Do you know the
lid’s open?’

‘I didn’t know it,’ the Knight said, a shade of vexation passing over
his face. ‘Then all the things must have fallen out! And the box is no
use without them.’ He unfastened it as he spoke, and was just going to
throw it into the bushes, when a sudden thought seemed to strike him,
and he hung it carefully on a tree. ‘Can you guess why I did that?’ he
said to Alice.

Alice shook her head.

‘In hopes some bees may make a nest in it--then I should get the honey.’

‘But you’ve got a bee-hive--or something like one--fastened to the
saddle,’ said Alice.

‘Yes, it’s a very good bee-hive,’ the Knight said in a discontented
tone, ‘one of the best kind. But not a single bee has come near it yet.
And the other thing is a mouse-trap. I suppose the mice keep the bees
out--or the bees keep the mice out, I don’t know which.’

‘I was wondering what the mouse-trap was for,’ said Alice. ‘It isn’t
very likely there would be any mice on the horse’s back.’

‘Not very likely, perhaps,’ said the Knight: ‘but if they DO come, I
don’t choose to have them running all about.’

‘You see,’ he went on after a pause, ‘it’s as well to be provided for
EVERYTHING. That’s the reason the horse has all those anklets round his
feet.’

‘But what are they for?’ Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

‘To guard against the bites of sharks,’ the Knight replied. ‘It’s an
invention of my own. And now help me on. I’ll go with you to the end of
the wood--What’s the dish for?’

‘It’s meant for plum-cake,’ said Alice.

‘We’d better take it with us,’ the Knight said. ‘It’ll come in handy if
we find any plum-cake. Help me to get it into this bag.’

This took a very long time to manage, though Alice held the bag open
very carefully, because the Knight was so VERY awkward in putting in
the dish: the first two or three times that he tried he fell in himself
instead. ‘It’s rather a tight fit, you see,’ he said, as they got it in
a last; ‘There are so many candlesticks in the bag.’ And he hung it
to the saddle, which was already loaded with bunches of carrots, and
fire-irons, and many other things.

‘I hope you’ve got your hair well fastened on?’ he continued, as they
set off.

‘Only in the usual way,’ Alice said, smiling.

‘That’s hardly enough,’ he said, anxiously. ‘You see the wind is so VERY
strong here. It’s as strong as soup.’

‘Have you invented a plan for keeping the hair from being blown off?’
Alice enquired.

‘Not yet,’ said the Knight. ‘But I’ve got a plan for keeping it from
FALLING off.’

‘I should like to hear it, very much.’

‘First you take an upright stick,’ said the Knight. ‘Then you make your
hair creep up it, like a fruit-tree. Now the reason hair falls off is
because it hangs DOWN--things never fall UPWARDS, you know. It’s a plan
of my own invention. You may try it if you like.’

It didn’t sound a comfortable plan, Alice thought, and for a few minutes
she walked on in silence, puzzling over the idea, and every now and then
stopping to help the poor Knight, who certainly was NOT a good rider.

Whenever the horse stopped (which it did very often), he fell off in
front; and whenever it went on again (which it generally did rather
suddenly), he fell off behind. Otherwise he kept on pretty well, except
that he had a habit of now and then falling off sideways; and as he
generally did this on the side on which Alice was walking, she soon
found that it was the best plan not to walk QUITE close to the horse.

‘I’m afraid you’ve not had much practice in riding,’ she ventured to
say, as she was helping him up from his fifth tumble.

The Knight looked very much surprised, and a little offended at the
remark. ‘What makes you say that?’ he asked, as he scrambled back into
the saddle, keeping hold of Alice’s hair with one hand, to save himself
from falling over on the other side.

‘Because people don’t fall off quite so often, when they’ve had much
practice.’

‘I’ve had plenty of practice,’ the Knight said very gravely: ‘plenty of
practice!’

Alice could think of nothing better to say than ‘Indeed?’ but she said
it as heartily as she could. They went on a little way in silence after
this, the Knight with his eyes shut, muttering to himself, and Alice
watching anxiously for the next tumble.

‘The great art of riding,’ the Knight suddenly began in a loud voice,
waving his right arm as he spoke, ‘is to keep--’ Here the sentence ended
as suddenly as it had begun, as the Knight fell heavily on the top of
his head exactly in the path where Alice was walking. She was quite
frightened this time, and said in an anxious tone, as she picked him up,
‘I hope no bones are broken?’

‘None to speak of,’ the Knight said, as if he didn’t mind breaking two
or three of them. ‘The great art of riding, as I was saying, is--to keep
your balance properly. Like this, you know--’

He let go the bridle, and stretched out both his arms to show Alice
what he meant, and this time he fell flat on his back, right under the
horse’s feet.

‘Plenty of practice!’ he went on repeating, all the time that Alice was
getting him on his feet again. ‘Plenty of practice!’

‘It’s too ridiculous!’ cried Alice, losing all her patience this time.
‘You ought to have a wooden horse on wheels, that you ought!’

‘Does that kind go smoothly?’ the Knight asked in a tone of great
interest, clasping his arms round the horse’s neck as he spoke, just in
time to save himself from tumbling off again.

‘Much more smoothly than a live horse,’ Alice said, with a little scream
of laughter, in spite of all she could do to prevent it.

‘I’ll get one,’ the Knight said thoughtfully to himself. ‘One or
two--several.’

There was a short silence after this, and then the Knight went on again.
‘I’m a great hand at inventing things. Now, I daresay you noticed, that
last time you picked me up, that I was looking rather thoughtful?’

‘You WERE a little grave,’ said Alice.

‘Well, just then I was inventing a new way of getting over a gate--would
you like to hear it?’

‘Very much indeed,’ Alice said politely.

‘I’ll tell you how I came to think of it,’ said the Knight. ‘You see, I
said to myself, “The only difficulty is with the feet: the HEAD is high
enough already.” Now, first I put my head on the top of the gate--then I
stand on my head--then the feet are high enough, you see--then I’m over,
you see.’

‘Yes, I suppose you’d be over when that was done,’ Alice said
thoughtfully: ‘but don’t you think it would be rather hard?’

‘I haven’t tried it yet,’ the Knight said, gravely: ‘so I can’t tell for
certain--but I’m afraid it WOULD be a little hard.’

He looked so vexed at the idea, that Alice changed the subject hastily.
‘What a curious helmet you’ve got!’ she said cheerfully. ‘Is that your
invention too?’

The Knight looked down proudly at his helmet, which hung from the
saddle. ‘Yes,’ he said, ‘but I’ve invented a better one than that--like
a sugar loaf. When I used to wear it, if I fell off the horse, it always
touched the ground directly. So I had a VERY little way to fall, you
see--But there WAS the danger of falling INTO it, to be sure. That
happened to me once--and the worst of it was, before I could get out
again, the other White Knight came and put it on. He thought it was his
own helmet.’

The knight looked so solemn about it that Alice did not dare to laugh.
‘I’m afraid you must have hurt him,’ she said in a trembling voice,
‘being on the top of his head.’

‘I had to kick him, of course,’ the Knight said, very seriously. ‘And
then he took the helmet off again--but it took hours and hours to get me
out. I was as fast as--as lightning, you know.’

‘But that’s a different kind of fastness,’ Alice objected.

The Knight shook his head. ‘It was all kinds of fastness with me, I can
assure you!’ he said. He raised his hands in some excitement as he said
this, and instantly rolled out of the saddle, and fell headlong into a
deep ditch.

Alice ran to the side of the ditch to look for him. She was rather
startled by the fall, as for some time he had kept on very well, and she
was afraid that he really WAS hurt this time. However, though she could
see nothing but the soles of his feet, she was much relieved to hear
that he was talking on in his usual tone. ‘All kinds of fastness,’
he repeated: ‘but it was careless of him to put another man’s helmet
on--with the man in it, too.’

‘How CAN you go on talking so quietly, head downwards?’ Alice asked, as
she dragged him out by the feet, and laid him in a heap on the bank.

The Knight looked surprised at the question. ‘What does it matter where
my body happens to be?’ he said. ‘My mind goes on working all the same.
In fact, the more head downwards I am, the more I keep inventing new
things.’

‘Now the cleverest thing of the sort that I ever did,’ he went on after
a pause, ‘was inventing a new pudding during the meat-course.’

‘In time to have it cooked for the next course?’ said Alice. ‘Well,
not the NEXT course,’ the Knight said in a slow thoughtful tone: ‘no,
certainly not the next COURSE.’

‘Then it would have to be the next day. I suppose you wouldn’t have two
pudding-courses in one dinner?’

‘Well, not the NEXT day,’ the Knight repeated as before: ‘not the next
DAY. In fact,’ he went on, holding his head down, and his voice getting
lower and lower, ‘I don’t believe that pudding ever WAS cooked! In fact,
I don’t believe that pudding ever WILL be cooked! And yet it was a very
clever pudding to invent.’

‘What did you mean it to be made of?’ Alice asked, hoping to cheer him
up, for the poor Knight seemed quite low-spirited about it.

‘It began with blotting paper,’ the Knight answered with a groan.

‘That wouldn’t be very nice, I’m afraid--’

‘Not very nice ALONE,’ he interrupted, quite eagerly: ‘but you’ve no
idea what a difference it makes mixing it with other things--such as
gunpowder and sealing-wax. And here I must leave you.’ They had just
come to the end of the wood.

Alice could only look puzzled: she was thinking of the pudding.

‘You are sad,’ the Knight said in an anxious tone: ‘let me sing you a
song to comfort you.’

‘Is it very long?’ Alice asked, for she had heard a good deal of poetry
that day.

‘It’s long,’ said the Knight, ‘but very, VERY beautiful. Everybody that
hears me sing it--either it brings the TEARS into their eyes, or else--’

‘Or else what?’ said Alice, for the Knight had made a sudden pause.

‘Or else it doesn’t, you know. The name of the song is called “HADDOCKS’
EYES.”’

‘Oh, that’s the name of the song, is it?’ Alice said, trying to feel
interested.

‘No, you don’t understand,’ the Knight said, looking a little vexed.
‘That’s what the name is CALLED. The name really IS “THE AGED AGED
MAN.”’

‘Then I ought to have said “That’s what the SONG is called”?’ Alice
corrected herself.

‘No, you oughtn’t: that’s quite another thing! The SONG is called “WAYS
AND MEANS”: but that’s only what it’s CALLED, you know!’

‘Well, what IS the song, then?’ said Alice, who was by this time
completely bewildered.

‘I was coming to that,’ the Knight said. ‘The song really IS “A-SITTING
ON A GATE”: and the tune’s my own invention.’

So saying, he stopped his horse and let the reins fall on its neck:
then, slowly beating time with one hand, and with a faint smile lighting
up his gentle foolish face, as if he enjoyed the music of his song, he
began.

Of all the strange things that Alice saw in her journey Through The
Looking-Glass, this was the one that she always remembered most clearly.
Years afterwards she could bring the whole scene back again, as if it
had been only yesterday--the mild blue eyes and kindly smile of the
Knight--the setting sun gleaming through his hair, and shining on his
armour in a blaze of light that quite dazzled her--the horse quietly
moving about, with the reins hanging loose on his neck, cropping the
grass at her feet--and the black shadows of the forest behind--all this
she took in like a picture, as, with one hand shading her eyes, she
leant against a tree, watching the strange pair, and listening, in a
half dream, to the melancholy music of the song.

‘But the tune ISN’T his own invention,’ she said to herself: ‘it’s “I
GIVE THEE ALL, I CAN NO MORE.”’ She stood and listened very attentively,
but no tears came into her eyes.


     ‘I’ll tell thee everything I can;
      There’s little to relate.
     I saw an aged aged man,
      A-sitting on a gate.
     “Who are you, aged man?” I said,
      “and how is it you live?”
      And his answer trickled through my head
      Like water through a sieve.

     He said “I look for butterflies
      That sleep among the wheat:
     I make them into mutton-pies,
      And sell them in the street.
     I sell them unto men,” he said,
      “Who sail on stormy seas;
     And that’s the way I get my bread--
      A trifle, if you please.”

     But I was thinking of a plan
      To dye one’s whiskers green,
     And always use so large a fan
      That they could not be seen.
     So, having no reply to give
      To what the old man said,
     I cried, “Come, tell me how you live!”
       And thumped him on the head.

     His accents mild took up the tale:
      He said “I go my ways,
     And when I find a mountain-rill,
      I set it in a blaze;
     And thence they make a stuff they call
      Rolands’ Macassar Oil--
     Yet twopence-halfpenny is all
      They give me for my toil.”

     But I was thinking of a way
      To feed oneself on batter,
     And so go on from day to day
      Getting a little fatter.
     I shook him well from side to side,
      Until his face was blue:
     “Come, tell me how you live,” I cried,
      “And what it is you do!”

     He said “I hunt for haddocks’ eyes
      Among the heather bright,
     And work them into waistcoat-buttons
      In the silent night.
     And these I do not sell for gold
      Or coin of silvery shine
     But for a copper halfpenny,
      And that will purchase nine.

     “I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,
      Or set limed twigs for crabs;
     I sometimes search the grassy knolls
      For wheels of Hansom-cabs.
     And that’s the way” (he gave a wink)
      “By which I get my wealth--
     And very gladly will I drink
      Your Honour’s noble health.”

     I heard him then, for I had just
      Completed my design
     To keep the Menai bridge from rust
      By boiling it in wine.
     I thanked him much for telling me
      The way he got his wealth,
     But chiefly for his wish that he
      Might drink my noble health.

     And now, if e’er by chance I put
      My fingers into glue
     Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
      Into a left-hand shoe,
     Or if I drop upon my toe
      A very heavy weight,
     I weep, for it reminds me so,
      Of that old man I used to know--

     Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,
     Whose hair was whiter than the snow,
     Whose face was very like a crow,
     With eyes, like cinders, all aglow,
     Who seemed distracted with his woe,
     Who rocked his body to and fro,
     And muttered mumblingly and low,
     As if his mouth were full of dough,
     Who snorted like a buffalo--
     That summer evening, long ago,
      A-sitting on a gate.’


As the Knight sang the last words of the ballad, he gathered up the
reins, and turned his horse’s head along the road by which they had
come. ‘You’ve only a few yards to go,’ he said, ‘down the hill and over
that little brook, and then you’ll be a Queen--But you’ll stay and
see me off first?’ he added as Alice turned with an eager look in the
direction to which he pointed. ‘I shan’t be long. You’ll wait and wave
your handkerchief when I get to that turn in the road? I think it’ll
encourage me, you see.’

‘Of course I’ll wait,’ said Alice: ‘and thank you very much for coming
so far--and for the song--I liked it very much.’

‘I hope so,’ the Knight said doubtfully: ‘but you didn’t cry so much as
I thought you would.’

So they shook hands, and then the Knight rode slowly away into the
forest. ‘It won’t take long to see him OFF, I expect,’ Alice said to
herself, as she stood watching him. ‘There he goes! Right on his head as
usual! However, he gets on again pretty easily--that comes of having so
many things hung round the horse--’ So she went on talking to herself,
as she watched the horse walking leisurely along the road, and the
Knight tumbling off, first on one side and then on the other. After
the fourth or fifth tumble he reached the turn, and then she waved her
handkerchief to him, and waited till he was out of sight.

‘I hope it encouraged him,’ she said, as she turned to run down the
hill: ‘and now for the last brook, and to be a Queen! How grand it
sounds!’ A very few steps brought her to the edge of the brook. ‘The
Eighth Square at last!’ she cried as she bounded across,

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

    *    *    *    *    *    *

  *    *    *    *    *    *    *

and threw herself down to rest on a lawn as soft as moss, with little
flower-beds dotted about it here and there. ‘Oh, how glad I am to get
here! And what IS this on my head?’ she exclaimed in a tone of dismay,
as she put her hands up to something very heavy, and fitted tight all
round her head.

‘But how CAN it have got there without my knowing it?’ she said to
herself, as she lifted it off, and set it on her lap to make out what it
could possibly be.

It was a golden crown.




CHAPTER IX. Queen Alice

‘Well, this IS grand!’ said Alice. ‘I never expected I should be a Queen
so soon--and I’ll tell you what it is, your majesty,’ she went on in
a severe tone (she was always rather fond of scolding herself), ‘it’ll
never do for you to be lolling about on the grass like that! Queens have
to be dignified, you know!’

So she got up and walked about--rather stiffly just at first, as she was
afraid that the crown might come off: but she comforted herself with the
thought that there was nobody to see her, ‘and if I really am a Queen,’
she said as she sat down again, ‘I shall be able to manage it quite well
in time.’

Everything was happening so oddly that she didn’t feel a bit surprised
at finding the Red Queen and the White Queen sitting close to her, one
on each side: she would have liked very much to ask them how they came
there, but she feared it would not be quite civil. However, there would
be no harm, she thought, in asking if the game was over. ‘Please, would
you tell me--’ she began, looking timidly at the Red Queen.

‘Speak when you’re spoken to!’ The Queen sharply interrupted her.

‘But if everybody obeyed that rule,’ said Alice, who was always ready
for a little argument, ‘and if you only spoke when you were spoken to,
and the other person always waited for YOU to begin, you see nobody
would ever say anything, so that--’

‘Ridiculous!’ cried the Queen. ‘Why, don’t you see, child--’ here she
broke off with a frown, and, after thinking for a minute, suddenly
changed the subject of the conversation. ‘What do you mean by “If you
really are a Queen”? What right have you to call yourself so? You can’t
be a Queen, you know, till you’ve passed the proper examination. And the
sooner we begin it, the better.’

‘I only said “if”!’ poor Alice pleaded in a piteous tone.

The two Queens looked at each other, and the Red Queen remarked, with a
little shudder, ‘She SAYS she only said “if”--’

‘But she said a great deal more than that!’ the White Queen moaned,
wringing her hands. ‘Oh, ever so much more than that!’

‘So you did, you know,’ the Red Queen said to Alice. ‘Always speak the
truth--think before you speak--and write it down afterwards.’

‘I’m sure I didn’t mean--’ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen
interrupted her impatiently.

‘That’s just what I complain of! You SHOULD have meant! What do you
suppose is the use of child without any meaning? Even a joke should
have some meaning--and a child’s more important than a joke, I hope. You
couldn’t deny that, even if you tried with both hands.’

‘I don’t deny things with my HANDS,’ Alice objected.

‘Nobody said you did,’ said the Red Queen. ‘I said you couldn’t if you
tried.’

‘She’s in that state of mind,’ said the White Queen, ‘that she wants to
deny SOMETHING--only she doesn’t know what to deny!’

‘A nasty, vicious temper,’ the Red Queen remarked; and then there was an
uncomfortable silence for a minute or two.

The Red Queen broke the silence by saying to the White Queen, ‘I invite
you to Alice’s dinner-party this afternoon.’

The White Queen smiled feebly, and said ‘And I invite YOU.’

‘I didn’t know I was to have a party at all,’ said Alice; ‘but if there
is to be one, I think _I_ ought to invite the guests.’

‘We gave you the opportunity of doing it,’ the Red Queen remarked: ‘but
I daresay you’ve not had many lessons in manners yet?’

‘Manners are not taught in lessons,’ said Alice. ‘Lessons teach you to
do sums, and things of that sort.’

‘And you do Addition?’ the White Queen asked. ‘What’s one and one and
one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one?’

‘I don’t know,’ said Alice. ‘I lost count.’

‘She can’t do Addition,’ the Red Queen interrupted. ‘Can you do
Subtraction? Take nine from eight.’

‘Nine from eight I can’t, you know,’ Alice replied very readily: ‘but--’

‘She can’t do Subtraction,’ said the White Queen. ‘Can you do Division?
Divide a loaf by a knife--what’s the answer to that?’

‘I suppose--’ Alice was beginning, but the Red Queen answered for her.
‘Bread-and-butter, of course. Try another Subtraction sum. Take a bone
from a dog: what remains?’

Alice considered. ‘The bone wouldn’t remain, of course, if I took
it--and the dog wouldn’t remain; it would come to bite me--and I’m sure
I shouldn’t remain!’

‘Then you think nothing would remain?’ said the Red Queen.

‘I think that’s the answer.’

‘Wrong, as usual,’ said the Red Queen: ‘the dog’s temper would remain.’

‘But I don’t see how--’

‘Why, look here!’ the Red Queen cried. ‘The dog would lose its temper,
wouldn’t it?’

‘Perhaps it would,’ Alice replied cautiously.

‘Then if the dog went away, its temper would remain!’ the Queen
exclaimed triumphantly.

Alice said, as gravely as she could, ‘They might go different ways.’ But
she couldn’t help thinking to herself, ‘What dreadful nonsense we ARE
talking!’

‘She can’t do sums a BIT!’ the Queens said together, with great
emphasis.

‘Can YOU do sums?’ Alice said, turning suddenly on the White Queen, for
she didn’t like being found fault with so much.

The Queen gasped and shut her eyes. ‘I can do Addition, if you give me
time--but I can’t do Subtraction, under ANY circumstances!’

‘Of course you know your A B C?’ said the Red Queen.

‘To be sure I do.’ said Alice.

‘So do I,’ the White Queen whispered: ‘we’ll often say it over together,
dear. And I’ll tell you a secret--I can read words of one letter! Isn’t
THAT grand! However, don’t be discouraged. You’ll come to it in time.’

Here the Red Queen began again. ‘Can you answer useful questions?’ she
said. ‘How is bread made?’

‘I know THAT!’ Alice cried eagerly. ‘You take some flour--’

‘Where do you pick the flower?’ the White Queen asked. ‘In a garden, or
in the hedges?’

‘Well, it isn’t PICKED at all,’ Alice explained: ‘it’s GROUND--’

‘How many acres of ground?’ said the White Queen. ‘You mustn’t leave out
so many things.’

‘Fan her head!’ the Red Queen anxiously interrupted. ‘She’ll be feverish
after so much thinking.’ So they set to work and fanned her with bunches
of leaves, till she had to beg them to leave off, it blew her hair about
so.

‘She’s all right again now,’ said the Red Queen. ‘Do you know Languages?
What’s the French for fiddle-de-dee?’

‘Fiddle-de-dee’s not English,’ Alice replied gravely.

‘Who ever said it was?’ said the Red Queen.

Alice thought she saw a way out of the difficulty this time. ‘If you’ll
tell me what language “fiddle-de-dee” is, I’ll tell you the French for
it!’ she exclaimed triumphantly.

But the Red Queen drew herself up rather stiffly, and said ‘Queens never
make bargains.’

‘I wish Queens never asked questions,’ Alice thought to herself.

‘Don’t let us quarrel,’ the White Queen said in an anxious tone. ‘What
is the cause of lightning?’

‘The cause of lightning,’ Alice said very decidedly, for she felt quite
certain about this, ‘is the thunder--no, no!’ she hastily corrected
herself. ‘I meant the other way.’

‘It’s too late to correct it,’ said the Red Queen: ‘when you’ve once
said a thing, that fixes it, and you must take the consequences.’

‘Which reminds me--’ the White Queen said, looking down and nervously
clasping and unclasping her hands, ‘we had SUCH a thunderstorm last
Tuesday--I mean one of the last set of Tuesdays, you know.’

Alice was puzzled. ‘In OUR country,’ she remarked, ‘there’s only one day
at a time.’

The Red Queen said, ‘That’s a poor thin way of doing things. Now HERE,
we mostly have days and nights two or three at a time, and sometimes
in the winter we take as many as five nights together--for warmth, you
know.’

‘Are five nights warmer than one night, then?’ Alice ventured to ask.

‘Five times as warm, of course.’

‘But they should be five times as COLD, by the same rule--’

‘Just so!’ cried the Red Queen. ‘Five times as warm, AND five times
as cold--just as I’m five times as rich as you are, AND five times as
clever!’

Alice sighed and gave it up. ‘It’s exactly like a riddle with no
answer!’ she thought.

‘Humpty Dumpty saw it too,’ the White Queen went on in a low voice, more
as if she were talking to herself. ‘He came to the door with a corkscrew
in his hand--’

‘What did he want?’ said the Red Queen.

‘He said he WOULD come in,’ the White Queen went on, ‘because he was
looking for a hippopotamus. Now, as it happened, there wasn’t such a
thing in the house, that morning.’

‘Is there generally?’ Alice asked in an astonished tone.

‘Well, only on Thursdays,’ said the Queen.

‘I know what he came for,’ said Alice: ‘he wanted to punish the fish,
because--’

Here the White Queen began again. ‘It was SUCH a thunderstorm, you can’t
think!’ (‘She NEVER could, you know,’ said the Red Queen.) ‘And part of
the roof came off, and ever so much thunder got in--and it went
rolling round the room in great lumps--and knocking over the tables and
things--till I was so frightened, I couldn’t remember my own name!’

Alice thought to herself, ‘I never should TRY to remember my name in the
middle of an accident! Where would be the use of it?’ but she did not
say this aloud, for fear of hurting the poor Queen’s feeling.

‘Your Majesty must excuse her,’ the Red Queen said to Alice, taking
one of the White Queen’s hands in her own, and gently stroking it:
‘she means well, but she can’t help saying foolish things, as a general
rule.’

The White Queen looked timidly at Alice, who felt she OUGHT to say
something kind, but really couldn’t think of anything at the moment.

‘She never was really well brought up,’ the Red Queen went on: ‘but
it’s amazing how good-tempered she is! Pat her on the head, and see how
pleased she’ll be!’ But this was more than Alice had courage to do.

‘A little kindness--and putting her hair in papers--would do wonders
with her--’

The White Queen gave a deep sigh, and laid her head on Alice’s shoulder.
‘I AM so sleepy?’ she moaned.

‘She’s tired, poor thing!’ said the Red Queen. ‘Smooth her hair--lend
her your nightcap--and sing her a soothing lullaby.’

‘I haven’t got a nightcap with me,’ said Alice, as she tried to obey the
first direction: ‘and I don’t know any soothing lullabies.’

‘I must do it myself, then,’ said the Red Queen, and she began:


   ‘Hush-a-by lady, in Alice’s lap!
   Till the feast’s ready, we’ve time for a nap:
   When the feast’s over, we’ll go to the ball--
   Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!


‘And now you know the words,’ she added, as she put her head down on
Alice’s other shoulder, ‘just sing it through to ME. I’m getting sleepy,
too.’ In another moment both Queens were fast asleep, and snoring loud.

‘What AM I to do?’ exclaimed Alice, looking about in great perplexity,
as first one round head, and then the other, rolled down from her
shoulder, and lay like a heavy lump in her lap. ‘I don’t think it EVER
happened before, that any one had to take care of two Queens asleep
at once! No, not in all the History of England--it couldn’t, you know,
because there never was more than one Queen at a time. Do wake up, you
heavy things!’ she went on in an impatient tone; but there was no answer
but a gentle snoring.

The snoring got more distinct every minute, and sounded more like a
tune: at last she could even make out the words, and she listened so
eagerly that, when the two great heads vanished from her lap, she hardly
missed them.

She was standing before an arched doorway over which were the words
QUEEN ALICE in large letters, and on each side of the arch there was a
bell-handle; one was marked ‘Visitors’ Bell,’ and the other ‘Servants’
Bell.’

‘I’ll wait till the song’s over,’ thought Alice, ‘and then I’ll
ring--the--WHICH bell must I ring?’ she went on, very much puzzled by
the names. ‘I’m not a visitor, and I’m not a servant. There OUGHT to be
one marked “Queen,” you know--’

Just then the door opened a little way, and a creature with a long beak
put its head out for a moment and said ‘No admittance till the week
after next!’ and shut the door again with a bang.

Alice knocked and rang in vain for a long time, but at last, a very old
Frog, who was sitting under a tree, got up and hobbled slowly towards
her: he was dressed in bright yellow, and had enormous boots on.

‘What is it, now?’ the Frog said in a deep hoarse whisper.

Alice turned round, ready to find fault with anybody. ‘Where’s the
servant whose business it is to answer the door?’ she began angrily.

‘Which door?’ said the Frog.

Alice almost stamped with irritation at the slow drawl in which he
spoke. ‘THIS door, of course!’

The Frog looked at the door with his large dull eyes for a minute:
then he went nearer and rubbed it with his thumb, as if he were trying
whether the paint would come off; then he looked at Alice.

‘To answer the door?’ he said. ‘What’s it been asking of?’ He was so
hoarse that Alice could scarcely hear him.

‘I don’t know what you mean,’ she said.

‘I talks English, doesn’t I?’ the Frog went on. ‘Or are you deaf? What
did it ask you?’

‘Nothing!’ Alice said impatiently. ‘I’ve been knocking at it!’

‘Shouldn’t do that--shouldn’t do that--’ the Frog muttered. ‘Vexes it,
you know.’ Then he went up and gave the door a kick with one of his
great feet. ‘You let IT alone,’ he panted out, as he hobbled back to his
tree, ‘and it’ll let YOU alone, you know.’

At this moment the door was flung open, and a shrill voice was heard
singing:


   ‘To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,
   “I’ve a sceptre in hand, I’ve a crown on my head;
   Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,
   Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me.”’


And hundreds of voices joined in the chorus:


  ‘Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
  And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:
  Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea--
  And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!’


Then followed a confused noise of cheering, and Alice thought to
herself, ‘Thirty times three makes ninety. I wonder if any one’s
counting?’ In a minute there was silence again, and the same shrill
voice sang another verse;


  ‘“O Looking-Glass creatures,” quoth Alice, “draw near!
  ‘Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:
  ‘Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
  Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!”’


Then came the chorus again:--


  ‘Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
  Or anything else that is pleasant to drink:
  Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine--
  And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!’


‘Ninety times nine!’ Alice repeated in despair, ‘Oh, that’ll never
be done! I’d better go in at once--’ and there was a dead silence the
moment she appeared.

Alice glanced nervously along the table, as she walked up the large
hall, and noticed that there were about fifty guests, of all kinds: some
were animals, some birds, and there were even a few flowers among them.
‘I’m glad they’ve come without waiting to be asked,’ she thought: ‘I
should never have known who were the right people to invite!’

There were three chairs at the head of the table; the Red and White
Queens had already taken two of them, but the middle one was empty.
Alice sat down in it, rather uncomfortable in the silence, and longing
for some one to speak.

At last the Red Queen began. ‘You’ve missed the soup and fish,’ she
said. ‘Put on the joint!’ And the waiters set a leg of mutton before
Alice, who looked at it rather anxiously, as she had never had to carve
a joint before.

‘You look a little shy; let me introduce you to that leg of mutton,’
said the Red Queen. ‘Alice--Mutton; Mutton--Alice.’ The leg of mutton
got up in the dish and made a little bow to Alice; and Alice returned
the bow, not knowing whether to be frightened or amused.

‘May I give you a slice?’ she said, taking up the knife and fork, and
looking from one Queen to the other.

‘Certainly not,’ the Red Queen said, very decidedly: ‘it isn’t etiquette
to cut any one you’ve been introduced to. Remove the joint!’ And the
waiters carried it off, and brought a large plum-pudding in its place.

‘I won’t be introduced to the pudding, please,’ Alice said rather
hastily, ‘or we shall get no dinner at all. May I give you some?’

But the Red Queen looked sulky, and growled ‘Pudding--Alice;
Alice--Pudding. Remove the pudding!’ and the waiters took it away so
quickly that Alice couldn’t return its bow.

However, she didn’t see why the Red Queen should be the only one to give
orders, so, as an experiment, she called out ‘Waiter! Bring back the
pudding!’ and there it was again in a moment like a conjuring-trick. It
was so large that she couldn’t help feeling a LITTLE shy with it, as she
had been with the mutton; however, she conquered her shyness by a great
effort and cut a slice and handed it to the Red Queen.

‘What impertinence!’ said the Pudding. ‘I wonder how you’d like it, if I
were to cut a slice out of YOU, you creature!’

It spoke in a thick, suety sort of voice, and Alice hadn’t a word to say
in reply: she could only sit and look at it and gasp.

‘Make a remark,’ said the Red Queen: ‘it’s ridiculous to leave all the
conversation to the pudding!’

‘Do you know, I’ve had such a quantity of poetry repeated to me to-day,’
Alice began, a little frightened at finding that, the moment she opened
her lips, there was dead silence, and all eyes were fixed upon her; ‘and
it’s a very curious thing, I think--every poem was about fishes in some
way. Do you know why they’re so fond of fishes, all about here?’

She spoke to the Red Queen, whose answer was a little wide of the mark.
‘As to fishes,’ she said, very slowly and solemnly, putting her mouth
close to Alice’s ear, ‘her White Majesty knows a lovely riddle--all in
poetry--all about fishes. Shall she repeat it?’

‘Her Red Majesty’s very kind to mention it,’ the White Queen murmured
into Alice’s other ear, in a voice like the cooing of a pigeon. ‘It
would be SUCH a treat! May I?’

‘Please do,’ Alice said very politely.

The White Queen laughed with delight, and stroked Alice’s cheek. Then
she began:


    ‘“First, the fish must be caught.”
   That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.
    “Next, the fish must be bought.”
   That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.

    “Now cook me the fish!”
   That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
    “Let it lie in a dish!”
   That is easy, because it already is in it.

    “Bring it here! Let me sup!”
   It is easy to set such a dish on the table.
    “Take the dish-cover up!”
   Ah, THAT is so hard that I fear I’m unable!

    For it holds it like glue--
  Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:
    Which is easiest to do,
  Un-dish-cover the fish, or dishcover the riddle?’


‘Take a minute to think about it, and then guess,’ said the Red Queen.
‘Meanwhile, we’ll drink your health--Queen Alice’s health!’ she screamed
at the top of her voice, and all the guests began drinking it directly,
and very queerly they managed it: some of them put their glasses upon
their heads like extinguishers, and drank all that trickled down their
faces--others upset the decanters, and drank the wine as it ran off
the edges of the table--and three of them (who looked like kangaroos)
scrambled into the dish of roast mutton, and began eagerly lapping up
the gravy, ‘just like pigs in a trough!’ thought Alice.

‘You ought to return thanks in a neat speech,’ the Red Queen said,
frowning at Alice as she spoke.

‘We must support you, you know,’ the White Queen whispered, as Alice got
up to do it, very obediently, but a little frightened.

‘Thank you very much,’ she whispered in reply, ‘but I can do quite well
without.’

‘That wouldn’t be at all the thing,’ the Red Queen said very decidedly:
so Alice tried to submit to it with a good grace.

(‘And they DID push so!’ she said afterwards, when she was telling her
sister the history of the feast. ‘You would have thought they wanted to
squeeze me flat!’)

In fact it was rather difficult for her to keep in her place while she
made her speech: the two Queens pushed her so, one on each side, that
they nearly lifted her up into the air: ‘I rise to return thanks--’
Alice began: and she really DID rise as she spoke, several inches; but
she got hold of the edge of the table, and managed to pull herself down
again.

‘Take care of yourself!’ screamed the White Queen, seizing Alice’s hair
with both her hands. ‘Something’s going to happen!’

And then (as Alice afterwards described it) all sorts of things happened
in a moment. The candles all grew up to the ceiling, looking something
like a bed of rushes with fireworks at the top. As to the bottles, they
each took a pair of plates, which they hastily fitted on as wings, and
so, with forks for legs, went fluttering about in all directions: ‘and
very like birds they look,’ Alice thought to herself, as well as she
could in the dreadful confusion that was beginning.

At this moment she heard a hoarse laugh at her side, and turned to see
what was the matter with the White Queen; but, instead of the Queen,
there was the leg of mutton sitting in the chair. ‘Here I am!’ cried a
voice from the soup tureen, and Alice turned again, just in time to see
the Queen’s broad good-natured face grinning at her for a moment over
the edge of the tureen, before she disappeared into the soup.

There was not a moment to be lost. Already several of the guests were
lying down in the dishes, and the soup ladle was walking up the table
towards Alice’s chair, and beckoning to her impatiently to get out of
its way.

‘I can’t stand this any longer!’ she cried as she jumped up and seized
the table-cloth with both hands: one good pull, and plates, dishes,
guests, and candles came crashing down together in a heap on the floor.

‘And as for YOU,’ she went on, turning fiercely upon the Red Queen, whom
she considered as the cause of all the mischief--but the Queen was no
longer at her side--she had suddenly dwindled down to the size of a
little doll, and was now on the table, merrily running round and round
after her own shawl, which was trailing behind her.

At any other time, Alice would have felt surprised at this, but she was
far too much excited to be surprised at anything NOW. ‘As for YOU,’
she repeated, catching hold of the little creature in the very act of
jumping over a bottle which had just lighted upon the table, ‘I’ll shake
you into a kitten, that I will!’




CHAPTER X. Shaking

She took her off the table as she spoke, and shook her backwards and
forwards with all her might.

The Red Queen made no resistance whatever; only her face grew very
small, and her eyes got large and green: and still, as Alice went on
shaking her, she kept on growing shorter--and fatter--and softer--and
rounder--and--




CHAPTER XI. Waking

--and it really WAS a kitten, after all.




CHAPTER XII. Which Dreamed it?

‘Your majesty shouldn’t purr so loud,’ Alice said, rubbing her eyes, and
addressing the kitten, respectfully, yet with some severity. ‘You
woke me out of oh! such a nice dream! And you’ve been along with me,
Kitty--all through the Looking-Glass world. Did you know it, dear?’

It is a very inconvenient habit of kittens (Alice had once made the
remark) that, whatever you say to them, they ALWAYS purr. ‘If they would
only purr for “yes” and mew for “no,” or any rule of that sort,’ she had
said, ‘so that one could keep up a conversation! But how CAN you talk
with a person if they always say the same thing?’

On this occasion the kitten only purred: and it was impossible to guess
whether it meant ‘yes’ or ‘no.’

So Alice hunted among the chessmen on the table till she had found the
Red Queen: then she went down on her knees on the hearth-rug, and put
the kitten and the Queen to look at each other. ‘Now, Kitty!’ she cried,
clapping her hands triumphantly. ‘Confess that was what you turned
into!’

(‘But it wouldn’t look at it,’ she said, when she was explaining the
thing afterwards to her sister: ‘it turned away its head, and pretended
not to see it: but it looked a LITTLE ashamed of itself, so I think it
MUST have been the Red Queen.’)

‘Sit up a little more stiffly, dear!’ Alice cried with a merry laugh.
‘And curtsey while you’re thinking what to--what to purr. It saves time,
remember!’ And she caught it up and gave it one little kiss, ‘just in
honour of having been a Red Queen.’

‘Snowdrop, my pet!’ she went on, looking over her shoulder at the White
Kitten, which was still patiently undergoing its toilet, ‘when WILL
Dinah have finished with your White Majesty, I wonder? That must be the
reason you were so untidy in my dream--Dinah! do you know that you’re
scrubbing a White Queen? Really, it’s most disrespectful of you!

‘And what did DINAH turn to, I wonder?’ she prattled on, as she settled
comfortably down, with one elbow in the rug, and her chin in her hand,
to watch the kittens. ‘Tell me, Dinah, did you turn to Humpty Dumpty? I
THINK you did--however, you’d better not mention it to your friends just
yet, for I’m not sure.

‘By the way, Kitty, if only you’d been really with me in my dream, there
was one thing you WOULD have enjoyed--I had such a quantity of poetry
said to me, all about fishes! To-morrow morning you shall have a real
treat. All the time you’re eating your breakfast, I’ll repeat “The
Walrus and the Carpenter” to you; and then you can make believe it’s
oysters, dear!

‘Now, Kitty, let’s consider who it was that dreamed it all. This is a
serious question, my dear, and you should NOT go on licking your paw
like that--as if Dinah hadn’t washed you this morning! You see, Kitty,
it MUST have been either me or the Red King. He was part of my dream,
of course--but then I was part of his dream, too! WAS it the Red King,
Kitty? You were his wife, my dear, so you ought to know--Oh, Kitty, DO
help to settle it! I’m sure your paw can wait!’ But the provoking kitten
only began on the other paw, and pretended it hadn’t heard the question.

Which do YOU think it was?


              ----


         A boat beneath a sunny sky,
         Lingering onward dreamily
         In an evening of July--

         Children three that nestle near,
         Eager eye and willing ear,
         Pleased a simple tale to hear--

         Long has paled that sunny sky:
         Echoes fade and memories die.
         Autumn frosts have slain July.

         Still she haunts me, phantomwise,
         Alice moving under skies
         Never seen by waking eyes.

         Children yet, the tale to hear,
         Eager eye and willing ear,
         Lovingly shall nestle near.

         In a Wonderland they lie,
         Dreaming as the days go by,
         Dreaming as the summers die:

         Ever drifting down the stream--
         Lingering in the golden gleam--
         Life, what is it but a dream?




THREE SUNSETS.


  He saw her once, and in the glance,
    A moment's glance of meeting eyes,
  His heart stood still in sudden trance:
    He trembled with a sweet surprise--
  All in the waning light she stood,
  The star of perfect womanhood.

  That summer-eve his heart was light:
    With lighter step he trod the ground:
  And life was fairer in his sight,
    And music was in every sound:
  He blessed the world where there could be
  So beautiful a thing as she.

  There once again, as evening fell
    And stars were peering overhead,
  Two lovers met to bid farewell:
    The western sun gleamed faint and red,
  Lost in a drift of purple cloud
  That wrapped him like a funeral-shroud.

  Long time the memory of that night--
    The hand that clasped, the lips that kissed,
  The form that faded from his sight
    Slow sinking through the tearful mist--
  In dreamy music seemed to roll
  Through the dark chambers of his soul.

  So after many years he came
    A wanderer from a distant shore:
  The street, the house, were still the same,
    But those he sought were there no more:
  His burning words, his hopes and fears,
  Unheeded fell on alien ears.

  Only the children from their play
    Would pause the mournful tale to hear,
  Shrinking in half-alarm away,
    Or, step by step, would venture near
  To touch with timid curious hands
  That strange wild man from other lands.

  He sat beside the busy street,
    There, where he last had seen her face:
  And thronging memories, bitter-sweet,
    Seemed yet to haunt the ancient place:
  Her footfall ever floated near:
  Her voice was ever in his ear.

  He sometimes, as the daylight waned
    And evening mists began to roll,
  In half-soliloquy complained
    Of that black shadow on his soul,
  And blindly fanned, with cruel care,
  The ashes of a vain despair.

  The summer fled: the lonely man
    Still lingered out the lessening days;
  Still, as the night drew on, would scan
    Each passing face with closer gaze--
  Till, sick at heart, he turned away,
  And sighed "she will not come to-day."

  So by degrees his spirit bent
    To mock its own despairing cry,
  In stern self-torture to invent
    New luxuries of agony,
  And people all the vacant space
  With visions of her perfect face.

  Then for a moment she was nigh,
    He heard no step, but she was there;
  As if an angel suddenly
    Were bodied from the viewless air,
  And all her fine ethereal frame
  Should fade as swiftly as it came.

  So, half in fancy's sunny trance,
    And half in misery's aching void
  With set and stony countenance
    His bitter being he enjoyed,
  And thrust for ever from his mind
  The happiness he could not find.

  As when the wretch, in lonely room,
    To selfish death is madly hurled,
  The glamour of that fatal fume
    Shuts out the wholesome living world--
  So all his manhood's strength and pride
  One sickly dream had swept aside.

  Yea, brother, and we passed him there,
    But yesterday, in merry mood,
  And marveled at the lordly air
    That shamed his beggar's attitude,
  Nor heeded that ourselves might be
  Wretches as desperate as he;

  Who let the thought of bliss denied
    Make havoc of our life and powers,
  And pine, in solitary pride,
    For peace that never shall be ours,
  Because we will not work and wait
  In trustful patience for our fate.

  And so it chanced once more that she
    Came by the old familiar spot:
  The face he would have died to see
    Bent o'er him, and he knew it not;
  Too rapt in selfish grief to hear,
  Even when happiness was near.

  And pity filled her gentle breast
    For him that would not stir nor speak
  The dying crimson of the west,
    That faintly tinged his haggard cheek,
  Fell on her as she stood, and shed
  A glory round the patient head.

  Ah, let him wake! The moments fly:
    This awful tryst may be the last.
  And see, the tear, that dimmed her eye,
    Had fallen on him ere she passed--
  She passed: the crimson paled to gray:
  And hope departed with the day.

  The heavy hours of night went by,
    And silence quickened into sound,
  And light slid up the eastern sky,
    And life began its daily round--
  But light and life for him were fled:
  His name was numbered with the dead.

_Nov., 1861._


[Illustration]




THE PATH OF ROSES.


  In the dark silence of an ancient room,
  Whose one tall window fronted to the West,
  Where, through laced tendrils of a hanging vine,
  The sunset-glow was fading into night,
  Sat a pale Lady, resting weary hands
  Upon a great clasped volume, and her face
  Within her hands. Not as in rest she bowed,
  But large hot tears were coursing down her cheek,
  And her low-panted sobs broke awefully
  Upon the sleeping echoes of the night.
    Soon she unclasp'd the volume once again,
  And read the words in tone of agony,
  As in self-torture, weeping as she read:--

  _"He crowns the glory of his race:
  He prayeth but in some fit place
  To meet his foeman face to face:

  "And, battling for the True, the Right,
  From ruddy dawn to purple night,
  To perish in the midmost fight:

  "Where hearts are fierce and hands are strong,
  Where peals the bugle loud and long,
  Where blood is dropping in the throng:

  "Still, with a dim and glazing eye,
  To watch the tide of victory,
  To hear in death the battle-cry:

  "Then, gathered grandly to his grave,
  To rest among the true and brave,
  In holy ground, where yew-trees wave:

  "Where, from church-windows sculptured fair,
  Float out upon the evening air
  The note of praise, the voice of prayer:

  "Where no vain marble mockery
  Insults with loud and boastful lie
  The simple soldier's memory:

  "Where sometimes little children go,
  And read, in whisper'd accent slow,
  The name of him who sleeps below."_

  Her voice died out: like one in dreams she sat.
  "Alas!" she sighed. "For what can Woman do?
  Her life is aimless, and her death unknown:
  Hemmed in by social forms she pines in vain.
  Man has his work, but what can Woman do?"
    And answer came there from the creeping gloom,
  The creeping gloom that settled into night:
  "Peace! For thy lot is other than a man's:
  His is a path of thorns: he beats them down:
  He faces death: he wrestles with despair.
  Thine is of roses, to adorn and cheer
  His lonely life, and hide the thorns in flowers."
    She spake again: in bitter tone she spake:
  "Aye, as a toy, the puppet of an hour,
  Or a fair posy, newly plucked at morn,
  But flung aside and withered ere the night."
    And answer came there from the creeping gloom,
  The creeping gloom that blackened into night:
  "So shalt thou be the lamp to light his path,
  What time the shades of sorrow close around."
    And, so it seemed to her, an awful light
  Pierced slowly through the darkness, orbed, and grew,
  Until all passed away--the ancient room--
  The sunlight dying through the trellised vine--
  The one tall window--all had passed away,
  And she was standing on the mighty hills.
    Beneath, around, and far as eye could see,
  Squadron on squadron, stretched opposing hosts,
  Ranked as for battle, mute and motionless.
  Anon a distant thunder shook the ground,
  The tramp of horses, and a troop shot by--
  Plunged headlong in that living sea of men--
  Plunged to their death: back from that fatal field
  A scattered handful, fighting hard for life,
  Broke through the serried lines; but, as she gazed,
  They shrank and melted, and their forms grew thin--
  Grew pale as ghosts when the first morning ray
  Dawns from the East--the trumpet's brazen blare
  Died into silence--and the vision passed--
  Passed to a room where sick and dying lay
  In long, sad line--there brooded Fear and Pain--
  Darkness was there, the shade of Azrael's wing.
  But there was one that ever, to and fro,
  Moved with light footfall: purely calm her face,
  And those deep steadfast eyes that starred the gloom:
  Still, as she went, she ministered to each
  Comfort and counsel; cooled the fevered brow
  With softest touch, and in the listening ear
  Of the pale sufferer whispered words of peace.
  The dying warrior, gazing as she passed,
  Clasped his thin hands and blessed her. Bless her too,
  Thou, who didst bless the merciful of old!
    So prayed the Lady, watching tearfully
  Her gentle moving onward, till the night
  Had veiled her wholly, and the vision passed.
    Then once again the solemn whisper came:
  "So in the darkest path of man's despair,
  Where War and Terror shake the troubled earth,
  Lies woman's mission; with unblenching brow
  To pass through scenes of horror and affright
  Where men grow sick and tremble: unto her
  All things are sanctified, for all are good.
  Nothing so mean, but shall deserve her care:
  Nothing so great, but she may bear her part.
  No life is vain: each hath his place assigned:
  Do thou thy task, and leave the rest to God."
  And there was silence, but the Lady made
  No answer, save one deeply-breathed "Amen."
    And she arose, and in that darkening room
  Stood lonely as a spirit of the night--
  Stood calm and fearless in the gathered night--
  And raised her eyes to heaven. There were tears
  Upon her face, but in her heart was peace,
  Peace that the world nor gives nor takes away!

_April 10, 1856._


[Illustration]




THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW OF DEATH.


  Hark, _said the dying man_, _and sighed_,
      To that complaining tone--
  Like sprite condemned, each eventide,
      To walk the world alone.
  At sunset, when the air is still,
  I hear it creep from yonder hill:
  It breathes upon me, dead and chill,
      A moment, and is gone.

  My son, it minds me of a day
      Left half a life behind,
  That I have prayed to put away
      For ever from my mind.
  But bitter memory will not die:
  It haunts my soul when none is nigh:
  I hear its whisper in the sigh
      Of that complaining wind.

  And now in death my soul is fain
      To tell the tale of fear
  That hidden in my breast hath lain
      Through many a weary year:
  Yet time would fail to utter all--
  The evil spells that held me thrall,
  And thrust my life from fall to fall,
      Thou needest not to hear.

  The spells that bound me with a chain,
      Sin's stern behests to do,
  Till Pleasure's self, invoked in vain,
      A heavy burden grew--
  Till from my spirit's fevered eye,
  A hunted thing, I seemed to fly
  Through the dark woods that underlie
      Yon mountain-range of blue.

  Deep in those woods I found a vale
      No sunlight visiteth,
  Nor star, nor wandering moonbeam pale;
      Where never comes the breath
  Of summer-breeze--there in mine ear,
  Even as I lingered half in fear,
  I heard a whisper, cold and clear,
      "This is the gate of Death.

  "O bitter is it to abide
      In weariness alway:
  At dawn to sigh for eventide,
      At eventide for day.
  Thy noon hath fled: thy sun hath shone.
  The brightness of thy day is gone:
  What need to lag and linger on
      Till life be cold and gray?

  "O well," it said, "beneath yon pool,
      In some still cavern deep,
  The fevered brain might slumber cool,
      The eyes forget to weep:
  Within that goblet's mystic rim
  Are draughts of healing, stored for him
  Whose heart is sick, whose sight is dim,
      Who prayeth but to sleep!"

  The evening-breeze went moaning by,
      Like mourner for the dead,
  And stirred, with shrill complaining sigh,
      The tree-tops overhead:
  My guardian-angel seemed to stand
  And mutely wave a warning hand--
  With sudden terror all unmanned,
      I turned myself and fled!

  A cottage-gate stood open wide:
      Soft fell the dying ray
  On two fair children, side by side,
      That rested from their play--
  Together bent the earnest head,
  As ever and anon they read
  From one dear Book: the words they said
      Come back to me to-day.

  Like twin cascades on mountain-stair
      Together wandered down
  The ripples of the golden hair,
      The ripples of the brown:
  While, through the tangled silken haze,
  Blue eyes looked forth in eager gaze,
  More starlike than the gems that blaze
      About a monarch's crown.

  My son, there comes to each an hour
      When sinks the spirit's pride--
  When weary hands forget their power
      The strokes of death to guide:
  In such a moment, warriors say,
  A word the panic-rout may stay,
  A sudden charge redeem the day
      And turn the living tide.

  I could not see, for blinding tears,
      The glories of the west:
  A heavenly music filled mine ears,
      A heavenly peace my breast.
  "Come unto Me, come unto Me--
  All ye that labour, unto Me--
  Ye heavy-laden, come to Me--
      And I will give you rest."

  The night drew onward: thin and blue
      The evening mists arise
  To bathe the thirsty land in dew,
      As erst in Paradise--
  While, over silent field and town,
  The deep blue vault of heaven looked down;
  Not, as of old, in angry frown,
      But bright with angels' eyes.

  Blest day! Then first I heard the voice
      That since hath oft beguiled
  These eyes from tears, and bid rejoice
      This heart with anguish wild--
  Thy mother, boy, thou hast not known;
  So soon she left me here to moan--
  Left me to weep and watch, alone,
      Our one beloved child.

  Though, parted from my aching sight,
      Like homeward-speeding dove,
  She passed into the perfect light
      That floods the world above;
  Yet our twin spirits, well I know--
  Though one abide in pain below--
  Love, as in summers long ago,
      And evermore shall love.

  So with a glad and patient heart
      I move toward mine end:
  The streams, that flow awhile apart,
      Shall both in ocean blend.
  I dare not weep: I can but bless
  The Love that pitied my distress,
  And lent me, in Life's wilderness,
      So sweet and true a friend.

  But if there be--O if there be
      A truth in what they say,
  That angel-forms we cannot see
      Go with us on our way;
  Then surely she is with me here,
  I dimly feel her spirit near--
  The morning-mists grow thin and clear,
      And Death brings in the Day.

_April, 1868._


[Illustration]




SOLITUDE.


  I love the stillness of the wood:
    I love the music of the rill:
  I love to couch in pensive mood
        Upon some silent hill.

  Scarce heard, beneath yon arching trees,
    The silver-crested ripples pass;
  And, like a mimic brook, the breeze
        Whispers among the grass.

  Here from the world I win release,
    Nor scorn of men, nor footstep rude,
  Break in to mar the holy peace
        Of this great solitude.

  Here may the silent tears I weep
    Lull the vexed spirit into rest,
  As infants sob themselves to sleep
        Upon a mother's breast.

  But when the bitter hour is gone,
    And the keen throbbing pangs are still,
  Oh sweetest then to couch alone
        Upon some silent hill!

  To live in joys that once have been,
    To put the cold world out of sight,
  And deck life's drear and barren scene
        With hues of rainbow-light.

  For what to man the gift of breath,
    If sorrow be his lot below;
  If all the day that ends in death
        Be dark with clouds of woe?

  Shall the poor transport of an hour
    Repay long years of sore distress--
  The fragrance of a lonely flower
        Make glad the wilderness?

  Ye golden hours of Life's young spring,
    Of innocence, of love and truth!
  Bright, beyond all imagining,
        Thou fairy-dream of youth!

  I'd give all wealth that years have piled,
    The slow result of Life's decay,
  To be once more a little child
        For one bright summer-day.

_March 16, 1853._




FAR AWAY.


  He stept so lightly to the land,
      All in his manly pride:
  He kissed her cheek, he clasped her hand;
      Yet still she glanced aside.
  "Too gay he seems," she darkly dreams,
      "Too gallant and too gay,
  To think of me--poor simple me--
      When he is far away!"

  "I bring my Love this goodly pearl
      Across the seas," he said:
  "A gem to deck the dearest girl
      That ever sailor wed!"
  She holds it tight: her eyes are bright:
      Her throbbing heart would say
  "He thought of me--he thought of me--
      When he was far away!"

  The ship has sailed into the West:
      Her ocean-bird is flown:
  A dull dead pain is in her breast,
      And she is weak and lone:
  But there's a smile upon her face,
      A smile that seems to say
  "He'll think of me--he'll think of me--
      When he is far away!

  "Though waters wide between us glide,
      Our lives are warm and near:
  No distance parts two faithful hearts--
      Two hearts that love so dear:
  And I will trust my sailor-lad,
      For ever and a day,
  To think of me--to think of me--
      When he is far away!"


[Illustration]




BEATRICE.


  In her eyes is the living light
    Of a wanderer to earth
  From a far celestial height:
      Summers five are all the span--
      Summers five since Time began
  To veil in mists of human night
    A shining angel-birth.

  Does an angel look from her eyes?
    Will she suddenly spring away,
  And soar to her home in the skies?
      Beatrice! Blessing and blessed to be!
      Beatrice! Still, as I gaze on thee,
  Visions of two sweet maids arise,
    Whose life was of yesterday:

  Of a Beatrice pale and stern,
    With the lips of a dumb despair,
  With the innocent eyes that yearn--
      Yearn for the young sweet hours of life,
      Far from sorrow and far from strife,
  For the happy summers, that never return,
    When the world seemed good and fair:

  Of a Beatrice glorious, bright--
    Of a sainted, ethereal maid,
  Whose blue eyes are deep fountains of light,
      Cheering the poet that broodeth apart,
      Filling with gladness his desolate heart,
  Like the moon when she shines thro' a cloudless night
    On a world of silence and shade.

  And the visions waver and faint,
    And the visions vanish away
  That my fancy delighted to paint--
      She is here at my side, a living child,
      With the glowing cheek and the tresses wild,
  Nor death-pale martyr, nor radiant saint,
    Yet stainless and bright as they.

  For I think, if a grim wild beast
    Were to come from his charnel-cave,
  From his jungle-home in the East--
      Stealthily creeping with bated breath,
      Stealthily creeping with eyes of death--
  He would all forget his dream of the feast,
    And crouch at her feet a slave.

  She would twine her hand in his mane:
    She would prattle in silvery tone,
  Like the tinkle of summer-rain--
      Questioning him with her laughing eyes,
      Questioning him with a glad surprise,
  Till she caught from those fierce eyes again
    The love that lit her own.

  And be sure, if a savage heart,
    In a mask of human guise,
  Were to come on her here apart--
      Bound for a dark and a deadly deed,
      Hurrying past with pitiless speed--
  He would suddenly falter and guiltily start
    At the glance of her pure blue eyes.

  Nay, be sure, if an angel fair,
    A bright seraph undefiled,
  Were to stoop from the trackless air,
      Fain would she linger in glad amaze--
      Lovingly linger to ponder and gaze,
  With a sister's love and a sister's care,
    On the happy, innocent child.

_Dec. 4, 1862._


[Illustration]




STOLEN WATERS.


  The light was faint, and soft the air
        That breathed around the place;
  And she was lithe, and tall, and fair,
        And with a wayward grace
        Her queenly head she bare.

  With glowing cheek, with gleaming eye,
        She met me on the way:
  My spirit owned the witchery
        Within her smile that lay:
  I followed her, I knew not why.

  The trees were thick with many a fruit,
        The grass with many a flower:
  My soul was dead, my tongue was mute,
        In that accursëd hour.

  And, in my dream, with silvery voice,
        She said, or seemed to say,
  "Youth is the season to rejoice--"
        I could not choose but stay:
        I could not say her nay.

  She plucked a branch above her head,
        With rarest fruitage laden:
  "Drink of the juice, Sir Knight," she said:
        "'Tis good for knight and maiden."

  Oh, blind mine eye that would not trace--
    Oh, deaf mine ear that would not heed--
  The mocking smile upon her face,
        The mocking voice of greed!

  I drank the juice; and straightway felt
        A fire within my brain:
  My soul within me seemed to melt
        In sweet delirious pain.

  "Sweet is the stolen draught," she said:
        "Hath sweetness stint or measure?
  Pleasant the secret hoard of bread:
        What bars us from our pleasure?"

  "Yea, take we pleasure while we may,"
        I heard myself replying.
  In the red sunset, far away,
        My happier life was dying:
  My heart was sad, my voice was gay.

  And unawares, I knew not how,
    I kissed her dainty finger-tips,
  I kissed her on the lily brow,
    I kissed her on the false, false lips--
  That burning kiss, I feel it now!

  "True love gives true love of the best:
    Then take," I cried, "my heart to thee!"
  The very heart from out my breast
    I plucked, I gave it willingly:
    Her very heart she gave to me--
  Then died the glory from the west.

  In the gray light I saw her face,
    And it was withered, old, and gray;
  The flowers were fading in their place,
    Were fading with the fading day.

  Forth from her, like a hunted deer,
    Through all that ghastly night I fled,
  And still behind me seemed to hear
        Her fierce unflagging tread;
  And scarce drew breath for fear.

  Yet marked I well how strangely seemed
    The heart within my breast to sleep:
  Silent it lay, or so I dreamed,
        With never a throb or leap.

  For hers was now my heart, she said,
    The heart that once had been mine own:
  And in my breast I bore instead
        A cold, cold heart of stone.
  So grew the morning overhead.

  The sun shot downward through the trees
        His old familiar flame:
  All ancient sounds upon the breeze
        From copse and meadow came--
        But I was not the same.

  They call me mad: I smile, I weep,
        Uncaring how or why:
  Yea, when one's heart is laid asleep,
        What better than to die?
  So that the grave be dark and deep.

  To die! To die? And yet, methinks,
        I drink of life, to-day,
  Deep as the thirsty traveler drinks
        Of fountain by the way:
  My voice is sad, my heart is gay.

  When yestereve was on the wane,
        I heard a clear voice singing
  So sweetly that, like summer-rain,
        My happy tears came springing:
  My human heart returned again.

        _"A rosy child,
  Sitting and singing, in a garden fair,
      The joy of hearing, seeing,
      The simple joy of being--
  Or twining rosebuds in the golden hair
      That ripples free and wild.

        "A sweet pale child--
  Wearily looking to the purple West--
      Waiting the great For-ever
      That suddenly shall sever
  The cruel chains that hold her from her rest--
      By earth-joys unbeguiled.

        "An angel-child--
  Gazing with living eyes on a dead face:
      The mortal form forsaken,
      That none may now awaken,
  That lieth painless, moveless in her place,
      As though in death she smiled!

        "Be as a child--
  So shalt thou sing for very joy of breath--
      So shalt thou wait thy dying,
      In holy transport lying--
  So pass rejoicing through the gate of death,
      In garment undefiled."_

  Then call me what they will, I know
        That now my soul is glad:
  If this be madness, better so,
        Far better to be mad,
  Weeping or smiling as I go.

  For if I weep, it is that now
    I see how deep a loss is mine,
  And feel how brightly round my brow
        The coronal might shine,
  Had I but kept mine early vow:

  And if I smile, it is that now
    I see the promise of the years--
  The garland waiting for my brow,
        That must be won with tears,
  With pain--with death--I care not how.

_May 9, 1862._


[Illustration]




THE WILLOW-TREE.


  The morn was bright, the steeds were light,
      The wedding guests were gay:
  Young Ellen stood within the wood
      And watched them pass away.
  She scarcely saw the gallant train:
      The tear-drop dimmed her ee:
  Unheard the maiden did complain
      Beneath the Willow-Tree.

  "Oh Robin, thou didst love me well,
      Till, on a bitter day,
  She came, the Lady Isabel,
      And stole thy heart away.
  My tears are vain: I live again
      In days that used to be,
  When I could meet thy welcome feet
      Beneath the Willow-Tree.

  "Oh Willow gray, I may not stay
      Till Spring renew thy leaf;
  But I will hide myself away,
      And nurse a lonely grief.
  It shall not dim Life's joy for him:
      My tears he shall not see:
  While he is by, I'll come not nigh
      My weeping Willow-Tree.

  "But when I die, oh let me lie
      Beneath thy loving shade,
  That he may loiter careless by,
      Where I am lowly laid.
  And let the white white marble tell,
      If he should stoop to see,
  'Here lies a maid that loved thee well,
      Beneath the Willow-Tree.'"

1859.




ONLY A WOMAN'S HAIR.


  'Only a woman's hair'! Fling it aside!
    A bubble on Life's mighty stream:
  Heed it not, man, but watch the broadening tide
        Bright with the western beam.

  Nay! In those words there rings from other years
    The echo of a long low cry,
  Where a proud spirit wrestles with its tears
        In loneliest agony.

  And, as I touch that lock, strange visions throng
    Upon my soul with dreamy grace--
  Of woman's hair, the theme of poet's song
        In every time and place.

  A child's bright tresses, by the breezes kissed
    To sweet disorder as she flies,
  Veiling, beneath a cloud of golden mist,
        Flushed cheek and laughing eyes--

  Or fringing, like a shadow, raven-black,
    The glory of a queen-like face--
  Or from a gipsy's sunny brow tossed back
        In wild and wanton grace--

  Or crown-like on the hoary head of Age,
    Whose tale of life is well-nigh told--
  Or, last, in dreams I make my pilgrimage
        To Bethany of old.

  I see the feast--the purple and the gold--
    The gathering crowd of Pharisees,
  Whose scornful eyes are centred to behold
        Yon woman on her knees.

  The stifled sob rings strangely on mine ears,
    Wrung from the depth of sin's despair:
  And still she bathes the sacred feet with tears,
        And wipes them with her hair.

  He scorned not then the simple loving deed
    Of her, the lowest and the last;
  Then scorn not thou, but use with earnest heed
        This relic of the past.

  The eyes that loved it once no longer wake:
    So lay it by with reverent care--
  Touching it tenderly for sorrow's sake--
        It is a woman's hair.

_Feb. 17, 1862._


[Illustration]




THE SAILOR'S WIFE.


  See! There are tears upon her face--
    Tears newly shed, and scarcely dried:
  Close, in an agonised embrace,
    She clasps the infant at her side.

  Peace dwells in those soft-lidded eyes,
    Those parted lips that faintly smile--
  Peace, the foretaste of Paradise,
    In heart too young for care or guile.

  No peace that mother's features wear;
    But quivering lip, and knotted brow,
  And broken mutterings, all declare
    The fearful dream that haunts her now.

  The storm-wind, rushing through the sky,
    Wails from the depths of cloudy space;
  Shrill, piercing as the seaman's cry
    When death and he are face to face.

  Familiar tones are in the gale:
    They ring upon her startled ear:
  And quick and low she pants the tale
    That tells of agony and fear:

  "Still that phantom-ship is nigh--
    With a vexed and life-like motion,
  All beneath an angry sky,
    Rocking on an angry ocean.

  "Round the straining mast and shrouds
    Throng the spirits of the storm:
  Darkly seen through driving clouds,
    Bends each gaunt and ghastly form.

  "See! The good ship yields at last!
    Dumbly yields, and fights no more;
  Driving, in the frantic blast,
    Headlong on the fatal shore.

  "Hark! I hear her battered side,
    With a low and sullen shock,
  Dashed, amid the foaming tide,
    Full upon a sunken rock.

  "His face shines out against the sky,
    Like a ghost, so cold and white;
  With a dead despairing eye
    Gazing through the gathered night.

  "Is he watching, through the dark
    Where a mocking ghostly hand
  Points a faint and feeble spark
    Glimmering from the distant land?

  "Sees he, in this hour of dread,
    Hearth and home and wife and child?
  Loved ones who, in summers fled,
    Clung to him and wept and smiled?

  "Reeling sinks the fated bark
    To her tomb beneath the wave:
  Must he perish in the dark--
    Not a hand stretched out to save?

  "See the spirits, how they crowd!
    Watching death with eyes that burn!
  Waves rush in----" she shrieks aloud,
    Ere her waking sense return.

  The storm is gone: the skies are clear:
    Hush'd is that bitter cry of pain:
  The only sound, that meets her ear,
    The heaving of the sullen main.

  Though heaviness endure the night,
    Yet joy shall come with break of day:
  She shudders with a strange delight--
    The fearful dream is pass'd away.

  She wakes: the grey dawn streaks the dark:
    With early song the copses ring:
  Far off she hears the watch-dog bark
    A joyful bark of welcoming!

_Feb. 23, 1857._


[Illustration]




AFTER THREE DAYS.


      I stood within the gate
  Of a great temple, 'mid the living stream
  Of worshipers that thronged its regal state
      Fair-pictured in my dream.

      Jewels and gold were there;
  And floors of marble lent a crystal sheen
  To body forth, as in a lower air,
      The wonders of the scene.

      Such wild and lavish grace
  Had whispers in it of a coming doom;
  As richest flowers lie strown about the face
      Of her that waits the tomb.

      The wisest of the land
  Had gathered there, three solemn trysting-days,
  For high debate: men stood on either hand
      To listen and to gaze.

      The aged brows were bent,
  Bent to a frown, half thought, and half annoy,
  That all their stores of subtlest argument
      Were baffled by a boy.

      In each averted face
  I marked but scorn and loathing, till mine eyes
  Fell upon one that stirred not in his place,
      Tranced in a dumb surprise.

      Surely within his mind
  Strange thoughts are born, until he doubts the lore
  Of those old men, blind leaders of the blind,
      Whose kingdom is no more.

      Surely he sees afar
  A day of death the stormy future brings;
  The crimson setting of the herald-star
      That led the Eastern kings.

      Thus, as a sunless deep
  Mirrors the shining heights that crown the bay,
  So did my soul create anew in sleep
      The picture seen by day.

      Gazers came and went--
  A restless hum of voices marked the spot--
  In varying shades of critic discontent
      Prating they knew not what.

      "Where is the comely limb,
  The form attuned in every perfect part,
  The beauty that we should desire in him?"
      Ah! Fools and slow of heart!

      Look into those deep eyes,
  Deep as the grave, and strong with love divine;
  Those tender, pure, and fathomless mysteries,
      That seem to pierce through thine.

      Look into those deep eyes,
  Stirred to unrest by breath of coming strife,
  Until a longing in thy soul arise
      That this indeed were life:

      That thou couldst find Him there,
  Bend at His sacred feet thy willing knee,
  And from thy heart pour out the passionate prayer
      "Lord, let me follow Thee!"

      But see the crowd divide:
  Mother and sire have found their lost one now:
  The gentle voice, that fain would seem to chide
      Whispers "Son, why hast thou"--

      In tone of sad amaze--
  "Thus dealt with us, that art our dearest thing?
  Behold, thy sire and I, three weary days,
      Have sought thee sorrowing."

      And I had stayed to hear
  The loving words "How is it that ye sought?"--
  But that the sudden lark, with matins clear,
      Severed the links of thought.

      Then over all there fell
  Shadow and silence; and my dream was fled,
  As fade the phantoms of a wizard's cell
      When the dark charm is said.

      Yet, in the gathering light,
  I lay with half-shut eyes that would not wake,
  Lovingly clinging to the skirts of night
      For that sweet vision's sake.

_Feb. 16, 1861._


[Illustration]




FACES IN THE FIRE.


  The night creeps onward, sad and slow:
  In these red embers' dying glow
  The forms of Fancy come and go.

  An island-farm--broad seas of corn
  Stirred by the wandering breath of morn--
  The happy spot where I was born.

  The picture fadeth in its place:
  Amid the glow I seem to trace
  The shifting semblance of a face.

  'Tis now a little childish form--
  Red lips for kisses pouted warm--
  And elf-locks tangled in the storm.

  'Tis now a grave and gentle maid,
  At her own beauty half afraid,
  Shrinking, and willing to be stayed.

  Oh, Time was young, and Life was warm,
  When first I saw that fairy-form,
  Her dark hair tossing in the storm.

  And fast and free these pulses played,
  When last I met that gentle maid--
  When last her hand in mine was laid.

  Those locks of jet are turned to gray,
  And she is strange and far away
  That might have been mine own to-day--

  That might have been mine own, my dear,
  Through many and many a happy year--
  That might have sat beside me here.

  Ay, changeless through the changing scene,
  The ghostly whisper rings between,
  The dark refrain of 'might have been.'

  The race is o'er I might have run:
  The deeds are past I might have done;
  And sere the wreath I might have won.

  Sunk is the last faint flickering blaze:
  The vision of departed days
  Is vanished even as I gaze.

  The pictures, with their ruddy light,
  Are changed to dust and ashes white,
  And I am left alone with night.

_Jan., 1860._


[Illustration]




A LESSON IN LATIN.


  Our Latin books, in motley row,
      Invite us to our task--
  Gay Horace, stately Cicero:
  Yet there's one verb, when once we know,
      No higher skill we ask:
  This ranks all other lore above--
  We've learned "'_Amare_' means '_to love_'!"

  So, hour by hour, from flower to flower,
      We sip the sweets of Life:
  Till, all too soon, the clouds arise,
  And flaming cheeks and flashing eyes
      Proclaim the dawn of strife:
  With half a smile and half a sigh,
  "_Amare! Bitter One!_" we cry.

  Last night we owned, with looks forlorn,
      "Too well the scholar knows
  There is no rose without a thorn"--
  But peace is made! We sing, this morn,
      "No thorn without a rose!"
  Our Latin lesson is complete:
  We've learned that Love is Bitter-Sweet!

_May, 1888._




PUCK LOST AND FOUND.


  Puck has fled the haunts of men:
    Ridicule has made him wary:
  In the woods, and down the glen,
        No one meets a Fairy!

  "Cream!" the greedy Goblin cries--
    Empties the deserted dairy--
  Steals the spoons, and off he flies.
        Still we seek our Fairy!

  Ah! What form is entering?
    Lovelit eyes and laughter airy!
  Is not this a better thing,
  Child, whose visit thus I sing,
        Even than a Fairy?

_Nov. 22, 1891._

  Puck has ventured back agen:
    Ridicule no more affrights him:
  In the very haunts of men
        Newer sport delights him.

  Capering lightly to and fro,
    Ever frolicking and funning--
  "Crack!" the mimic pistols go!
        Hark! The noise is stunning!

  All too soon will Childhood gay
    Realise Life's sober sadness.
  Let's be merry while we may,
  Innocent and happy Fay!
        Elves were made for gladness!

_Nov. 25, 1891._


[Illustration]




A SONG OF LOVE.


  Say, what is the spell, when her fledgelings are cheeping,
        That lures the bird home to her nest?
  Or wakes the tired mother, whose infant is weeping,
        To cuddle and croon it to rest?
  What the magic that charms the glad babe in her arms,
        Till it cooes with the voice of the dove?
  'Tis a secret, and so let us whisper it low--
        And the name of the secret is Love!
              For I think it is Love,
              For I feel it is Love,
        For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

  Say, whence is the voice that, when anger is burning,
        Bids the whirl of the tempest to cease?
  That stirs the vexed soul with an aching--a yearning
        For the brotherly hand-grip of peace?
  Whence the music that fills all our being--that thrills
        Around us, beneath, and above?
  'Tis a secret: none knows how it comes, how it goes--
        But the name of the secret is Love!
              For I think it is Love,
              For I feel it is Love,
        For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

  Say, whose is the skill that paints valley and hill,
        Like a picture so fair to the sight?
  That flecks the green meadow with sunshine and shadow,
        Till the little lambs leap with delight?
  'Tis a secret untold to hearts cruel and cold,
        Though 'tis sung, by the angels above,
  In notes that ring clear for the ears that can hear--
        And the name of the secret is Love!
              For I think it is Love,
              For I feel it is Love,
        For I'm sure it is nothing but Love!

_Oct., 1886._




EXCELSIOR.


"Goblin, lead them up and down."


The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the sombre shadows of
night, when two travellers might have been observed swiftly--at a pace
of six miles in the hour--descending the rugged side of a mountain; the
younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, while his
companion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the heavy chain armour
habitually worn by tourists in that district, toiled on painfully at his
side.

As is always the case under such circumstances, the younger knight was
the first to break the silence.

"A goodly pace, I trow!" he exclaimed. "We sped not thus in the ascent!"

"Goodly, indeed!" the other echoed with a groan. "We clomb it but at
three miles in the hour."

"And on the dead level our pace is----?" the younger suggested; for he
was weak in statistics, and left all such details to his aged companion.

"Four miles in the hour," the other wearily replied. "Not an ounce
more," he added, with that love of metaphor so common in old age, "and
not a farthing less!"

"'Twas three hours past high noon when we left our hostelry," the young
man said, musingly. "We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance
mine host will roundly deny us all food!"

"He will chide our tardy return," was the grave reply, "and such a
rebuke will be meet."

"A brave conceit!" cried the other, with a merry laugh. "And should we
bid him bring us yet another course, I trow his answer will be tart!"

"We shall but get our deserts," sighed the elder knight, who had never
seen a joke in his life, and was somewhat displeased at his companion's
untimely levity. "'Twill be nine of the clock," he added in an
undertone, "by the time we regain our hostelry. Full many a mile shall
we have plodded this day!"

"How many? How many?" cried the eager youth, ever athirst for knowledge.

The old man was silent.

"Tell me," he answered, after a moment's thought, "what time it was when
we stood together on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!" he added
hastily, reading a protest in the young man's face. "An' thy guess be
within one poor half-hour of the mark, 'tis all I ask of thy mother's
son! Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall have
trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock."

A groan was the young man's only reply; while his convulsed features and
the deep wrinkles that chased each other across his manly brow, revealed
the abyss of arithmetical agony into which one chance question had
plunged him.




KNOT II.

ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS.

   "Straight down the crooked lane,
   And all round the square."


"Let's ask Balbus about it," said Hugh.

"All right," said Lambert.

"_He_ can guess it," said Hugh.

"Rather," said Lambert.

No more words were needed: the two brothers understood each other
perfectly.

[Illustration: "BALBUS WAS ASSISTING HIS MOTHER-IN-LAW TO CONVINCE THE
DRAGON."]

Balbus was waiting for them at the hotel: the journey down had tired
him, he said: so his two pupils had been the round of the place, in
search of lodgings, without the old tutor who had been their inseparable
companion from their childhood. They had named him after the hero of
their Latin exercise-book, which overflowed with anecdotes of that
versatile genius--anecdotes whose vagueness in detail was more than
compensated by their sensational brilliance. "Balbus has overcome all
his enemies" had been marked by their tutor, in the margin of the book,
"Successful Bravery." In this way he had tried to extract a moral from
every anecdote about Balbus--sometimes one of warning, as in "Balbus had
borrowed a healthy dragon," against which he had written "Rashness in
Speculation"--sometimes of encouragement, as in the words "Influence of
Sympathy in United Action," which stood opposite to the anecdote "Balbus
was assisting his mother-in-law to convince the dragon"--and sometimes
it dwindled down to a single word, such as "Prudence," which was all he
could extract from the touching record that "Balbus, having scorched the
tail of the dragon, went away." His pupils liked the short morals best,
as it left them more room for marginal illustrations, and in this
instance they required all the space they could get to exhibit the
rapidity of the hero's departure.

Their report of the state of things was discouraging. That most
fashionable of watering-places, Little Mendip, was "chockfull" (as the
boys expressed it) from end to end. But in one Square they had seen no
less than four cards, in different houses, all announcing in flaming
capitals "ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS." "So there's plenty of choice, after all,
you see," said spokesman Hugh in conclusion.

"That doesn't follow from the data," said Balbus, as he rose from the
easy chair, where he had been dozing over _The Little Mendip Gazette_.
"They may be all single rooms. However, we may as well see them. I shall
be glad to stretch my legs a bit."

An unprejudiced bystander might have objected that the operation was
needless, and that this long, lank creature would have been all the
better with even shorter legs: but no such thought occurred to his
loving pupils. One on each side, they did their best to keep up with his
gigantic strides, while Hugh repeated the sentence in their father's
letter, just received from abroad, over which he and Lambert had been
puzzling. "He says a friend of his, the Governor of----_what_ was that
name again, Lambert?" ("Kgovjni," said Lambert.) "Well, yes. The
Governor of----what-you-may-call-it----wants to give a _very_ small
dinner-party, and he means to ask his father's brother-in-law, his
brother's father-in-law, his father-in-law's brother, and his
brother-in-law's father: and we're to guess how many guests there will
be."

There was an anxious pause. "_How_ large did he say the pudding was to
be?" Balbus said at last. "Take its cubical contents, divide by the
cubical contents of what each man can eat, and the quotient----"

"He didn't say anything about pudding," said Hugh, "--and here's the
Square," as they turned a corner and came into sight of the "eligible
apartments."

"It _is_ a Square!" was Balbus' first cry of delight, as he gazed around
him. "Beautiful! Beau-ti-ful! Equilateral! _And_ rectangular!"

The boys looked round with less enthusiasm. "Number nine is the first
with a card," said prosaic Lambert; but Balbus would not so soon awake
from his dream of beauty.

"See, boys!" he cried. "Twenty doors on a side! What symmetry! Each side
divided into twenty-one equal parts! It's delicious!"

"Shall I knock, or ring?" said Hugh, looking in some perplexity at a
square brass plate which bore the simple inscription "RING ALSO."

"Both," said Balbus. "That's an Ellipsis, my boy. Did you never see an
Ellipsis before?"

"I couldn't hardly read it," said Hugh, evasively. "It's no good having
an Ellipsis, if they don't keep it clean."

"Which there is _one_ room, gentlemen," said the smiling landlady. "And
a sweet room too! As snug a little back-room----"

"We will see it," said Balbus gloomily, as they followed her in. "I knew
how it would be! One room in each house! No view, I suppose?"

"Which indeed there _is_, gentlemen!" the landlady indignantly
protested, as she drew up the blind, and indicated the back garden.

"Cabbages, I perceive," said Balbus. "Well, they're green, at any rate."

"Which the greens at the shops," their hostess explained, "are by no
means dependable upon. Here you has them on the premises, _and_ of the
best."

"Does the window open?" was always Balbus' first question in testing a
lodging: and "Does the chimney smoke?" his second. Satisfied on all
points, he secured the refusal of the room, and they moved on to Number
Twenty-five.

This landlady was grave and stern. "I've nobbut one room left," she
told them: "and it gives on the back-gyardin."

"But there are cabbages?" Balbus suggested.

The landlady visibly relented. "There is, sir," she said: "and good
ones, though I say it as shouldn't. We can't rely on the shops for
greens. So we grows them ourselves."

"A singular advantage," said Balbus: and, after the usual questions,
they went on to Fifty-two.

"And I'd gladly accommodate you all, if I could," was the greeting that
met them. "We are but mortal," ("Irrelevant!" muttered Balbus) "and I've
let all my rooms but one."

"Which one is a back-room, I perceive," said Balbus: "and looking out
on--on cabbages, I presume?"

"Yes, indeed, sir!" said their hostess. "Whatever _other_ folks may do,
_we_ grows our own. For the shops----"

"An excellent arrangement!" Balbus interrupted. "Then one can really
depend on their being good. Does the window open?"

The usual questions were answered satisfactorily: but this time Hugh
added one of his own invention--"Does the cat scratch?"

The landlady looked round suspiciously, as if to make sure the cat was
not listening, "I will not deceive you, gentlemen," she said. "It _do_
scratch, but not without you pulls its whiskers! It'll never do it," she
repeated slowly, with a visible effort to recall the exact words of some
written agreement between herself and the cat, "without you pulls its
whiskers!"

"Much may be excused in a cat so treated," said Balbus, as they left the
house and crossed to Number Seventy-three, leaving the landlady
curtseying on the doorstep, and still murmuring to herself her parting
words, as if they were a form of blessing, "---- not without you pulls
its whiskers!"

At Number Seventy-three they found only a small shy girl to show the
house, who said "yes'm" in answer to all questions.

"The usual room," said Balbus, as they marched in: "the usual
back-garden, the usual cabbages. I suppose you can't get them good at
the shops?"

"Yes'm," said the girl.

"Well, you may tell your mistress we will take the room, and that her
plan of growing her own cabbages is simply _admirable_!"

"Yes'm," said the girl, as she showed them out.

"One day-room and three bed-rooms," said Balbus, as they returned to the
hotel. "We will take as our day-room the one that gives us the least
walking to do to get to it."

"Must we walk from door to door, and count the steps?" said Lambert.

"No, no! Figure it out, my boys, figure it out!" Balbus gaily exclaimed,
as he put pens, ink, and paper before his hapless pupils, and left the
room.

"I say! It'll be a job!" said Hugh.

"Rather!" said Lambert.




KNOT III.

MAD MATHESIS.

   "I waited for the train."


"Well, they call me so because I _am_ a little mad, I suppose," she
said, good-humouredly, in answer to Clara's cautiously-worded question
as to how she came by so strange a nick-name. "You see, I never do what
sane people are expected to do now-a-days. I never wear long trains,
(talking of trains, that's the Charing Cross Metropolitan Station--I've
something to tell you about _that_), and I never play lawn-tennis. I
can't cook an omelette. I can't even set a broken limb! _There's_ an
ignoramus for you!"

Clara was her niece, and full twenty years her junior; in fact, she was
still attending a High School--an institution of which Mad Mathesis
spoke with undisguised aversion. "Let a woman be meek and lowly!" she
would say. "None of your High Schools for me!" But it was vacation-time
just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis was showing her the
sights of that Eighth Wonder of the world--London.

"The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!" she resumed, waving her hand
towards the entrance as if she were introducing her niece to a friend.
"The Bayswater and Birmingham Extension is just completed, and the
trains now run round and round continuously--skirting the border of
Wales, just touching at York, and so round by the east coast back to
London. The way the trains run is _most_ peculiar. The westerly ones go
round in two hours; the easterly ones take three; but they always manage
to start two trains from here, opposite ways, punctually every
quarter-of-an-hour."

"They part to meet again," said Clara, her eyes filling with tears at
the romantic thought.

"No need to cry about it!" her aunt grimly remarked. "They don't meet on
the same line of rails, you know. Talking of meeting, an idea strikes
me!" she added, changing the subject with her usual abruptness. "Let's
go opposite ways round, and see which can meet most trains. No need for
a chaperon--ladies' saloon, you know. You shall go whichever way you
like, and we'll have a bet about it!"

"I never make bets," Clara said very gravely. "Our excellent preceptress
has often warned us----"

"You'd be none the worse if you did!" Mad Mathesis interrupted. "In
fact, you'd be the better, I'm certain!"

"Neither does our excellent preceptress approve of puns," said Clara.
"But we'll have a match, if you like. Let me choose my train," she added
after a brief mental calculation, "and I'll engage to meet exactly half
as many again as you do."

"Not if you count fair," Mad Mathesis bluntly interrupted. "Remember, we
only count the trains we meet _on the way_. You mustn't count the one
that starts as you start, nor the one that arrives as you arrive."

"That will only make the difference of _one_ train," said Clara, as they
turned and entered the station. "But I never travelled alone before.
There'll be no one to help me to alight. However, I don't mind. Let's
have a match."

A ragged little boy overheard her remark, and came running after her.
"Buy a box of cigar-lights, Miss!" he pleaded, pulling her shawl to
attract her attention. Clara stopped to explain.

"I never smoke cigars," she said in a meekly apologetic tone. "Our
excellent preceptress----," but Mad Mathesis impatiently hurried her on,
and the little boy was left gazing after her with round eyes of
amazement.

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly down the central
platform, Mad Mathesis prattling on as usual--Clara silent, anxiously
reconsidering the calculation on which she rested her hopes of winning
the match.

"Mind where you go, dear!" cried her aunt, checking her just in time.
"One step more, and you'd have been in that pail of cold water!"

"I know, I know," Clara said, dreamily. "The pale, the cold, and the
moony----"

"Take your places on the spring-boards!" shouted a porter.

"What are _they_ for!" Clara asked in a terrified whisper.

"Merely to help us into the trains." The elder lady spoke with the
nonchalance of one quite used to the process. "Very few people can get
into a carriage without help in less than three seconds, and the trains
only stop for one second." At this moment the whistle was heard, and two
trains rushed into the station. A moment's pause, and they were gone
again; but in that brief interval several hundred passengers had been
shot into them, each flying straight to his place with the accuracy of a
Minie bullet--while an equal number were showered out upon the
side-platforms.

Three hours had passed away, and the two friends met again on the
Charing Cross platform, and eagerly compared notes. Then Clara turned
away with a sigh. To young impulsive hearts, like hers, disappointment
is always a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of kindly
sympathy.

"Try again, my love!" she said, cheerily. "Let us vary the experiment.
We will start as we did before, but not to begin counting till our
trains meet. When we see each other, we will say 'One!' and so count on
till we come here again."

Clara brightened up. "I shall win _that_," she exclaimed eagerly, "if I
may choose my train!"

Another shriek of engine whistles, another upheaving of spring-boards,
another living avalanche plunging into two trains as they flashed by:
and the travellers were off again.

Each gazed eagerly from her carriage window, holding up her handkerchief
as a signal to her friend. A rush and a roar. Two trains shot past each
other in a tunnel, and two travellers leaned back in their corners with
a sigh--or rather with _two_ sighs--of relief. "One!" Clara murmured to
herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. _This_ time, at any rate, the
victory will be mine!"

But _was_ it?




KNOT IV.

THE DEAD RECKONING.

   "I did dream of money-bags to-night."


Noonday on the open sea within a few degrees of the Equator is apt to be
oppressively warm; and our two travellers were now airily clad in suits
of dazzling white linen, having laid aside the chain-armour which they
had found not only endurable in the cold mountain air they had lately
been breathing, but a necessary precaution against the daggers of the
banditti who infested the heights. Their holiday-trip was over, and they
were now on their way home, in the monthly packet which plied between
the two great ports of the island they had been exploring.

Along with their armour, the tourists had laid aside the antiquated
speech it had pleased them to affect while in knightly disguise, and
had returned to the ordinary style of two country gentlemen of the
Twentieth Century.

Stretched on a pile of cushions, under the shade of a huge umbrella,
they were lazily watching some native fishermen, who had come on board
at the last landing-place, each carrying over his shoulder a small but
heavy sack. A large weighing-machine, that had been used for cargo at
the last port, stood on the deck; and round this the fishermen had
gathered, and, with much unintelligible jabber, seemed to be weighing
their sacks.

"More like sparrows in a tree than human talk, isn't it?" the elder
tourist remarked to his son, who smiled feebly, but would not exert
himself so far as to speak. The old man tried another listener.

"What have they got in those sacks, Captain?" he inquired, as that great
being passed them in his never ending parade to and fro on the deck.

The Captain paused in his march, and towered over the travellers--tall,
grave, and serenely self-satisfied.

"Fishermen," he explained, "are often passengers in My ship. These five
are from Mhruxi--the place we last touched at--and that's the way they
carry their money. The money of this island is heavy, gentlemen, but it
costs little, as you may guess. We buy it from them by weight--about
five shillings a pound. I fancy a ten pound-note would buy all those
sacks."

By this time the old man had closed his eyes--in order, no doubt, to
concentrate his thoughts on these interesting facts; but the Captain
failed to realise his motive, and with a grunt resumed his monotonous
march.

Meanwhile the fishermen were getting so noisy over the weighing-machine
that one of the sailors took the precaution of carrying off all the
weights, leaving them to amuse themselves with such substitutes in the
form of winch-handles, belaying-pins, &c., as they could find. This
brought their excitement to a speedy end: they carefully hid their sacks
in the folds of the jib that lay on the deck near the tourists, and
strolled away.

When next the Captain's heavy footfall passed, the younger man roused
himself to speak.

"_What_ did you call the place those fellows came from, Captain?" he
asked.

"Mhruxi, sir."

"And the one we are bound for?"

The Captain took a long breath, plunged into the word, and came out of
it nobly. "They call it Kgovjni, sir."

"K--I give it up!" the young man faintly said.

He stretched out his hand for a glass of iced water which the
compassionate steward had brought him a minute ago, and had set down,
unluckily, just outside the shadow of the umbrella. It was scalding hot,
and he decided not to drink it. The effort of making this resolution,
coming close on the fatiguing conversation he had just gone through, was
too much for him: he sank back among the cushions in silence.

His father courteously tried to make amends for his _nonchalance_.

"Whereabouts are we now, Captain?" said he, "Have you any idea?"

The Captain cast a pitying look on the ignorant landsman. "I could tell
you _that_, sir," he said, in a tone of lofty condescension, "to an
inch!"

"You don't say so!" the old man remarked, in a tone of languid surprise.

"And mean so," persisted the Captain. "Why, what do you suppose would
become of My ship, if I were to lose My Longitude and My Latitude?
Could _you_ make anything of My Dead Reckoning?"

"Nobody could, I'm sure!" the other heartily rejoined.

But he had overdone it.

"It's _perfectly_ intelligible," the Captain said, in an offended tone,
"to any one that understands such things." With these words he moved
away, and began giving orders to the men, who were preparing to hoist
the jib.

Our tourists watched the operation with such interest that neither of
them remembered the five money-bags, which in another moment, as the
wind filled out the jib, were whirled overboard and fell heavily into
the sea.

But the poor fishermen had not so easily forgotten their property. In a
moment they had rushed to the spot, and stood uttering cries of fury,
and pointing, now to the sea, and now to the sailors who had caused the
disaster.

The old man explained it to the Captain.

"Let us make it up among us," he added in conclusion. "Ten pounds will
do it, I think you said?"

[Illustration]

But the Captain put aside the suggestion with a wave of the hand.

"No, sir!" he said, in his grandest manner. "You will excuse Me, I am
sure; but these are My passengers. The accident has happened on board My
ship, and under My orders. It is for Me to make compensation." He
turned to the angry fishermen. "Come here, my men!" he said, in the
Mhruxian dialect. "Tell me the weight of each sack. I saw you weighing
them just now."

Then ensued a perfect Babel of noise, as the five natives explained, all
screaming together, how the sailors had carried off the weights, and
they had done what they could with whatever came handy.

Two iron belaying-pins, three blocks, six holystones, four
winch-handles, and a large hammer, were now carefully weighed, the
Captain superintending and noting the results. But the matter did not
seem to be settled, even then: an angry discussion followed, in which
the sailors and the five natives all joined: and at last the Captain
approached our tourists with a disconcerted look, which he tried to
conceal under a laugh.

"It's an absurd difficulty," he said. "Perhaps one of you gentlemen can
suggest something. It seems they weighed the sacks two at a time!"

"If they didn't have five separate weighings, of course you can't value
them separately," the youth hastily decided.

"Let's hear all about it," was the old man's more cautious remark.

"They _did_ have five separate weighings," the Captain said, "but--Well,
it beats _me_ entirely!" he added, in a sudden burst of candour. "Here's
the result. First and second sack weighed twelve pounds; second and
third, thirteen and a half; third and fourth, eleven and a half; fourth
and fifth, eight: and then they say they had only the large hammer left,
and it took _three_ sacks to weigh it down--that's the first, third and
fifth--and _they_ weighed sixteen pounds. There, gentlemen! Did you ever
hear anything like _that_?"

The old man muttered under his breath "If only my sister were here!" and
looked helplessly at his son. His son looked at the five natives. The
five natives looked at the Captain. The Captain looked at nobody: his
eyes were cast down, and he seemed to be saying softly to himself
"Contemplate one another, gentlemen, if such be your good pleasure. _I_
contemplate _Myself_!"




KNOT V.

OUGHTS AND CROSSES.

   "Look here, upon this picture, and on this."


"And what made you choose the first train, Goosey?" said Mad Mathesis,
as they got into the cab. "Couldn't you count better than _that_?"

"I took an extreme case," was the tearful reply. "Our excellent
preceptress always says 'When in doubt, my dears, take an extreme case.'
And I _was_ in doubt."

"Does it always succeed?" her aunt enquired.

Clara sighed. "Not _always_," she reluctantly admitted. "And I can't
make out why. One day she was telling the little girls--they make such a
noise at tea, you know--'The more noise you make, the less jam you will
have, and _vice versâ_.' And I thought they wouldn't know what '_vice
versâ_' meant: so I explained it to them. I said 'If you make an
infinite noise, you'll get no jam: and if you make no noise, you'll get
an infinite lot of jam.' But our excellent preceptress said that wasn't
a good instance. _Why_ wasn't it?" she added plaintively.

Her aunt evaded the question. "One sees certain objections to it," she
said. "But how did you work it with the Metropolitan trains? None of
them go infinitely fast, I believe."

"I called them hares and tortoises," Clara said--a little timidly, for
she dreaded being laughed at. "And I thought there couldn't be so many
hares as tortoises on the Line: so I took an extreme case--one hare and
an infinite number of tortoises."

"An extreme case, indeed," her aunt remarked with admirable gravity:
"and a most dangerous state of things!"

"And I thought, if I went with a tortoise, there would be only _one_
hare to meet: but if I went with the hare--you know there were _crowds_
of tortoises!"

"It wasn't a bad idea," said the elder lady, as they left the cab, at
the entrance of Burlington House. "You shall have another chance to-day.
We'll have a match in marking pictures."

Clara brightened up. "I should like to try again, very much," she said.
"I'll take more care this time. How are we to play?"

To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply: she was busy drawing lines
down the margins of the catalogue. "See," she said after a minute, "I've
drawn three columns against the names of the pictures in the long room,
and I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses--crosses for good
marks and oughts for bad. The first column is for choice of subject, the
second for arrangement, the third for colouring. And these are the
conditions of the match. You must give three crosses to two or three
pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five----"

"Do you mean _only_ two crosses?" said Clara. "Or may I count the
three-cross pictures among the two-cross pictures?"

"Of course you may," said her aunt. "Any one, that has _three_ eyes, may
be said to have _two_ eyes, I suppose?"

Clara followed her aunt's dreamy gaze across the crowded gallery,
half-dreading to find that there was a three-eyed person in sight.

"And you must give one cross to nine or ten."

"And which wins the match?" Clara asked, as she carefully entered these
conditions on a blank leaf in her catalogue.

"Whichever marks fewest pictures."

"But suppose we marked the same number?"

"Then whichever uses most marks."

Clara considered. "I don't think it's much of a match," she said. "I
shall mark nine pictures, and give three crosses to three of them, two
crosses to two more, and one cross each to all the rest."

"Will you, indeed?" said her aunt. "Wait till you've heard all the
conditions, my impetuous child. You must give three oughts to one or two
pictures, two oughts to three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I
don't want you to be _too_ hard on the R.A.'s."

Clara quite gasped as she wrote down all these fresh conditions. "It's a
great deal worse than Circulating Decimals!" she said. "But I'm
determined to win, all the same!"

Her aunt smiled grimly. "We can begin _here_," she said, as they paused
before a gigantic picture, which the catalogue informed them was the
"Portrait of Lieutenant Brown, mounted on his favorite elephant."

"He looks awfully conceited!" said Clara. "I don't think he was the
elephant's favorite Lieutenant. What a hideous picture it is! And it
takes up room enough for twenty!"

"Mind what you say, my dear!" her aunt interposed. "It's by an R.A.!"

But Clara was quite reckless. "I don't care who it's by!" she cried.
"And I shall give it three bad marks!"

Aunt and niece soon drifted away from each other in the crowd, and for
the next half-hour Clara was hard at work, putting in marks and rubbing
them out again, and hunting up and down for suitable pictures. This she
found the hardest part of all. "I _can't_ find the one I want!" she
exclaimed at last, almost crying with vexation.

"What is it you want to find, my dear?" The voice was strange to Clara,
but so sweet and gentle that she felt attracted to the owner of it, even
before she had seen her; and when she turned, and met the smiling looks
of two little old ladies, whose round dimpled faces, exactly alike,
seemed never to have known a care, it was as much as she could do--as
she confessed to Aunt Mattie afterwards--to keep herself from hugging
them both.

"I was looking for a picture," she said, "that has a good subject--and
that's well arranged--but badly coloured."

The little old ladies glanced at each other in some alarm. "Calm
yourself, my dear," said the one who had spoken first, "and try to
remember which it was. What _was_ the subject?"

"Was it an elephant, for instance?" the other sister suggested. They
were still in sight of Lieutenant Brown.

"I don't know, indeed!" Clara impetuously replied. "You know it doesn't
matter a bit what the subject _is_, so long as it's a good one!"

Once more the sisters exchanged looks of alarm, and one of them
whispered something to the other, of which Clara caught only the one
word "mad."

"They mean Aunt Mattie, of course," she said to herself--fancying, in
her innocence, that London was like her native town, where everybody
knew everybody else. "If you mean my aunt," she added aloud, "she's
_there_--just three pictures beyond Lieutenant Brown."

"Ah, well! Then you'd better go to her, my dear!" her new friend said,
soothingly. "_She'll_ find you the picture you want. Good-bye, dear!"

"Good-bye, dear!" echoed the other sister, "Mind you don't lose sight of
your aunt!" And the pair trotted off into another room, leaving Clara
rather perplexed at their manner.

"They're real darlings!" she soliloquised. "I wonder why they pity me
so!" And she wandered on, murmuring to herself "It must have two good
marks, and----"




KNOT VI.

HER RADIANCY.

   "One piecee thing that my have got,
     Maskee[A] that thing my no can do.
   You talkee you no sabey what?
               Bamboo."


They landed, and were at once conducted to the Palace. About half way
they were met by the Governor, who welcomed them in English--a great
relief to our travellers, whose guide could speak nothing but Kgovjnian.

"I don't half like the way they grin at us as we go by!" the old man
whispered to his son. "And why do they say 'Bamboo!' so often?"

"It alludes to a local custom," replied the Governor, who had overheard
the question. "Such persons as happen in any way to displease Her
Radiancy are usually beaten with rods."

[Illustration: "WHY DO THEY SAY 'BAMBOO!' SO OFTEN?"]

The old man shuddered. "A most objectional local custom!" he remarked
with strong emphasis. "I wish we had never landed! Did you notice that
black fellow, Norman, opening his great mouth at us? I verily believe he
would like to eat us!"

Norman appealed to the Governor, who was walking at his other side. "Do
they often eat distinguished strangers here?" he said, in as indifferent
a tone as he could assume.

"Not often--not ever!" was the welcome reply. "They are not good for it.
Pigs we eat, for they are fat. This old man is thin."

"And thankful to be so!" muttered the elder traveller. "Beaten we shall
be without a doubt. It's a comfort to know it won't be Beaten without
the B! My dear boy, just look at the peacocks!"

They were now walking between two unbroken lines of those gorgeous
birds, each held in check, by means of a golden collar and chain, by a
black slave, who stood well behind, so as not to interrupt the view of
the glittering tail, with its network of rustling feathers and its
hundred eyes.

The Governor smiled proudly. "In your honour," he said, "Her Radiancy
has ordered up ten thousand additional peacocks. She will, no doubt,
decorate you, before you go, with the usual Star and Feathers."

"It'll be Star without the S!" faltered one of his hearers.

"Come, come! Don't lose heart!" said the other. "All this is full of
charm for me."

"You are young, Norman," sighed his father; "young and light-hearted.
For me, it is Charm without the C."

"The old one is sad," the Governor remarked with some anxiety. "He has,
without doubt, effected some fearful crime?"

"But I haven't!" the poor old gentleman hastily exclaimed. "Tell him I
haven't, Norman!"

"He has not, as yet," Norman gently explained. And the Governor
repeated, in a satisfied tone, "Not as yet."

"Yours is a wondrous country!" the Governor resumed, after a pause. "Now
here is a letter from a friend of mine, a merchant, in London. He and
his brother went there a year ago, with a thousand pounds apiece; and on
New-Year's-day they had sixty thousand pounds between them!"

"How did they do it?" Norman eagerly exclaimed. Even the elder traveller
looked excited.

The Governor handed him the open letter. "Anybody can do it, when once
they know how," so ran this oracular document. "We borrowed nought: we
stole nought. We began the year with only a thousand pounds apiece: and
last New-Year's-day we had sixty thousand pounds between us--sixty
thousand golden sovereigns!"

Norman looked grave and thoughtful as he handed back the letter. His
father hazarded one guess. "Was it by gambling?"

"A Kgovjnian never gambles," said the Governor gravely, as he ushered
them through the palace gates. They followed him in silence down a long
passage, and soon found themselves in a lofty hall, lined entirely with
peacocks' feathers. In the centre was a pile of crimson cushions, which
almost concealed the figure of Her Radiancy--a plump little damsel, in a
robe of green satin dotted with silver stars, whose pale round face lit
up for a moment with a half-smile as the travellers bowed before her,
and then relapsed into the exact expression of a wax doll, while she
languidly murmured a word or two in the Kgovjnian dialect.

The Governor interpreted. "Her Radiancy welcomes you. She notes the
Impenetrable Placidity of the old one, and the Imperceptible Acuteness
of the youth."

Here the little potentate clapped her hands, and a troop of slaves
instantly appeared, carrying trays of coffee and sweetmeats, which they
offered to the guests, who had, at a signal from the Governor, seated
themselves on the carpet.

"Sugar-plums!" muttered the old man. "One might as well be at a
confectioner's! Ask for a penny bun, Norman!"

"Not so loud!" his son whispered. "Say something complimentary!" For the
Governor was evidently expecting a speech.

"We thank Her Exalted Potency," the old man timidly began. "We bask in
the light of her smile, which----"

"The words of old men are weak!" the Governor interrupted angrily. "Let
the youth speak!"

"Tell her," cried Norman, in a wild burst of eloquence, "that, like two
grasshoppers in a volcano, we are shrivelled up in the presence of Her
Spangled Vehemence!"

"It is well," said the Governor, and translated this into Kgovjnian. "I
am now to tell you," he proceeded, "what Her Radiancy requires of you
before you go. The yearly competition for the post of Imperial
Scarf-maker is just ended; you are the judges. You will take account of
the rate of work, the lightness of the scarves, and their warmth.
Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi
and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial-week, and they
were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's and she was
pronounced twice as good. But this year, woe is me, who can judge it?
Three competitors are here, and they differ in all points! While you
settle their claims, you shall be lodged, Her Radiancy bids me say, free
of expense--in the best dungeon, and abundantly fed on the best bread
and water."

The old man groaned. "All is lost!" he wildly exclaimed. But Norman
heeded him not: he had taken out his note-book, and was calmly jotting
down the particulars.

"Three they be," the Governor proceeded, "Lolo, Mimi, and Zuzu. Lolo
makes 5 scarves while Mimi makes 2; but Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3!
Again, so fairylike is Zuzu's handiwork, 5 of her scarves weigh no more
than one of Lolo's; yet Mimi's is lighter still--5 of hers will but
balance 3 of Zuzu's! And for warmth one of Mimi's is equal to 4 of
Zuzu's; yet one of Lolo's is as warm as 3 of Mimi's!"

Here the little lady once more clapped her hands.

"It is our signal of dismissal!" the Governor hastily said. "Pay Her
Radiancy your farewell compliments--and walk out backwards."

The walking part was all the elder tourist could manage. Norman simply
said "Tell Her Radiancy we are transfixed by the spectacle of Her Serene
Brilliance, and bid an agonized farewell to her Condensed Milkiness!"

"Her Radiancy is pleased," the Governor reported, after duly translating
this. "She casts on you a glance from Her Imperial Eyes, and is
confident that you will catch it!"

"That I warrant we shall!" the elder traveller moaned to himself
distractedly.

Once more they bowed low, and then followed the Governor down a winding
staircase to the Imperial Dungeon, which they found to be lined with
coloured marble, lighted from the roof, and splendidly though not
luxuriously furnished with a bench of polished malachite. "I trust you
will not delay the calculation," the Governor said, ushering them in
with much ceremony. "I have known great inconvenience--great and serious
inconvenience--result to those unhappy ones who have delayed to execute
the commands of Her Radiancy! And on this occasion she is resolute: she
says the thing must and shall be done: and she has ordered up ten
thousand additional bamboos!" With these words he left them, and they
heard him lock and bar the door on the outside.

"I told you how it would end!" moaned the elder traveller, wringing his
hands, and quite forgetting in his anguish that he had himself proposed
the expedition, and had never predicted anything of the sort. "Oh that
we were well out of this miserable business!"

"Courage!" cried the younger cheerily. "_Hæc olim meminisse juvabit!_
The end of all this will be glory!"

"Glory without the L!" was all the poor old man could say, as he rocked
himself to and fro on the malachite bench. "Glory without the L!"

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: "_Maskee_," in Pigeon-English, means "_without_."]




KNOT VII.

PETTY CASH.

   "Base is the slave that pays."


"Aunt Mattie!"

"My child?"

"_Would_ you mind writing it down at once? I shall be quite _certain_ to
forget it if you don't!"

"My dear, we really must wait till the cab stops. How can I possibly
write anything in the midst of all this jolting?"

"But _really_ I shall be forgetting it!"

Clara's voice took the plaintive tone that her aunt never knew how to
resist, and with a sigh the old lady drew forth her ivory tablets and
prepared to record the amount that Clara had just spent at the
confectioner's shop. Her expenditure was always made out of her aunt's
purse, but the poor girl knew, by bitter experience, that sooner or
later "Mad Mathesis" would expect an exact account of every penny that
had gone, and she waited, with ill-concealed impatience, while the old
lady turned the tablets over and over, till she had found the one headed
"PETTY CASH."

"Here's the place," she said at last, "and here we have yesterday's
luncheon duly entered. _One glass lemonade_ (Why can't you drink water,
like me?) _three sandwiches_ (They never put in half mustard enough. I
told the young woman so, to her face; and she tossed her head--like her
impudence!) _and seven biscuits_. _Total one-and-two-pence._ Well, now
for to-day's?"

"One glass of lemonade----" Clara was beginning to say, when suddenly
the cab drew up, and a courteous railway-porter was handing out the
bewildered girl before she had had time to finish her sentence.

Her aunt pocketed the tablets instantly. "Business first," she said:
"petty cash--which is a form of pleasure, whatever _you_ may
think--afterwards." And she proceeded to pay the driver, and to give
voluminous orders about the luggage, quite deaf to the entreaties of her
unhappy niece that she would enter the rest of the luncheon account.

"My dear, you really must cultivate a more capacious mind!" was all the
consolation she vouchsafed to the poor girl. "Are not the tablets of
your memory wide enough to contain the record of one single luncheon?"

"Not wide enough! Not half wide enough!" was the passionate reply.

The words came in aptly enough, but the voice was not that of Clara, and
both ladies turned in some surprise to see who it was that had so
suddenly struck into their conversation. A fat little old lady was
standing at the door of a cab, helping the driver to extricate what
seemed an exact duplicate of herself: it would have been no easy task to
decide which was the fatter, or which looked the more good-humoured of
the two sisters.

"I tell you the cab-door isn't half wide enough!" she repeated, as her
sister finally emerged, somewhat after the fashion of a pellet from a
pop-gun, and she turned to appeal to Clara. "Is it, dear?" she said,
trying hard to bring a frown into a face that dimpled all over with
smiles.

"Some folks is too wide for 'em," growled the cab-driver.

[Illustration: "I TELL YOU THE CAB-DOOR ISN'T HALF WIDE ENOUGH!"]

"Don't provoke me, man!" cried the little old lady, in what she meant
for a tempest of fury. "Say another word and I'll put you into the
County Court, and sue you for a _Habeas Corpus_!" The cabman touched his
hat, and marched off, grinning.

"Nothing like a little Law to cow the ruffians, my dear!" she remarked
confidentially to Clara. "You saw how he quailed when I mentioned the
_Habeas Corpus_? Not that I've any idea what it means, but it sounds
very grand, doesn't it?"

"It's very provoking," Clara replied, a little vaguely.

"Very!" the little old lady eagerly repeated. "And we're very much
provoked indeed. Aren't we, sister?"

"I never was so provoked in all my life!" the fatter sister assented,
radiantly.

By this time Clara had recognised her picture-gallery acquaintances,
and, drawing her aunt aside, she hastily whispered her reminiscences. "I
met them first in the Royal Academy--and they were very kind to me--and
they were lunching at the next table to us, just now, you know--and they
tried to help me to find the picture I wanted--and I'm sure they're dear
old things!"

"Friends of yours, are they?" said Mad Mathesis. "Well, I like their
looks. You can be civil to them, while I get the tickets. But do try and
arrange your ideas a little more chronologically!"

And so it came to pass that the four ladies found themselves seated side
by side on the same bench waiting for the train, and chatting as if they
had known one another for years.

"Now this I call quite a remarkable coincidence!" exclaimed the smaller
and more talkative of the two sisters--the one whose legal knowledge had
annihilated the cab-driver. "Not only that we should be waiting for the
same train, and at the same station--_that_ would be curious enough--but
actually on the same day, and the same hour of the day! That's what
strikes _me_ so forcibly!" She glanced at the fatter and more silent
sister, whose chief function in life seemed to be to support the family
opinion, and who meekly responded--

"And me too, sister!"

"Those are not _independent_ coincidences----" Mad Mathesis was just
beginning, when Clara ventured to interpose.

"There's no jolting here," she pleaded meekly. "_Would_ you mind writing
it down now?"

Out came the ivory tablets once more. "What was it, then?" said her
aunt.

"One glass of lemonade, one sandwich, one biscuit--Oh dear me!" cried
poor Clara, the historical tone suddenly changing to a wail of agony.

"Toothache?" said her aunt calmly, as she wrote down the items. The two
sisters instantly opened their reticules and produced two different
remedies for neuralgia, each marked "unequalled."

"It isn't that!" said poor Clara. "Thank you very much. It's only that I
_can't_ remember how much I paid!"

"Well, try and make it out, then," said her aunt. "You've got
yesterday's luncheon to help you, you know. And here's the luncheon we
had the day before--the first day we went to that shop--_one
glass lemonade_, _four sandwiches_, _ten biscuits_. _Total,
one-and-fivepence._" She handed the tablets to Clara, who gazed at them
with eyes so dim with tears that she did not at first notice that she
was holding them upside down.

The two sisters had been listening to all this with the deepest
interest, and at this juncture the smaller one softly laid her hand on
Clara's arm.

"Do you know, my dear," she said coaxingly, "my sister and I are in the
very same predicament! Quite identically the very same predicament!
Aren't we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely the very----" began the fatter sister,
but she was constructing her sentence on too large a scale, and the
little one would not wait for her to finish it.

"Yes, my dear," she resumed; "we were lunching at the very same shop as
you were--and we had two glasses of lemonade and three sandwiches and
five biscuits--and neither of us has the least idea what we paid. Have
we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely----" murmured the other, who evidently
considered that she was now a whole sentence in arrears, and that she
ought to discharge one obligation before contracting any fresh
liabilities; but the little lady broke in again, and she retired from
the conversation a bankrupt.

"_Would_ you make it out for us, my dear?" pleaded the little old lady.

"You can do Arithmetic, I trust?" her aunt said, a little anxiously, as
Clara turned from one tablet to another, vainly trying to collect her
thoughts. Her mind was a blank, and all human expression was rapidly
fading out of her face.

A gloomy silence ensued.




KNOT VIII.

DE OMNIBUS REBUS.

   "This little pig went to market:
   This little pig staid at home."


"By Her Radiancy's express command," said the Governor, as he conducted
the travellers, for the last time, from the Imperial presence, "I shall
now have the ecstasy of escorting you as far as the outer gate of the
Military Quarter, where the agony of parting--if indeed Nature can
survive the shock--must be endured! From that gate grurmstipths start
every quarter of an hour, both ways----"

"Would you mind repeating that word?" said Norman. "Grurm----?"

"Grurmstipths," the Governor repeated. "You call them omnibuses in
England. They run both ways, and you can travel by one of them all the
way down to the harbour."

The old man breathed a sigh of relief; four hours of courtly ceremony
had wearied him, and he had been in constant terror lest something
should call into use the ten thousand additional bamboos.

In another minute they were crossing a large quadrangle, paved with
marble, and tastefully decorated with a pigsty in each corner. Soldiers,
carrying pigs, were marching in all directions: and in the middle stood
a gigantic officer giving orders in a voice of thunder, which made
itself heard above all the uproar of the pigs.

"It is the Commander-in-Chief!" the Governor hurriedly whispered to his
companions, who at once followed his example in prostrating themselves
before the great man. The Commander gravely bowed in return. He was
covered with gold lace from head to foot: his face wore an expression of
deep misery: and he had a little black pig under each arm. Still the
gallant fellow did his best, in the midst of the orders he was every
moment issuing to his men, to bid a courteous farewell to the departing
guests.

"Farewell, oh old one--carry these three to the South corner--and
farewell to thee, thou young one--put this fat one on the top of the
others in the Western sty--may your shadows never be less--woe is me, it
is wrongly done! Empty out all the sties, and begin again!" And the
soldier leant upon his sword, and wiped away a tear.

"He is in distress," the Governor explained as they left the court. "Her
Radiancy has commanded him to place twenty-four pigs in those four
sties, so that, as she goes round the court, she may always find the
number in each sty nearer to ten than the number in the last."

"Does she call ten nearer to ten than nine is?" said Norman.

"Surely," said the Governor. "Her Radiancy would admit that ten is
nearer to ten than nine is--and also nearer than eleven is."

"Then I think it can be done," said Norman.

The Governor shook his head. "The Commander has been transferring them
in vain for four months," he said. "What hope remains? And Her Radiancy
has ordered up ten thousand additional----"

"The pigs don't seem to enjoy being transferred," the old man hastily
interrupted. He did not like the subject of bamboos.

"They are only _provisionally_ transferred, you know," said the
Governor. "In most cases they are immediately carried back again: so
they need not mind it. And all is done with the greatest care, under the
personal superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief."

"Of course she would only go _once_ round?" said Norman.

"Alas, no!" sighed their conductor. "Round and round. Round and round.
These are Her Radiancy's own words. But oh, agony! Here is the outer
gate, and we must part!" He sobbed as he shook hands with them, and the
next moment was briskly walking away.

"He _might_ have waited to see us off!" said the old man, piteously.

"And he needn't have begun whistling the very _moment_ he left us!" said
the young one, severely. "But look sharp--here are two what's-his-names
in the act of starting!"

Unluckily, the sea-bound omnibus was full. "Never mind!" said Norman,
cheerily. "We'll walk on till the next one overtakes us."

They trudged on in silence, both thinking over the military problem,
till they met an omnibus coming from the sea. The elder traveller took
out his watch. "Just twelve minutes and a half since we started," he
remarked in an absent manner. Suddenly the vacant face brightened; the
old man had an idea. "My boy!" he shouted, bringing his hand down upon
Norman's shoulder so suddenly as for a moment to transfer his centre of
gravity beyond the base of support.

Thus taken off his guard, the young man wildly staggered forwards, and
seemed about to plunge into space: but in another moment he had
gracefully recovered himself. "Problem in Precession and Nutation," he
remarked--in tones where filial respect only just managed to conceal a
shade of annoyance. "What is it?" he hastily added, fearing his father
might have been taken ill. "Will you have some brandy?"

"When will the next omnibus overtake us? When? When?" the old man cried,
growing more excited every moment.

Norman looked gloomy. "Give me time," he said. "I must think it over."
And once more the travellers passed on in silence--a silence only broken
by the distant squeals of the unfortunate little pigs, who were still
being provisionally transferred from sty to sty, under the personal
superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief.




KNOT IX.

A SERPENT WITH CORNERS.

   "Water, water, every where,
   Nor any drop to drink."


"It'll just take one more pebble."

"What ever _are_ you doing with those buckets?"

The speakers were Hugh and Lambert. Place, the beach of Little Mendip.
Time, 1.30, P.M. Hugh was floating a bucket in another a size larger,
and trying how many pebbles it would carry without sinking. Lambert was
lying on his back, doing nothing.

For the next minute or two Hugh was silent, evidently deep in thought.
Suddenly he started. "I say, look here, Lambert!" he cried.

"If it's alive, and slimy, and with legs, I don't care to," said
Lambert.

"Didn't Balbus say this morning that, if a body is immersed in liquid,
it displaces as much liquid as is equal to its own bulk?" said Hugh.

"He said things of that sort," Lambert vaguely replied.

"Well, just look here a minute. Here's the little bucket almost quite
immersed: so the water displaced ought to be just about the same bulk.
And now just look at it!" He took out the little bucket as he spoke, and
handed the big one to Lambert. "Why, there's hardly a teacupful! Do you
mean to say _that_ water is the same bulk as the little bucket?"

"Course it is," said Lambert.

"Well, look here again!" cried Hugh, triumphantly, as he poured the
water from the big bucket into the little one. "Why, it doesn't half
fill it!"

"That's _its_ business," said Lambert. "If Balbus says it's the same
bulk, why, it _is_ the same bulk, you know."

"Well, I don't believe it," said Hugh.

"You needn't," said Lambert. "Besides, it's dinner-time. Come along."

They found Balbus waiting dinner for them, and to him Hugh at once
propounded his difficulty.

"Let's get you helped first," said Balbus, briskly cutting away at the
joint. "You know the old proverb 'Mutton first, mechanics afterwards'?"

The boys did _not_ know the proverb, but they accepted it in perfect
good faith, as they did every piece of information, however startling,
that came from so infallible an authority as their tutor. They ate on
steadily in silence, and, when dinner was over, Hugh set out the usual
array of pens, ink, and paper, while Balbus repeated to them the problem
he had prepared for their afternoon's task.

"A friend of mine has a flower-garden--a very pretty one, though no
great size--"

"How big is it?" said Hugh.

"That's what _you_ have to find out!" Balbus gaily replied. "All _I_
tell you is that it is oblong in shape--just half a yard longer than its
width--and that a gravel-walk, one yard wide, begins at one corner and
runs all round it."

"Joining into itself?" said Hugh.

"_Not_ joining into itself, young man. Just before doing _that_, it
turns a corner, and runs round the garden again, alongside of the first
portion, and then inside that again, winding in and in, and each lap
touching the last one, till it has used up the whole of the area."

"Like a serpent with corners?" said Lambert.

"Exactly so. And if you walk the whole length of it, to the last inch,
keeping in the centre of the path, it's exactly two miles and half a
furlong. Now, while you find out the length and breadth of the garden,
I'll see if I can think out that sea-water puzzle."

"You said it was a flower-garden?" Hugh inquired, as Balbus was leaving
the room.

"I did," said Balbus.

"Where do the flowers grow?" said Hugh. But Balbus thought it best not
to hear the question. He left the boys to their problem, and, in the
silence of his own room, set himself to unravel Hugh's mechanical
paradox.

"To fix our thoughts," he murmured to himself, as, with hands
deep-buried in his pockets, he paced up and down the room, "we will take
a cylindrical glass jar, with a scale of inches marked up the side, and
fill it with water up to the 10-inch mark: and we will assume that every
inch depth of jar contains a pint of water. We will now take a solid
cylinder, such that every inch of it is equal in bulk to _half_ a pint
of water, and plunge 4 inches of it into the water, so that the end of
the cylinder comes down to the 6-inch mark. Well, that displaces 2
pints of water. What becomes of them? Why, if there were no more
cylinder, they would lie comfortably on the top, and fill the jar up to
the 12-inch mark. But unfortunately there _is_ more cylinder, occupying
half the space between the 10-inch and the 12-inch marks, so that only
_one_ pint of water can be accommodated there. What becomes of the other
pint? Why, if there were no more cylinder, it would lie on the top, and
fill the jar up to the 13-inch mark. But unfortunately----Shade of
Newton!" he exclaimed, in sudden accents of terror. "When _does_ the
water stop rising?"

A bright idea struck him. "I'll write a little essay on it," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Balbus's Essay._

"When a solid is immersed in a liquid, it is well known that it
displaces a portion of the liquid equal to itself in bulk, and that the
level of the liquid rises just so much as it would rise if a quantity of
liquid had been added to it, equal in bulk to the solid. Lardner says,
precisely the same process occurs when a solid is _partially_ immersed:
the quantity of liquid displaced, in this case, equalling the portion of
the solid which is immersed, and the rise of the level being in
proportion.

"Suppose a solid held above the surface of a liquid and partially
immersed: a portion of the liquid is displaced, and the level of the
liquid rises. But, by this rise of level, a little bit more of the solid
is of course immersed, and so there is a new displacement of a second
portion of the liquid, and a consequent rise of level. Again, this
second rise of level causes a yet further immersion, and by consequence
another displacement of liquid and another rise. It is self-evident that
this process must continue till the entire solid is immersed, and that
the liquid will then begin to immerse whatever holds the solid, which,
being connected with it, must for the time be considered a part of it.
If you hold a stick, six feet long, with its end in a tumbler of water,
and wait long enough, you must eventually be immersed. The question as
to the source from which the water is supplied--which belongs to a high
branch of mathematics, and is therefore beyond our present scope--does
not apply to the sea. Let us therefore take the familiar instance of a
man standing at the edge of the sea, at ebb-tide, with a solid in his
hand, which he partially immerses: he remains steadfast and unmoved, and
we all know that he must be drowned. The multitudes who daily perish in
this manner to attest a philosophical truth, and whose bodies the
unreasoning wave casts sullenly upon our thankless shores, have a truer
claim to be called the martyrs of science than a Galileo or a Kepler. To
use Kossuth's eloquent phrase, they are the unnamed demigods of the
nineteenth century."[B]

       *       *       *       *       *

"There's a fallacy _somewhere_," he murmured drowsily, as he stretched
his long legs upon the sofa. "I must think it over again." He closed his
eyes, in order to concentrate his attention more perfectly, and for the
next hour or so his slow and regular breathing bore witness to the
careful deliberation with which he was investigating this new and
perplexing view of the subject.

[Illustration: "HE REMAINS STEADFAST AND UNMOVED."]

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote B: _Note by the writer._--For the above Essay I am indebted to
a dear friend, now deceased.]




KNOT X.

CHELSEA BUNS.

   "Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!"

                          OLD SONG.


"How very, very sad!" exclaimed Clara; and the eyes of the gentle girl
filled with tears as she spoke.

"Sad--but very curious when you come to look at it arithmetically," was
her aunt's less romantic reply. "Some of them have lost an arm in their
country's service, some a leg, some an ear, some an eye----"

"And some, perhaps, _all_!" Clara murmured dreamily, as they passed the
long rows of weather-beaten heroes basking in the sun. "Did you notice
that very old one, with a red face, who was drawing a map in the dust
with his wooden leg, and all the others watching? I _think_ it was a
plan of a battle----"

"The battle of Trafalgar, no doubt," her aunt interrupted, briskly.

"Hardly that, I think," Clara ventured to say. "You see, in that case,
he couldn't well be alive----"

"Couldn't well be alive!" the old lady contemptuously repeated. "He's as
lively as you and me put together! Why, if drawing a map in the
dust--with one's wooden leg--doesn't prove one to be alive, perhaps
you'll kindly mention what _does_ prove it!"

Clara did not see her way out of it. Logic had never been her _forte_.

"To return to the arithmetic," Mad Mathesis resumed--the eccentric old
lady never let slip an opportunity of driving her niece into a
calculation--"what percentage do you suppose must have lost all four--a
leg, an arm, an eye, and an ear?"

"How _can_ I tell?" gasped the terrified girl. She knew well what was
coming.

"You can't, of course, without _data_," her aunt replied: "but I'm just
going to give you----"

"Give her a Chelsea bun, Miss! That's what most young ladies likes
best!" The voice was rich and musical, and the speaker dexterously
whipped back the snowy cloth that covered his basket, and disclosed a
tempting array of the familiar square buns, joined together in rows,
richly egged and browned, and glistening in the sun.

"No, sir! I shall give her nothing so indigestible! Be off!" The old
lady waved her parasol threateningly: but nothing seemed to disturb the
good-humour of the jolly old man, who marched on, chanting his melodious
refrain:--

[Music: Chel-sea buns! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!

Pi-ping hot! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!]

"Far too indigestible, my love!" said the old lady. "Percentages will
agree with you ever so much better!"

Clara sighed, and there was a hungry look in her eyes as she watched the
basket lessening in the distance: but she meekly listened to the
relentless old lady, who at once proceeded to count off the _data_ on
her fingers.

"Say that 70 per cent. have lost an eye--75 per cent. an ear--80 per
cent. an arm--85 per cent. a leg--that'll do it beautifully. Now, my
dear, what percentage, _at least_, must have lost all four?"

No more conversation occurred--unless a smothered exclamation of "Piping
hot!" which escaped from Clara's lips as the basket vanished round a
corner could be counted as such--until they reached the old Chelsea
mansion, where Clara's father was then staying, with his three sons and
their old tutor.

Balbus, Lambert, and Hugh had entered the house only a few minutes
before them. They had been out walking, and Hugh had been propounding a
difficulty which had reduced Lambert to the depths of gloom, and had
even puzzled Balbus.

"It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight, doesn't it?" Hugh
had begun.

"Sometimes," said Balbus, cautiously.

"Always," said Lambert, decisively.

"_Sometimes_," Balbus gently insisted. "Six midnights out of seven, it
changes to some other name."

"I meant, of course," Hugh corrected himself, "when it _does_ change
from Wednesday to Thursday, it does it at midnight--and _only_ at
midnight."

"Surely," said Balbus. Lambert was silent.

"Well, now, suppose it's midnight here in Chelsea. Then it's Wednesday
_west_ of Chelsea (say in Ireland or America) where midnight hasn't
arrived yet: and it's Thursday _east_ of Chelsea (say in Germany or
Russia) where midnight has just passed by?"

"Surely," Balbus said again. Even Lambert nodded this time.

"But it isn't midnight, anywhere else; so it can't be changing from one
day to another anywhere else. And yet, if Ireland and America and so on
call it Wednesday, and Germany and Russia and so on call it Thursday,
there _must_ be some place--not Chelsea--that has different days on the
two sides of it. And the worst of it is, the people _there_ get their
days in the wrong order: they've got Wednesday _east_ of them, and
Thursday _west_--just as if their day had changed from Thursday to
Wednesday!"

"I've heard that puzzle before!" cried Lambert. "And I'll tell you the
explanation. When a ship goes round the world from east to west, we
know that it loses a day in its reckoning: so that when it gets home,
and calls its day Wednesday, it finds people here calling it Thursday,
because we've had one more midnight than the ship has had. And when you
go the other way round you gain a day."

"I know all that," said Hugh, in reply to this not very lucid
explanation: "but it doesn't help me, because the ship hasn't proper
days. One way round, you get more than twenty-four hours to the day, and
the other way you get less: so of course the names get wrong: but people
that live on in one place always get twenty-four hours to the day."

"I suppose there _is_ such a place," Balbus said, meditatively, "though
I never heard of it. And the people must find it very queer, as Hugh
says, to have the old day _east_ of them, and the new one _west_:
because, when midnight comes round to them, with the new day in front of
it and the old one behind it, one doesn't see exactly what happens. I
must think it over."

So they had entered the house in the state I have described--Balbus
puzzled, and Lambert buried in gloomy thought.

"Yes, m'm, Master _is_ at home, m'm," said the stately old butler.
(N.B.--It is only a butler of experience who can manage a series of
three M's together, without any interjacent vowels.) "And the _ole_
party is a-waiting for you in the libery."

"I don't like his calling your father an _old_ party," Mad Mathesis
whispered to her niece, as they crossed the hall. And Clara had only
just time to whisper in reply "he meant the _whole_ party," before they
were ushered into the library, and the sight of the five solemn faces
there assembled chilled her into silence.

Her father sat at the head of the table, and mutely signed to the ladies
to take the two vacant chairs, one on each side of him. His three sons
and Balbus completed the party. Writing materials had been arranged
round the table, after the fashion of a ghostly banquet: the butler had
evidently bestowed much thought on the grim device. Sheets of quarto
paper, each flanked by a pen on one side and a pencil on the other,
represented the plates--penwipers did duty for rolls of bread--while
ink-bottles stood in the places usually occupied by wine-glasses. The
_pièce de resistance_ was a large green baize bag, which gave forth, as
the old man restlessly lifted it from side to side, a charming jingle,
as of innumerable golden guineas.

"Sister, daughter, sons--and Balbus--," the old man began, so nervously,
that Balbus put in a gentle "Hear, hear!" while Hugh drummed on the
table with his fists. This disconcerted the unpractised orator.
"Sister--" he began again, then paused a moment, moved the bag to the
other side, and went on with a rush, "I mean--this being--a critical
occasion--more or less--being the year when one of my sons comes of
age--" he paused again in some confusion, having evidently got into the
middle of his speech sooner than he intended: but it was too late to go
back. "Hear, hear!" cried Balbus. "Quite so," said the old gentleman,
recovering his self-possession a little: "when first I began this annual
custom--my friend Balbus will correct me if I am wrong--" (Hugh
whispered "with a strap!" but nobody heard him except Lambert, who only
frowned and shook his head at him) "--this annual custom of giving each
of my sons as many guineas as would represent his age--it was a critical
time--so Balbus informed me--as the ages of two of you were together
equal to that of the third--so on that occasion I made a speech----" He
paused so long that Balbus thought it well to come to the rescue with
the words "It was a most----" but the old man checked him with a warning
look: "yes, made a speech," he repeated. "A few years after that, Balbus
pointed out--I say pointed out--" ("Hear, hear"! cried Balbus. "Quite
so," said the grateful old man.) "--that it was _another_ critical
occasion. The ages of two of you were together _double_ that of the
third. So I made another speech--another speech. And now again it's a
critical occasion--so Balbus says--and I am making----" (Here Mad
Mathesis pointedly referred to her watch) "all the haste I can!" the old
man cried, with wonderful presence of mind. "Indeed, sister, I'm coming
to the point now! The number of years that have passed since that first
occasion is just two-thirds of the number of guineas I then gave you.
Now, my boys, calculate your ages from the _data_, and you shall have
the money!"

"But we _know_ our ages!" cried Hugh.

"Silence, sir!" thundered the old man, rising to his full height (he was
exactly five-foot five) in his indignation. "I say you must use the
_data_ only! You mustn't even assume _which_ it is that comes of age!"
He clutched the bag as he spoke, and with tottering steps (it was about
as much as he could do to carry it) he left the room.

"And _you_ shall have a similar _cadeau_," the old lady whispered to her
niece, "when you've calculated that percentage!" And she followed her
brother.

Nothing could exceed the solemnity with which the old couple had risen
from the table, and yet was it--was it a _grin_ with which the father
turned away from his unhappy sons? Could it be--could it be a _wink_
with which the aunt abandoned her despairing niece? And were those--were
those sounds of suppressed _chuckling_ which floated into the room, just
before Balbus (who had followed them out) closed the door? Surely not:
and yet the butler told the cook--but no, that was merely idle gossip,
and I will not repeat it.

The shades of evening granted their unuttered petition, and "closed not
o'er" them (for the butler brought in the lamp): the same obliging
shades left them a "lonely bark" (the wail of a dog, in the back-yard,
baying the moon) for "awhile": but neither "morn, alas," (nor any other
epoch) seemed likely to "restore" them--to that peace of mind which had
once been theirs ere ever these problems had swooped upon them, and
crushed them with a load of unfathomable mystery!

"It's hardly fair," muttered Hugh, "to give us such a jumble as this to
work out!"

"Fair?" Clara echoed, bitterly. "Well!"

And to all my readers I can but repeat the last words of gentle Clara--

   FARE-WELL!




APPENDIX.

     "A knot!" said Alice. "Oh, do let me help to undo it!"


ANSWERS TO KNOT I.

_Problem._--"Two travellers spend from 3 o'clock till 9 in walking along
a level road, up a hill, and home again: their pace on the level being 4
miles an hour, up hill 3, and down hill 6. Find distance walked: also
(within half an hour) time of reaching top of hill."

_Answer._--"24 miles: half-past 6."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--A level mile takes 1/4 of an hour, up hill 1/3, down hill
1/6. Hence to go and return over the same mile, whether on the level or
on the hill-side, takes 1/2 an hour. Hence in 6 hours they went 12 miles
out and 12 back. If the 12 miles out had been nearly all level, they
would have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all up hill, a little
under 4. Hence 3-1/2 hours must be within 1/2 an hour of the time taken
in reaching the peak; thus, as they started at 3, they got there within
1/2 an hour of 1/2 past 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are right, 16 partially
right, and 2 wrong. The 16 give the _distance_ correctly, but they have
failed to grasp the fact that the top of the hill might have been
reached at _any_ moment between 6 o'clock and 7.

The two wrong answers are from GERTY VERNON and A NIHILIST. The former
makes the distance "23 miles," while her revolutionary companion puts it
at "27." GERTY VERNON says "they had to go 4 miles along the plain, and
got to the foot of the hill at 4 o'clock." They _might_ have done so, I
grant; but you have no ground for saying they _did_ so. "It was 7-1/2
miles to the top of the hill, and they reached that at 1/4 before 7
o'clock." Here you go wrong in your arithmetic, and I must, however
reluctantly, bid you farewell. 7-1/2 miles, at 3 miles an hour, would
_not_ require 2-3/4 hours. A NIHILIST says "Let _x_ denote the whole
number of miles; _y_ the number of hours to hill-top; [** therefore] 3_y_ =
number of miles to hill-top, and _x_-3_y_ = number of miles on the other
side." You bewilder me. The other side of _what_? "Of the hill," you
say. But then, how did they get home again? However, to accommodate your
views we will build a new hostelry at the foot of the hill on the
opposite side, and also assume (what I grant you is _possible_, though
it is not _necessarily_ true) that there was no level road at all. Even
then you go wrong.

You say

   "_y_ = 6 - (_x_ - 3_y_)/6, ..... (i);

   _x_/4-1/2 = 6              ..... (ii)."

I grant you (i), but I deny (ii): it rests on the assumption that to go
_part_ of the time at 3 miles an hour, and the rest at 6 miles an hour,
comes to the same result as going the _whole_ time at 4-1/2 miles an
hour. But this would only be true if the "_part_" were an exact _half_,
i.e., if they went up hill for 3 hours, and down hill for the other 3:
which they certainly did _not_ do.

The sixteen, who are partially right, are AGNES BAILEY, F. K., FIFEE, G.
E. B., H. P., KIT, M. E. T., MYSIE, A MOTHER'S SON, NAIRAM, A
REDRUTHIAN, A SOCIALIST, SPEAR MAIDEN, T. B. C, VIS INERTIÆ, and YAK. Of
these, F. K., FIFEE, T. B. C, and VIS INERTIÆ do not attempt the second
part at all. F. K. and H. P. give no working. The rest make particular
assumptions, such as that there was no level road--that there were 6
miles of level road--and so on, all leading to _particular_ times being
fixed for reaching the hill-top. The most curious assumption is that of
AGNES BAILEY, who says "Let _x_ = number of hours occupied in ascent;
then _x_/2 = hours occupied in descent; and 4_x_/3 = hours occupied on
the level." I suppose you were thinking of the relative _rates_, up
hill and on the level; which we might express by saying that, if they
went x miles up hill in a certain time, they would go 4_x_/3 miles on
the level _in the same time_. You have, in fact, assumed that they took
_the same time_ on the level that they took in ascending the hill. FIFEE
assumes that, when the aged knight said they had gone "four miles in the
hour" on the level, he meant that four miles was the _distance_ gone,
not merely the rate. This would have been--if FIFEE will excuse the
slang expression--a "sell," ill-suited to the dignity of the hero.

And now "descend, ye classic Nine!" who have solved the whole problem,
and let me sing your praises. Your names are BLITHE, E. W., L. B., A
MARLBOROUGH BOY, O. V. L., PUTNEY WALKER, ROSE, SEA BREEZE, SIMPLE
SUSAN, and MONEY SPINNER. (These last two I count as one, as they send a
joint answer.) ROSE and SIMPLE SUSAN and CO. do not actually state that
the hill-top was reached some time between 6 and 7, but, as they have
clearly grasped the fact that a mile, ascended and descended, took the
same time as two level miles, I mark them as "right." A MARLBOROUGH BOY
and PUTNEY WALKER deserve honourable mention for their algebraical
solutions being the only two who have perceived that the question leads
to _an indeterminate equation_. E. W. brings a charge of untruthfulness
against the aged knight--a serious charge, for he was the very pink of
chivalry! She says "According to the data given, the time at the summit
affords no clue to the total distance. It does not enable us to state
precisely to an inch how much level and how much hill there was on the
road." "Fair damsel," the aged knight replies, "--if, as I surmise, thy
initials denote Early Womanhood--bethink thee that the word 'enable' is
thine, not mine. I did but ask the time of reaching the hill-top as my
_condition_ for further parley. If _now_ thou wilt not grant that I am a
truth-loving man, then will I affirm that those same initials denote
Envenomed Wickedness!"


CLASS LIST.

I.

   A MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   PUTNEY WALKER.

II.

   BLITHE.
   E. W.
   L. B.
   O. V. L.
   ROSE.
   SEA BREEZE.
   {SIMPLE SUSAN.
   {MONEY-SPINNER.

BLITHE has made so ingenious an addition to the problem, and SIMPLE
SUSAN and CO. have solved it in such tuneful verse, that I record both
their answers in full. I have altered a word or two in BLITHE'S--which I
trust she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yet stay," said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration lighted up the
relaxing muscles of his quiescent features. "Stay. Methinks it matters
little _when_ we reached that summit, the crown of our toil. For in the
space of time wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down the same
on our return, we could have trudged the _twain_ on the level. We have
plodded, then, four-and-twenty miles in these six mortal hours; for
never a moment did we stop for catching of fleeting breath or for gazing
on the scene around!"

"Very good," said the old man. "Twelve miles out and twelve miles in.
And we reached the top some time between six and seven of the clock. Now
mark me! For every five minutes that had fled since six of the clock
when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we toiled upwards on the
dreary mountainside!"

The youth moaned and rushed into the hostel.

   BLITHE.

   The elder and the younger knight,
     They sallied forth at three;
   How far they went on level ground
     It matters not to me;
   What time they reached the foot of hill,
     When they began to mount,
   Are problems which I hold to be
     Of very small account.

   The moment that each waved his hat
     Upon the topmost peak--
   To trivial query such as this
     No answer will I seek.
   Yet can I tell the distance well
     They must have travelled o'er:
   On hill and plain, 'twixt three and nine,
     The miles were twenty-four.

   Four miles an hour their steady pace
     Along the level track,
   Three when they climbed--but six when they
     Came swiftly striding back
   Adown the hill; and little skill
     It needs, methinks, to show,
   Up hill and down together told,
     Four miles an hour they go.

   For whether long or short the time
     Upon the hill they spent,
   Two thirds were passed in going up,
     One third in the descent.
   Two thirds at three, one third at six,
     If rightly reckoned o'er,
   Will make one whole at four--the tale
     Is tangled now no more.

                                SIMPLE SUSAN.
                                MONEY SPINNER.


ANSWERS TO KNOT II.

§ 1. THE DINNER PARTY.

_Problem._--"The Governor of Kgovjni wants to give a very small dinner
party, and invites his father's brother-in-law, his brother's
father-in-law, his father-in-law's brother, and his brother-in-law's
father. Find the number of guests."

_Answer._--"One."

       *       *       *       *       *

In this genealogy, males are denoted by capitals, and females by small
letters.

The Governor is E and his guest is C.

            A = a
              |
       +------+-+----+
       |        |    |
   b = B    D = d    C = c
     |        |        |
     |   +---++--+   +-+-+
     |   |   |   |   |   |
     e = E   |   g = G   |
             F ========= f

Ten answers have been received. Of these, one is wrong, GALANTHUS
NIVALIS MAJOR, who insists on inviting _two_ guests, one being the
Governor's _wife's brother's father_. If she had taken his _sister's
husband's father_ instead, she would have found it possible to reduce
the guests to _one_.

Of the nine who send right answers, SEA-BREEZE is the very faintest
breath that ever bore the name! She simply states that the Governor's
uncle might fulfill all the conditions "by intermarriages"! "Wind of the
western sea," you have had a very narrow escape! Be thankful to appear
in the Class-list at all! BOG-OAK and BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE use
genealogies which require 16 people instead of 14, by inviting the
Governor's _father's sister's husband_ instead of his _father's wife's
brother_. I cannot think this so good a solution as one that requires
only 14. CAIUS and VALENTINE deserve special mention as the only two who
have supplied genealogies.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BEE.
   CAIUS.
   M. M.
   MATTHEW MATTICKS.
   OLD CAT.
   VALENTINE.

II.

   BOG-OAK.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

III.

   SEA-BREEZE.


§ 2. THE LODGINGS.

_Problem._--"A Square has 20 doors on each side, which contains 21 equal
parts. They are numbered all round, beginning at one corner. From which
of the four, Nos. 9, 25, 52, 73, is the sum of the distances, to the
other three, least?"

_Answer._--"From No. 9."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Let A be No. 9, B No. 25, C No. 52, and D No. 73.

   Then AB = [** sqrt](12^{2} + 5^{2}) = [** sqrt]169 = 13;
   AC = 21;
   AD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 8^{2}) = [** sqrt]145 = 12 +
   (N.B. _i.e._ "between 12 and 13.")
   BC = [** sqrt](16^{2} + 12^{2}) = [** sqrt]400 = 20;
   BD = [** sqrt](3^{2} + 21^{2}) = [** sqrt]450 = 21+;
   CD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 13^{2}) = [** sqrt]250 = 15+;


Hence sum of distances from A is between 46 and 47; from B, between 54
and 55; from C, between 56 and 57; from D, between 48 and 51. (Why not
"between 48 and 49"? Make this out for yourselves.) Hence the sum is
least for A.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-five solutions have been received. Of these, 15 must be marked
"0," 5 are partly right, and 5 right. Of the 15, I may dismiss
ALPHABETICAL PHANTOM, BOG-OAK, DINAH MITE, FIFEE, GALANTHUS NIVALIS
MAJOR (I fear the cold spring has blighted our SNOWDROP), GUY, H.M.S.
PINAFORE, JANET, and VALENTINE with the simple remark that they insist
on the unfortunate lodgers _keeping to the pavement_. (I used the words
"crossed to Number Seventy-three" for the special purpose of showing
that _short cuts_ were possible.) SEA-BREEZE does the same, and adds
that "the result would be the same" even if they crossed the Square, but
gives no proof of this. M. M. draws a diagram, and says that No. 9 is
the house, "as the diagram shows." I cannot see _how_ it does so. OLD
CAT assumes that the house _must_ be No. 9 or No. 73. She does not
explain how she estimates the distances. Bee's Arithmetic is faulty: she
makes [** sqrt]169 + [** sqrt]442 + [** sqrt]130 = 741. (I suppose you
mean [** sqrt]741, which would be a little nearer the truth. But roots
cannot be added in this manner. Do you think [** sqrt]9 + [** sqrt]16 is
25, or even [** sqrt]25?) But AYR'S state is more perilous still: she
draws illogical conclusions with a frightful calmness. After pointing
out (rightly) that AC is less than BD she says, "therefore the nearest
house to the other three must be A or C." And again, after pointing out
(rightly) that B and D are both within the half-square containing A,
she says "therefore" AB + AD must be less than BC + CD. (There is no
logical force in either "therefore." For the first, try Nos. 1, 21, 60,
70: this will make your premiss true, and your conclusion false.
Similarly, for the second, try Nos. 1, 30, 51, 71.)

Of the five partly-right solutions, RAGS AND TATTERS and MAD HATTER (who
send one answer between them) make No. 25 6 units from the corner
instead of 5. CHEAM, E. R. D. L., and MEGGY POTTS leave openings at the
corners of the Square, which are not in the _data_: moreover CHEAM gives
values for the distances without any hint that they are only
_approximations_. CROPHI AND MOPHI make the bold and unfounded
assumption that there were really 21 houses on each side, instead of 20
as stated by Balbus. "We may assume," they add, "that the doors of Nos.
21, 42, 63, 84, are invisible from the centre of the Square"! What is
there, I wonder, that CROPHI AND MOPHI would _not_ assume?

Of the five who are wholly right, I think BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, CAIUS,
CLIFTON C., and MARTREB deserve special praise for their full
_analytical_ solutions. MATTHEW MATTICKS picks out No. 9, and proves it
to be the right house in two ways, very neatly and ingeniously, but
_why_ he picks it out does not appear. It is an excellent _synthetical_
proof, but lacks the analysis which the other four supply.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE
   CAIUS.
   CLIFTON C.
   MARTREB.

II.

MATTHEW MATTICKS.

III.

   CHEAM.
   CROPHI AND MOPHI.
   E. R. D. L.
   MEGGY POTTS.
   {RAGS AND TATTERS.
   {MAD HATTER.


A remonstrance has reached me from SCRUTATOR on the subject of KNOT I.,
which he declares was "no problem at all." "Two questions," he says,
"are put. To solve one there is no data: the other answers itself." As
to the first point, SCRUTATOR is mistaken; there _are_ (not "is") data
sufficient to answer the question. As to the other, it is interesting to
know that the question "answers itself," and I am sure it does the
question great credit: still I fear I cannot enter it on the list of
winners, as this competition is only open to human beings.


ANSWERS TO KNOT III.

_Problem._--(1) "Two travellers, starting at the same time, went
opposite ways round a circular railway. Trains start each way every 15
minutes, the easterly ones going round in 3 hours, the westerly in 2.
How many trains did each meet on the way, not counting trains met at the
terminus itself?" (2) "They went round, as before, each traveller
counting as 'one' the train containing the other traveller. How many did
each meet?"

_Answers._--(1) 19. (2) The easterly traveller met 12; the other 8.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trains one way took 180 minutes, the other way 120. Let us take the
L. C. M., 360, and divide the railway into 360 units. Then one set of
trains went at the rate of 2 units a minute and at intervals of 30
units; the other at the rate of 3 units a minute and at intervals of 45
units. An easterly train starting has 45 units between it and the first
train it will meet: it does 2-5ths of this while the other does 3-5ths,
and thus meets it at the end of 18 units, and so all the way round. A
westerly train starting has 30 units between it and the first train it
will meet: it does 3-5ths of this while the other does 2-5ths, and thus
meets it at the end of 18 units, and so all the way round. Hence if the
railway be divided, by 19 posts, into 20 parts, each containing 18
units, trains meet at every post, and, in (1), each traveller passes 19
posts in going round, and so meets 19 trains. But, in (2), the easterly
traveller only begins to count after traversing 2-5ths of the journey,
_i.e._, on reaching the 8th post, and so counts 12 posts: similarly the
other counts 8. They meet at the end of 2-5ths of 3 hours, or 3-5ths of
2 hours, _i.e._, 72 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty-five answers have been received. Of these 12 are beyond the reach
of discussion, as they give no working. I can but enumerate their names.
ARDMORE, E. A., F. A. D., L. D., MATTHEW MATTICKS, M. E. T., POO-POO,
and THE RED QUEEN are all wrong. BETA and ROWENA have got (1) right and
(2) wrong. CHEEKY BOB and NAIRAM give the right answers, but it may
perhaps make the one less cheeky, and induce the other to take a less
inverted view of things, to be informed that, if this had been a
competition for a prize, they would have got no marks. [N.B.--I have
not ventured to put E. A.'s name in full, as she only gave it
provisionally, in case her answer should prove right.]

Of the 33 answers for which the working is given, 10 are wrong; 11
half-wrong and half-right; 3 right, except that they cherish the
delusion that it was _Clara_ who travelled in the easterly train--a
point which the data do not enable us to settle; and 9 wholly right.

The 10 wrong answers are from BO-PEEP, FINANCIER, I. W. T., KATE B., M.
A. H., Q. Y. Z., SEA-GULL, THISTLEDOWN, TOM-QUAD, and an unsigned one.
BO-PEEP rightly says that the easterly traveller met all trains which
started during the 3 hours of her trip, as well as all which started
during the previous 2 hours, _i.e._, all which started at the
commencements of 20 periods of 15 minutes each; and she is right in
striking out the one she met at the moment of starting; but wrong in
striking out the _last_ train, for she did not meet this at the
terminus, but 15 minutes before she got there. She makes the same
mistake in (2). FINANCIER thinks that any train, met for the second
time, is not to be counted. I. W. T. finds, by a process which is not
stated, that the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes and 26-1/2
seconds. KATE B. thinks the trains which are met on starting and on
arriving are _never_ to be counted, even when met elsewhere. Q. Y. Z.
tries a rather complex algebraical solution, and succeeds in finding the
time of meeting correctly: all else is wrong. SEA-GULL seems to think
that, in (1), the easterly train _stood still_ for 3 hours; and says
that, in (2), the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes 40 seconds.
THISTLEDOWN nobly confesses to having tried no calculation, but merely
having drawn a picture of the railway and counted the trains; in (1),
she counts wrong; in (2) she makes them meet in 75 minutes. TOM-QUAD
omits (1): in (2) he makes Clara count the train she met on her arrival.
The unsigned one is also unintelligible; it states that the travellers
go "1-24th more than the total distance to be traversed"! The "Clara"
theory, already referred to, is adopted by 5 of these, viz., BO-PEEP,
FINANCIER, KATE B., TOM-QUAD, and the nameless writer.

The 11 half-right answers are from BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, CASTOR, CHESHIRE
CAT, G. E. B., GUY, MARY, M. A. H., OLD MAID, R. W., and VENDREDI. All
these adopt the "Clara" theory. CASTOR omits (1). VENDREDI gets (1)
right, but in (2) makes the same mistake as BO-PEEP. I notice in your
solution a marvellous proportion-sum:--"300 miles: 2 hours :: one mile:
24 seconds." May I venture to advise your acquiring, as soon as
possible, an utter disbelief in the possibility of a ratio existing
between _miles_ and _hours_? Do not be disheartened by your two friends'
sarcastic remarks on your "roundabout ways." Their short method, of
adding 12 and 8, has the slight disadvantage of bringing the answer
wrong: even a "roundabout" method is better than _that_! M. A. H., in
(2), makes the travellers count "one" _after_ they met, not _when_ they
met. CHESHIRE CAT and OLD MAID get "20" as answer for (1), by forgetting
to strike out the train met on arrival. The others all get "18" in
various ways. BOG-OAK, GUY, and R. W. divide the trains which the
westerly traveller has to meet into 2 sets, viz., those already on the
line, which they (rightly) make "11," and those which started during her
2 hours' journey (exclusive of train met on arrival), which they
(wrongly) make "7"; and they make a similar mistake with the easterly
train. BRIDGET (rightly) says that the westerly traveller met a train
every 6 minutes for 2 hours, but (wrongly) makes the number "20"; it
should be "21." G. E. B. adopts BO-PEEP'S method, but (wrongly) strikes
out (for the easterly traveller) the train which started at the
_commencement_ of the previous 2 hours. MARY thinks a train, met on
arrival, must not be counted, even when met on a _previous_ occasion.

The 3, who are wholly right but for the unfortunate "Clara" theory, are
F. LEE, G. S. C., and X. A. B.

And now "descend, ye classic Ten!" who have solved the whole problem.
Your names are AIX-LES-BAINS, ALGERNON BRAY (thanks for a friendly
remark, which comes with a heart-warmth that not even the Atlantic could
chill), ARVON, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FIFEE, H. L. R., J. L. O., OMEGA,
S. S. G., and WAITING FOR THE TRAIN. Several of these have put Clara,
provisionally, into the easterly train: but they seem to have understood
that the data do not decide that point.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   AIX-LES-BAINS.
   ALGERNON BRAY.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   FIFEE.
   H. L. R.
   OMEGA.
   S. S. G.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.

II.

   ARVON.
   J. L. O.

III.

   F. LEE.
   G. S. C.
   X. A. B.


ANSWERS TO KNOT IV.

_Problem._--"There are 5 sacks, of which Nos. 1, 2, weigh 12 lbs.; Nos.
2, 3, 13-1/2 lbs.; Nos. 3, 4, 11-1/2 lbs.; Nos. 4, 5, 8 lbs.; Nos. 1, 3,
5, 16 lbs. Required the weight of each sack."

_Answer._--"5-1/2, 6-1/2, 7, 4-1/2, 3-1/2."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sum of all the weighings, 61 lbs., includes sack No. 3 _thrice_ and
each other _twice_. Deducting twice the sum of the 1st and 4th
weighings, we get 21 lbs. for _thrice_ No. 3, _i.e._, 7 lbs. for No. 3.
Hence, the 2nd and 3rd weighings give 6-1/2 lbs., 4-1/2 lbs. for Nos. 2,
4; and hence again, the 1st and 4th weighings give 5-1/2 lbs., 3-1/2
lbs., for Nos. 1, 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ninety-seven answers have been received. Of these, 15 are beyond the
reach of discussion, as they give no working. I can but enumerate their
names, and I take this opportunity of saying that this is the last time
I shall put on record the names of competitors who give no sort of clue
to the process by which their answers were obtained. In guessing a
conundrum, or in catching a flea, we do not expect the breathless victor
to give us afterwards, in cold blood, a history of the mental or
muscular efforts by which he achieved success; but a mathematical
calculation is another thing. The names of this "mute inglorious" band
are COMMON SENSE, D. E. R., DOUGLAS, E. L., ELLEN, I. M. T., J. M. C.,
JOSEPH, KNOT I, LUCY, MEEK, M. F. C., PYRAMUS, SHAH, VERITAS.

Of the eighty-two answers with which the working, or some approach to
it, is supplied, one is wrong: seventeen have given solutions which are
(from one cause or another) practically valueless: the remaining
sixty-four I shall try to arrange in a Class-list, according to the
varying degrees of shortness and neatness to which they seem to have
attained.

The solitary wrong answer is from NELL. To be thus "alone in the crowd"
is a distinction--a painful one, no doubt, but still a distinction. I am
sorry for you, my dear young lady, and I seem to hear your tearful
exclamation, when you read these lines, "Ah! This is the knell of all my
hopes!" Why, oh why, did you assume that the 4th and 5th bags weighed 4
lbs. each? And why did you not test your answers? However, please try
again: and please don't change your _nom-de-plume_: let us have NELL in
the First Class next time!

The seventeen whose solutions are practically valueless are ARDMORE, A
READY RECKONER, ARTHUR, BOG-LARK, BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, FIRST ATTEMPT, J. L.
C., M. E. T., ROSE, ROWENA, SEA-BREEZE, SYLVIA, THISTLEDOWN,
THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP, VENDREDI, and WINIFRED. BOG-LARK tries it by a sort
of "rule of false," assuming experimentally that Nos. 1, 2, weigh 6 lbs.
each, and having thus produced 17-1/2, instead of 16, as the weight of
1, 3, and 5, she removes "the superfluous pound and a half," but does
not explain how she knows from which to take it. THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP
says that (when in that peculiar state) "it seemed perfectly clear" to
her that, "3 out of the 5 sacks being weighed twice over, 3/5 of 45 =
27, must be the total weight of the 5 sacks." As to which I can only
say, with the Captain, "it beats me entirely!" WINIFRED, on the plea
that "one must have a starting-point," assumes (what I fear is a mere
guess) that No. 1 weighed 5-1/2 lbs. The rest all do it, wholly or
partly, by guess-work.

The problem is of course (as any Algebraist sees at once) a case of
"simultaneous simple equations." It is, however, easily soluble by
Arithmetic only; and, when this is the case, I hold that it is bad
workmanship to use the more complex method. I have not, this time, given
more credit to arithmetical solutions; but in future problems I shall
(other things being equal) give the highest marks to those who use the
simplest machinery. I have put into Class I. those whose answers seemed
specially short and neat, and into Class III. those that seemed
specially long or clumsy. Of this last set, A. C. M., FURZE-BUSH, JAMES,
PARTRIDGE, R. W., and WAITING FOR THE TRAIN, have sent long wandering
solutions, the substitutions having no definite method, but seeming to
have been made to see what would come of it. CHILPOME and DUBLIN BOY
omit some of the working. ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY only finds the weight of
_one_ sack.


CLASS LIST

I.

   B. E. D.
   C. H.
   CONSTANCE JOHNSON.
   GREYSTEAD.
   GUY.
   HOOPOE.
   J. F. A.
   M. A. H.
   NUMBER FIVE.
   PEDRO.
   R. E. X.
   SEVEN OLD MEN.
   VIS INERTIÆ.
   WILLY B.
   YAHOO.

II.

   AMERICAN SUBSCRIBER.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   CHEAM.
   C. M. G.
   DINAH MITE.
   DUCKWING.
   E. C. M.
   E. N. Lowry.
   ERA.
   EUROCLYDON.
   F. H. W.
   FIFEE.
   G. E. B.
   HARLEQUIN.
   HAWTHORN.
   HOUGH GREEN.
   J. A. B.
   JACK TAR.
   J. B. B.
   KGOVJNI.
   LAND LUBBER.
   L. D.
   MAGPIE.
   MARY.
   MHRUXI.
   MINNIE.
   MONEY-SPINNER.
   NAIRAM.
   OLD CAT.
   POLICHINELLE.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   S. S. G.
   THISBE.
   VERENA.
   WAMBA.
   WOLFE.
   WYKEHAMICUS.
   Y. M. A. H.

III.

   A. C. M.
   ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   CHILPOME.
   DUBLIN BOY.
   FURZE-BUSH.
   JAMES.
   PARTRIDGE.
   R. W.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.


ANSWERS TO KNOT V.

_Problem._--To mark pictures, giving 3 x's to 2 or 3, 2 to 4 or 5, and 1
to 9 or 10; also giving 3 o's to 1 or 2, 2 to 3 or 4 and 1 to 8 or 9; so
as to mark the smallest possible number of pictures, and to give them
the largest possible number of marks.

_Answer._--10 pictures; 29 marks; arranged thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  o
   x  x  x  x  x     o  o  o  o
   x  x  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

_Solution._--By giving all the x's possible, putting into brackets the
optional ones, we get 10 pictures marked thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x (x)

By then assigning o's in the same way, beginning at the other end, we
get 9 pictures marked thus:--

                        (o) o
                  (o) o  o  o
   (o) o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

All we have now to do is to run these two wedges as close together as
they will go, so as to get the minimum number of pictures----erasing
optional marks where by so doing we can run them closer, but otherwise
letting them stand. There are 10 necessary marks in the 1st row, and in
the 3rd; but only 7 in the 2nd. Hence we erase all optional marks in the
1st and 3rd rows, but let them stand in the 2nd.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-two answers have been received. Of these 11 give no working; so,
in accordance with what I announced in my last review of answers, I
leave them unnamed, merely mentioning that 5 are right and 6 wrong.

Of the eleven answers with which some working is supplied, 3 are wrong.
C. H. begins with the rash assertion that under the given conditions
"the sum is impossible. For," he or she adds (these initialed
correspondents are dismally vague beings to deal with: perhaps "it"
would be a better pronoun), "10 is the least possible number of
pictures" (granted): "therefore we must either give 2 x's to 6, or 2 o's
to 5." Why "must," oh alphabetical phantom? It is nowhere ordained that
every picture "must" have 3 marks! FIFEE sends a folio page of solution,
which deserved a better fate: she offers 3 answers, in each of which 10
pictures are marked, with 30 marks; in one she gives 2 x's to 6
pictures; in another to 7; in the 3rd she gives 2 o's to 5; thus in
every case ignoring the conditions. (I pause to remark that the
condition "2 x's to 4 or 5 pictures" can only mean "_either_ to 4 _or
else_ to 5": if, as one competitor holds, it might mean _any_ number not
less than 4, the words "_or_ 5" would be superfluous.) I. E. A. (I am
happy to say that none of these bloodless phantoms appear this time in
the class-list. Is it IDEA with the "D" left out?) gives 2 x's to 6
pictures. She then takes me to task for using the word "ought" instead
of "nought." No doubt, to one who thus rebels against the rules laid
down for her guidance, the word must be distasteful. But does not I. E.
A. remember the parallel case of "adder"? That creature was originally
"a nadder": then the two words took to bandying the poor "n" backwards
and forwards like a shuttlecock, the final state of the game being "an
adder." May not "a nought" have similarly become "an ought"? Anyhow,
"oughts and crosses" is a very old game. I don't think I ever heard it
called "noughts and crosses."

In the following Class-list, I hope the solitary occupant of III. will
sheathe her claws when she hears how narrow an escape she has had of not
being named at all. Her account of the process by which she got the
answer is so meagre that, like the nursery tale of "Jack-a-Minory" (I
trust I. E. A. will be merciful to the spelling), it is scarcely to be
distinguished from "zero."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   GUY.
   OLD CAT.
   SEA-BREEZE.

II.

   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   F. LEE.
   H. VERNON.

III.

CAT.


ANSWERS TO KNOT VI.

_Problem 1._--_A_ and _B_ began the year with only 1,000_l._ a-piece.
They borrowed nought; they stole nought. On the next New-Year's Day they
had 60,000_l._ between them. How did they do it?

_Solution._--They went that day to the Bank of England. _A_ stood in
front of it, while _B_ went round and stood behind it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two answers have been received, both worthy of much honour. ADDLEPATE
makes them borrow "0" and steal "0," and uses both cyphers by putting
them at the right-hand end of the 1,000_l._, thus producing 100,000_l._,
which is well over the mark. But (or to express it in Latin) AT SPES
INFRACTA has solved it even more ingeniously: with the first cypher she
turns the "1" of the 1,000_l._ into a "9," and adds the result to the
original sum, thus getting 10,000_l._: and in this, by means of the
other "0," she turns the "1" into a "6," thus hitting the exact
60,000_l._


CLASS LIST

I.

AT SPES INFRACTA.

II.

ADDLEPATE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Problem 2._--_L_ makes 5 scarves, while _M_ makes 2: _Z_ makes 4 while
_L_ makes 3. Five scarves of _Z_'s weigh one of _L_'s; 5 of _M_'s weigh
3 of _Z_'s. One of _M_'s is as warm as 4 of _Z_'s: and one of _L_'s as
warm as 3 of _M_'s. Which is best, giving equal weight in the result to
rapidity of work, lightness, and warmth?

_Answer._--The order is _M_, _L_, _Z_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--As to rapidity (other things being constant) _L_'s merit is
to _M_'s in the ratio of 5 to 2: _Z_'s to _L_'s in the ratio of 4 to 3.
In order to get one set of 3 numbers fulfilling these conditions, it is
perhaps simplest to take the one that occurs _twice_ as unity, and
reduce the others to fractions: this gives, for _L_, _M_, and _Z_, the
marks 1, 2/5, 4/3. In estimating for _lightness_, we observe that the
greater the weight, the less the merit, so that _Z_'s merit is to _L_'s
as 5 to 1. Thus the marks for _lightness_ are 1/5, 5/3, 1. And
similarly, the marks for warmth are 3, 1, 1/4. To get the total result,
we must _multiply_ _L_'s 3 marks together, and do the same for _M_ and
for _Z_. The final numbers are 1 × 1/5 × 3, 2/5 × 5/3 × 1, 4/3 × 1 ×
1/4; _i.e._ 3/5, 2/3, 1/3; _i.e._ multiplying throughout by 15 (which
will not alter the proportion), 9, 10, 5; showing the order of merit to
be _M_, _L_, _Z_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five are right, and
twenty-four wrong. These hapless ones have all (with three exceptions)
fallen into the error of _adding_ the proportional numbers together, for
each candidate, instead of _multiplying_. _Why_ the latter is right,
rather than the former, is fully proved in text-books, so I will not
occupy space by stating it here: but it can be _illustrated_ very easily
by the case of length, breadth, and depth. Suppose _A_ and _B_ are rival
diggers of rectangular tanks: the amount of work done is evidently
measured by the number of _cubical feet_ dug out. Let _A_ dig a tank 10
feet long, 10 wide, 2 deep: let _B_ dig one 6 feet long, 5 wide, 10
deep. The cubical contents are 200, 300; _i.e._ _B_ is best digger in
the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for length, width, and depth,
separately; giving a maximum mark of 10 to the best in each contest, and
then _adding_ the results!

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working, and so has no real
claim to be named; but I break the rule for once, in deference to its
success in Problem 1: he, she, or it, is ADDLEPATE. The other
twenty-three may be divided into five groups.

First and worst are, I take it, those who put the rightful winner
_last_; arranging them as "Lolo, Zuzu, Mimi." The names of these
desperate wrong-doers are AYR, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FURZE-BUSH and
POLLUX (who send a joint answer), GREYSTEAD, GUY, OLD HEN, and SIMPLE
SUSAN. The latter was _once_ best of all; the Old Hen has taken
advantage of her simplicity, and beguiled her with the chaff which was
the bane of her own chickenhood.

Secondly, I point the finger of scorn at those who have put the worst
candidate at the top; arranging them as "Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo." They are
GRAECIA, M. M., OLD CAT, and R. E. X. "'Tis Greece, but----."

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and have even
succeeded in putting the worst last, their answer being "Lolo, Mimi,
Zuzu." Their names are AYR (who also appears among the "quite too too"),
CLIFTON C., F. B., FIFEE, GRIG, JANET, and MRS. SAIREY GAMP. F. B. has
not fallen into the common error; she _multiplies_ together the
proportionate numbers she gets, but in getting them she goes wrong, by
reckoning warmth as a _de_-merit. Possibly she is "Freshly Burnt," or
comes "From Bombay." JANET and MRS. SAIREY GAMP have also avoided this
error: the method they have adopted is shrouded in mystery--I scarcely
feel competent to criticize it. MRS. GAMP says "if Zuzu makes 4 while
Lolo makes 3, Zuzu makes 6 while Lolo makes 5 (bad reasoning), while
Mimi makes 2." From this she concludes "therefore Zuzu excels in speed
by 1" (_i.e._ when compared with Lolo; but what about Mimi?). She then
compares the 3 kinds of excellence, measured on this mystic scale. JANET
takes the statement, that "Lolo makes 5 while Mimi makes 2," to prove
that "Lolo makes 3 while Mimi makes 1 and Zuzu 4" (worse reasoning than
MRS. GAMP'S), and thence concludes that "Zuzu excels in speed by 1/8"!
JANET should have been ADELINE, "mystery of mysteries!"

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging them as "Mimi,
Zuzu, Lolo." They are MARQUIS AND CO., MARTREB, S. B. B. (first initial
scarcely legible: _may_ be meant for "J"), and STANZA.

The fifth set consist of AN ANCIENT FISH and CAMEL. These ill-assorted
comrades, by dint of foot and fin, have scrambled into the right answer,
but, as their method is wrong, of course it counts for nothing. Also AN
ANCIENT FISH has very ancient and fishlike ideas as to _how_ numbers
represent merit: she says "Lolo gains 2-1/2 on Mimi." Two and a half
_what_? Fish, fish, art thou in thy duty?

Of the five winners I put BALBUS and THE ELDER TRAVELLER slightly below
the other three--BALBUS for defective reasoning, the other for scanty
working. BALBUS gives two reasons for saying that _addition_ of marks is
_not_ the right method, and then adds "it follows that the decision must
be made by _multiplying_ the marks together." This is hardly more
logical than to say "This is not Spring: _therefore_ it must be Autumn."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   DINAH MITE.
   E. B. D. L.
   JORAM.

II.

   BALBUS.
   THE ELDER TRAVELLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

With regard to Knot V., I beg to express to VIS INERTIÆ and to any
others who, like her, understood the condition to be that _every_ marked
picture must have _three_ marks, my sincere regret that the unfortunate
phrase "_fill_ the columns with oughts and crosses" should have caused
them to waste so much time and trouble. I can only repeat that a
_literal_ interpretation of "fill" would seem to _me_ to require that
_every_ picture in the gallery should be marked. VIS INERTIÆ would have
been in the First Class if she had sent in the solution she now offers.


ANSWERS TO KNOT VII.

_Problem._--Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 7
biscuits, cost 1_s._ 2_d._; and that one glass of lemonade, 4
sandwiches, and 10 biscuits, cost 1_s._ 5_d._: find the cost of (1) a
glass of lemonade, a sandwich, and a biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of
lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 5 biscuits.

_Answer._--(1) 8_d._; (2) 1_s._ 7_d._

_Solution._--This is best treated algebraically. Let _x_ = the cost (in
pence) of a glass of lemonade, _y_ of a sandwich, and _z_ of a biscuit.
Then we have _x_ + 3_y_ + 7_z_ = 14, and _x_ + 4_y_ + 10_z_ = 17. And we
require the values of _x_ + _y_ + _z_, and of 2_x_ + 3_y_ + 5_z_. Now,
from _two_ equations only, we cannot find, _separately_, the values of
_three_ unknowns: certain _combinations_ of them may, however, be found.
Also we know that we can, by the help of the given equations, eliminate
2 of the 3 unknowns from the quantity whose value is required, which
will then contain one only. If, then, the required value is
ascertainable at all, it can only be by the 3rd unknown vanishing of
itself: otherwise the problem is impossible.

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches, and reduce everything to
biscuits--a state of things even more depressing than "if all the world
were apple-pie"--by subtracting the 1st equation from the 2nd, which
eliminates lemonade, and gives _y_ + 3_z_ = 3, or _y_ = 3-3_z_; and then
substituting this value of _y_ in the 1st, which gives _x_-2_z_ = 5,
_i.e._ _x_ = 5 + 2_z_. Now if we substitute these values of _x_, _y_, in
the quantities whose values are required, the first becomes (5 + 2_z_) +
(3-3_z_) + _z_, _i.e._ 8: and the second becomes 2(5 + 2_z_) + 3(3-3_z_)
+ 5_z_, _i.e._ 19. Hence the answers are (1) 8_d._, (2) 1_s._ 7_d._

       *       *       *       *       *

The above is a _universal_ method: that is, it is absolutely certain
either to produce the answer, or to prove that no answer is possible.
The question may also be solved by combining the quantities whose values
are given, so as to form those whose values are required. This is merely
a matter of ingenuity and good luck: and as it _may_ fail, even when the
thing is possible, and is of no use in proving it _im_possible, I cannot
rank this method as equal in value with the other. Even when it
succeeds, it may prove a very tedious process. Suppose the 26
competitors, who have sent in what I may call _accidental_ solutions,
had had a question to deal with where every number contained 8 or 10
digits! I suspect it would have been a case of "silvered is the raven
hair" (see "Patience") before any solution would have been hit on by
the most ingenious of them.

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I am happy to say,
some sort of _working_, and therefore deserve to be mentioned by name,
and to have their virtues, or vices as the case may be, discussed.
Thirteen have made assumptions to which they have no right, and so
cannot figure in the Class-list, even though, in 10 of the 13 cases, the
answer is right. Of the remaining 28, no less than 26 have sent in
_accidental_ solutions, and therefore fall short of the highest honours.

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst first, as my
custom is.

FROGGY gives no working--at least this is all he gives: after stating
the given equations, he says "therefore the difference, 1 sandwich + 3
biscuits, = 3_d._": then follow the amounts of the unknown bills, with
no further hint as to how he got them. FROGGY has had a _very_ narrow
escape of not being named at all!

Of those who are wrong, VIS INERTIÆ has sent in a piece of incorrect
working. Peruse the horrid details, and shudder! She takes _x_ (call it
"_y_") as the cost of a sandwich, and concludes (rightly enough) that a
biscuit will cost (3-_y_)/3. She then subtracts the second equation from
the first, and deduces 3_y_ + 7 × (3-_y_)/3-4_y_ + 10 × (3-_y_)/3 = 3.
By making two mistakes in this line, she brings out _y_ = 3/2. Try it
again, oh VIS INERTIÆ! Away with INERTIÆ: infuse a little more VIS: and
you will bring out the correct (though uninteresting) result, 0 = 0!
This will show you that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these 3
unknowns to reveal its _separate_ value. The other competitor, who is
wrong throughout, is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.: but, whether he be a
Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True Mathematician Confused, he makes the
answers 7_d._ and 1_s._ 5_d._ He assumes, with Too Much Confidence, that
biscuits were 1/2_d._ each, and that Clara paid for 8, though she only
ate 7!

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong, though the answer is
right: and, not to measure their demerits too exactly, I will take them
in alphabetical order. ANITA finds (rightly) that "1 sandwich and 3
biscuits cost 3_d._," and proceeds "therefore 1 sandwich = 1-1/2_d._, 3
biscuits = 1-1/2_d._, 1 lemonade = 6_d._" DINAH MITE begins like ANITA:
and thence proves (rightly) that a biscuit costs less than a 1_d._:
whence she concludes (wrongly) that it _must_ cost 1/2_d._ F. C. W. is
so beautifully resigned to the certainty of a verdict of "guilty," that
I have hardly the heart to utter the word, without adding a "recommended
to mercy owing to extenuating circumstances." But really, you know,
where _are_ the extenuating circumstances? She begins by assuming that
lemonade is 4_d._ a glass, and sandwiches 3_d._ each, (making with the 2
given equations, _four_ conditions to be fulfilled by _three_ miserable
unknowns!). And, having (naturally) developed this into a contradiction,
she then tries 5_d._ and 2_d._ with a similar result. (N.B. _This_
process might have been carried on through the whole of the Tertiary
Period, without gratifying one single Megatherium.) She then, by a
"happy thought," tries half-penny biscuits, and so obtains a consistent
result. This may be a good solution, viewing the problem as a conundrum:
but it is _not_ scientific. JANET identifies sandwiches with biscuits!
"One sandwich + 3 biscuits" she makes equal to "4." Four _what_? MAYFAIR
makes the astounding assertion that the equation, _s_ + 3_b_ = 3, "is
evidently only satisfied by _s_ = 3/2, _b_ = 1/2"! OLD CAT believes that
the assumption that a sandwich costs 1-1/2_d._ is "the only way to avoid
unmanageable fractions." But _why_ avoid them? Is there not a certain
glow of triumph in taming such a fraction? "Ladies and gentlemen, the
fraction now before you is one that for years defied all efforts of a
refining nature: it was, in a word, hopelessly vulgar. Treating it as a
circulating decimal (the treadmill of fractions) only made matters
worse. As a last resource, I reduced it to its lowest terms, and
extracted its square root!" Joking apart, let me thank OLD CAT for some
very kind words of sympathy, in reference to a correspondent (whose name
I am happy to say I have now forgotten) who had found fault with me as a
discourteous critic. O. V. L. is beyond my comprehension. He takes the
given equations as (1) and (2): thence, by the process [(2)-(1)] deduces
(rightly) equation (3) viz. _s_ + 3_b_ = 3: and thence again, by the
process [x3] (a hopeless mystery), deduces 3_s_ + 4_b_ = 4. I have
nothing to say about it: I give it up. SEA-BREEZE says "it is immaterial
to the answer" (why?) "in what proportion 3_d._ is divided between the
sandwich and the 3 biscuits": so she assumes _s_ = l-1/2_d._, _b_ =
1/2_d._ STANZA is one of a very irregular metre. At first she (like
JANET) identifies sandwiches with biscuits. She then tries two
assumptions (_s_ = 1, _b_ = 2/3, and _s_ = 1/2 _b_ = 5/6), and
(naturally) ends in contradictions. Then she returns to the first
assumption, and finds the 3 unknowns separately: _quod est absurdum_.
STILETTO identifies sandwiches and biscuits, as "articles." Is the word
ever used by confectioners? I fancied "What is the next article, Ma'am?"
was limited to linendrapers. TWO SISTERS first assume that biscuits are
4 a penny, and then that they are 2 a penny, adding that "the answer
will of course be the same in both cases." It is a dreamy remark,
making one feel something like Macbeth grasping at the spectral dagger.
"Is this a statement that I see before me?" If you were to say "we both
walked the same way this morning," and _I_ were to say "_one_ of you
walked the same way, but the other didn't," which of the three would be
the most hopelessly confused? TURTLE PYATE (what _is_ a Turtle Pyate,
please?) and OLD CROW, who send a joint answer, and Y. Y., adopt the
same method. Y. Y. gets the equation _s_ + 3_b_ = 3: and then says "this
sum must be apportioned in one of the three following ways." It _may_
be, I grant you: but Y. Y. do you say "must"? I fear it is _possible_
for Y. Y. to be _two_ Y's. The other two conspirators are less positive:
they say it "can" be so divided: but they add "either of the three
prices being right"! This is bad grammar and bad arithmetic at once, oh
mysterious birds!

Of those who win honours, THE SHETLAND SNARK must have the 3rd class all
to himself. He has only answered half the question, viz. the amount of
Clara's luncheon: the two little old ladies he pitilessly leaves in the
midst of their "difficulty." I beg to assure him (with thanks for his
friendly remarks) that entrance-fees and subscriptions are things
unknown in that most economical of clubs, "The Knot-Untiers."

The authors of the 26 "accidental" solutions differ only in the number
of steps they have taken between the _data_ and the answers. In order
to do them full justice I have arranged the 2nd class in sections,
according to the number of steps. The two Kings are fearfully
deliberate! I suppose walking quick, or taking short cuts, is
inconsistent with kingly dignity: but really, in reading THESEUS'
solution, one almost fancied he was "marking time," and making no
advance at all! The other King will, I hope, pardon me for having
altered "Coal" into "Cole." King Coilus, or Coil, seems to have reigned
soon after Arthur's time. Henry of Huntingdon identifies him with the
King Coël who first built walls round Colchester, which was named after
him. In the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester we read:--

   "Aftur Kyng Aruirag, of wam we habbeth y told,
   Marius ys sone was kyng, quoynte mon & bold.
   And ys sone was aftur hym, _Coil_ was ys name,
   Bothe it were quoynte men, & of noble fame."

BALBUS lays it down as a general principle that "in order to ascertain
the cost of any one luncheon, it must come to the same amount upon two
different assumptions." (_Query._ Should not "it" be "we"? Otherwise the
_luncheon_ is represented as wishing to ascertain its own cost!) He then
makes two assumptions--one, that sandwiches cost nothing; the other,
that biscuits cost nothing, (either arrangement would lead to the shop
being inconveniently crowded!)--and brings out the unknown luncheons as
8_d._ and 19_d._, on each assumption. He then concludes that this
agreement of results "shows that the answers are correct." Now I propose
to disprove his general law by simply giving _one_ instance of its
failing. One instance is quite enough. In logical language, in order to
disprove a "universal affirmative," it is enough to prove its
contradictory, which is a "particular negative." (I must pause for a
digression on Logic, and especially on Ladies' Logic. The universal
affirmative "everybody says he's a duck" is crushed instantly by proving
the particular negative "Peter says he's a goose," which is equivalent
to "Peter does _not_ say he's a duck." And the universal negative
"nobody calls on her" is well met by the particular affirmative "_I_
called yesterday." In short, either of two contradictories disproves the
other: and the moral is that, since a particular proposition is much
more easily proved than a universal one, it is the wisest course, in
arguing with a Lady, to limit one's _own_ assertions to "particulars,"
and leave _her_ to prove the "universal" contradictory, if she can. You
will thus generally secure a _logical_ victory: a _practical_ victory is
not to be hoped for, since she can always fall back upon the crushing
remark "_that_ has nothing to do with it!"--a move for which Man has not
yet discovered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to BALBUS.)
Here is my "particular negative," on which to test his rule. Suppose the
two recorded luncheons to have been "2 buns, one queen-cake, 2
sausage-rolls, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total, one-and-ninepence," and
"one bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage-roll, and a bottle of Zoëdone: total,
one-and-fourpence." And suppose Clara's unknown luncheon to have been "3
buns, one queen-cake, one sausage-roll, and 2 bottles of Zoëdone:" while
the two little sisters had been indulging in "8 buns, 4 queen-cakes, 2
sausage-rolls, and 6 bottles of Zoëdone." (Poor souls, how thirsty they
must have been!) If BALBUS will kindly try this by his principle of "two
assumptions," first assuming that a bun is 1_d._ and a queen-cake 2_d._,
and then that a bun is 3_d._ and a queen-cake 3_d._, he will bring out
the other two luncheons, on each assumption, as "one-and-nine-pence" and
"four-and-ten-pence" respectively, which harmony of results, he will
say, "shows that the answers are correct." And yet, as a matter of fact,
the buns were 2_d._ each, the queen-cakes 3_d._, the sausage-rolls
6_d._, and the Zoëdone 2_d._ a bottle: so that Clara's third luncheon
had cost one-and-sevenpence, and her thirsty friends had spent
four-and-fourpence!

Another remark of BALBUS I will quote and discuss: for I think that it
also may yield a moral for some of my readers. He says "it is the same
thing in substance whether in solving this problem we use words and call
it Arithmetic, or use letters and signs and call it Algebra." Now this
does not appear to me a correct description of the two methods: the
Arithmetical method is that of "synthesis" only; it goes from one known
fact to another, till it reaches its goal: whereas the Algebraical
method is that of "analysis": it begins with the goal, symbolically
represented, and so goes backwards, dragging its veiled victim with it,
till it has reached the full daylight of known facts, in which it can
tear off the veil and say "I know you!"

Take an illustration. Your house has been broken into and robbed, and
you appeal to the policeman who was on duty that night. "Well, Mum, I
did see a chap getting out over your garden-wall: but I was a good bit
off, so I didn't chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the
Chequers, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming full split round
the corner. So I just ups and says 'My lad, you're wanted.' That's all I
says. And he says 'I'll go along quiet, Bobby,' he says, 'without the
darbies,' he says." There's your _Arithmetical_ policeman. Now try the
other method. "I seed somebody a running, but he was well gone or ever
_I_ got nigh the place. So I just took a look round in the garden. And I
noticed the foot-marks, where the chap had come right across your
flower-beds. They was good big foot-marks sure-ly. And I noticed as the
left foot went down at the heel, ever so much deeper than the other. And
I says to myself 'The chap's been a big hulking chap: and he goes lame
on his left foot.' And I rubs my hand on the wall where he got over, and
there was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself 'Now where can
I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep line, what's lame of one
foot?' And I flashes up permiscuous: and I says 'It's Bill Sykes!' says
I." There is your _Algebraical_ policeman--a higher intellectual type,
to my thinking, than the other.

LITTLE JACK'S solution calls for a word of praise, as he has written out
what really is an algebraical proof _in words_, without representing any
of his facts as equations. If it is all his own, he will make a good
algebraist in the time to come. I beg to thank SIMPLE SUSAN for some
kind words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received from OLD
CAT.

HECLA and MARTREB are the only two who have used a method _certain_
either to produce the answer, or else to prove it impossible: so they
must share between them the highest honours.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   HECLA.
   MARTREB.

II.

§ 1 (2 _steps_).

   ADELAIDE.
   CLIFTON C....
   E. K. C.
   GUY.
   L'INCONNU.
   LITTLE JACK.
   NIL DESPERANDUM.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   YELLOW-HAMMER.
   WOOLLY ONE.

§ 2 (3 _steps_).

   A. A.
   A CHRISTMAS CAROL.
   AFTERNOON TEA.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   BABY.
   BALBUS.
   BOG-OAK.
   THE RED QUEEN.
   WALL-FLOWER.

§ 3 (4 _steps_).

   HAWTHORN.
   JORAM.
   S. S. G.

§ 4 (5 _steps_).

   A STEPNEY COACH.

§ 5 (6 _steps_).

   BAY LAUREL.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

§ 6 (9 _steps_).

   OLD KING COLE.

§ 7 (14 _steps_).

   THESEUS.


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots II. and VI.,
which lead me to think some further explanation desirable.

In Knot II., I had intended the numbering of the houses to begin at one
corner of the Square, and this was assumed by most, if not all, of the
competitors. TROJANUS however says "assuming, in default of any
information, that the street enters the square in the middle of each
side, it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street." But
surely the other is the more natural assumption?

In Knot VI., the first Problem was of course a mere _jeu de mots_, whose
presence I thought excusable in a series of Problems whose aim is to
entertain rather than to instruct: but it has not escaped the
contemptuous criticisms of two of my correspondents, who seem to think
that Apollo is in duty bound to keep his bow always on the stretch.
Neither of them has guessed it: and this is true human nature. Only the
other day--the 31st of September, to be quite exact--I met my old friend
Brown, and gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort of
his colossal mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!" said I. "Ah," said he,
"it's very neat--very neat. And it isn't an answer that would occur to
everybody. Very neat indeed." A few yards further on, I fell in with
Smith and to him I propounded the same riddle. He frowned over it for a
minute, and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the answer. "A poor
thing, sir!" Smith growled, as he turned away. "A very poor thing! I
wonder you care to repeat such rubbish!" Yet Smith's mind is, if
possible, even more colossal than Brown's.

The second Problem of Knot VI. is an example in ordinary Double Rule of
Three, whose essential feature is that the result depends on the
variation of several elements, which are so related to it that, if all
but one be constant, it varies as that one: hence, if none be constant,
it varies as their product. Thus, for example, the cubical contents of a
rectangular tank vary as its length, if breadth and depth be constant,
and so on; hence, if none be constant, it varies as the product of the
length, breadth, and depth.

When the result is not thus connected with the varying elements, the
Problem ceases to be Double Rule of Three and often becomes one of great
complexity.

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, _A_ and _B_,
who are to compete in French, German, and Italian:

(_a_) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on their
_relative_ knowledge of each subject, so that, whether their marks, for
French, be "1, 2" or "100, 200," the result will be the same: and let it
also be laid down that, if they get equal marks on 2 papers, the final
marks are to have the same ratio as those of the 3rd paper. This is a
case of ordinary Double Rule of Three. We multiply _A_'s 3 marks
together, and do the same for _B_. Note that, if _A_ gets a single "0,"
his final mark is "0," even if he gets full marks for 2 papers while _B_
gets only one mark for each paper. This of course would be very unfair
on _A_, though a correct solution under the given conditions.

(_b_) The result is to depend, as before, on _relative_ knowledge; but
French is to have twice as much weight as German or Italian. This is an
unusual form of question. I should be inclined to say "the resulting
ratio is to be nearer to the French ratio than if we multiplied as in
(_a_), and so much nearer that it would be necessary to use the other
multipliers _twice_ to produce the same result as in (_a_):" _e.g._ if
the French Ratio were 9/10, and the others 4/9, 1/9 so that the ultimate
ratio, by method (_a_), would be 2/45, I should multiply instead by 2/3,
1/3, giving the result, 1/3 which is nearer to 9/10 than if he had used
method (_a_).

(_c_) The result is to depend on _actual_ amount of knowledge of the 3
subjects collectively. Here we have to ask two questions. (1) What is
to be the "unit" (_i.e._ "standard to measure by") in each subject? (2)
Are these units to be of equal, or unequal value? The usual "unit" is
the knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correctly; calling this
"100," all lower amounts are represented by numbers between "0" and
"100." Then, if these units are to be of equal value, we simply add
_A_'s 3 marks together, and do the same for _B_.

(_d_) The conditions are the same as (_c_), but French is to have double
weight. Here we simply double the French marks, and add as before.

(_e_) French is to have such weight, that, if other marks be equal, the
ultimate ratio is to be that of the French paper, so that a "0" in this
would swamp the candidate: but the other two subjects are only to affect
the result collectively, by the amount of knowledge shown, the two being
reckoned of equal value. Here I should add _A_'s German and Italian
marks together, and multiply by his French mark.

But I need not go on: the problem may evidently be set with many varying
conditions, each requiring its own method of solution. The Problem in
Knot VI. was meant to belong to variety (_a_), and to make this clear, I
inserted the following passage:

"Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi
and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial week, and they
were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's, and she was
pronounced twice as good."

What I have said will suffice, I hope, as an answer to BALBUS, who holds
that (_a_) and (_c_) are the only possible varieties of the problem, and
that to say "We cannot use addition, therefore we must be intended to
use multiplication," is "no more illogical than, from knowledge that one
was not born in the night, to infer that he was born in the daytime";
and also to FIFEE, who says "I think a little more consideration will
show you that our 'error of _adding_ the proportional numbers together
for each candidate instead of _multiplying_' is no error at all." Why,
even if addition _had_ been the right method to use, not one of the
writers (I speak from memory) showed any consciousness of the necessity
of fixing a "unit" for each subject. "No error at all!" They were
positively steeped in error!

One correspondent (I do not name him, as the communication is not quite
friendly in tone) writes thus:--"I wish to add, very respectfully, that
I think it would be in better taste if you were to abstain from the very
trenchant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in when
criticising the answer. That such a tone must not be" ("be not"?)
"agreeable to the persons concerned who have made mistakes may possibly
have no great weight with you, but I hope you will feel that it would be
as well not to employ it, _unless you are quite certain of being correct
yourself_." The only instances the writer gives of the "trenchant
expressions" are "hapless" and "malefactors." I beg to assure him (and
any others who may need the assurance: I trust there are none) that all
such words have been used in jest, and with no idea that they could
possibly annoy any one, and that I sincerely regret any annoyance I may
have thus inadvertently given. May I hope that in future they will
recognise the distinction between severe language used in sober earnest,
and the "words of unmeant bitterness," which Coleridge has alluded to in
that lovely passage beginning "A little child, a limber elf"? If the
writer will refer to that passage, or to the preface to "Fire, Famine,
and Slaughter," he will find the distinction, for which I plead, far
better drawn out than I could hope to do in any words of mine.

The writer's insinuation that I care not how much annoyance I give to my
readers I think it best to pass over in silence; but to his concluding
remark I must entirely demur. I hold that to use language likely to
annoy any of my correspondents would not be in the least justified by
the plea that I was "quite certain of being correct." I trust that the
knot-untiers and I are not on such terms as those!

I beg to thank _G. B._ for the offer of a puzzle--which, however, is too
like the old one "Make four 9's into 100."


ANSWERS TO KNOT VIII.

§ 1. THE PIGS.

_Problem._--Place twenty-four pigs in four sties so that, as you go
round and round, you may always find the number in each sty nearer to
ten than the number in the last.

_Answer._--Place 8 pigs in the first sty, 10 in the second, nothing in
the third, and 6 in the fourth: 10 is nearer ten than 8; nothing is
nearer ten than 10; 6 is nearer ten than nothing; and 8 is nearer ten
than 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

This problem is noticed by only two correspondents. BALBUS says "it
certainly cannot be solved mathematically, nor do I see how to solve it
by any verbal quibble." NOLENS VOLENS makes Her Radiancy change the
direction of going round; and even then is obliged to add "the pigs must
be carried in front of her"!

§ 2. THE GRURMSTIPTHS.

_Problem._--Omnibuses start from a certain point, both ways, every 15
minutes. A traveller, starting on foot along with one of them, meets
one in 12-1/2 minutes: when will he be overtaken by one?

_Answer._--In 6-1/4 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--Let "_a_" be the distance an omnibus goes in 15 minutes,
and "_x_" the distance from the starting-point to where the traveller is
overtaken. Since the omnibus met is due at the starting-point in 2-1/2
minutes, it goes in that time as far as the traveller walks in 12-1/2;
_i.e._ it goes 5 times as fast. Now the overtaking omnibus is "_a_"
behind the traveller when he starts, and therefore goes "_a_ + _x_"
while he goes "_x_." Hence _a_ + _x_ = 5_x_; _i.e._ 4_x_ = _a_, and _x_
= _a_/4. This distance would be traversed by an omnibus in 15/4 minutes,
and therefore by the traveller in 5 × 15/4. Hence he is overtaken in
18-3/4 minutes after starting, _i.e._ in 6-1/4 minutes after meeting the
omnibus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four answers have been received, of which two are wrong. DINAH MITE
rightly states that the overtaking omnibus reached the point where they
met the other omnibus 5 minutes after they left, but wrongly concludes
that, going 5 times as fast, it would overtake them in another minute.
The travellers are 5-minutes-walk ahead of the omnibus, and must walk
1-4th of this distance farther before the omnibus overtakes them, which
will be 1-5th of the distance traversed by the omnibus in the same time:
this will require 1-1/4 minutes more. NOLENS VOLENS tries it by a
process like "Achilles and the Tortoise." He rightly states that, when
the overtaking omnibus leaves the gate, the travellers are 1-5th of
"_a_" ahead, and that it will take the omnibus 3 minutes to traverse
this distance; "during which time" the travellers, he tells us, go
1-15th of "_a_" (this should be 1-25th). The travellers being now 1-15th
of "_a_" ahead, he concludes that the work remaining to be done is for
the travellers to go 1-60th of "_a_," while the omnibus goes l-12th. The
_principle_ is correct, and might have been applied earlier.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BALBUS.
   DELTA.


ANSWERS TO KNOT IX.


§ 1. THE BUCKETS.

_Problem._--Lardner states that a solid, immersed in a fluid, displaces
an amount equal to itself in bulk. How can this be true of a small
bucket floating in a larger one?

_Solution._--Lardner means, by "displaces," "occupies a space which
might be filled with water without any change in the surroundings." If
the portion of the floating bucket, which is above the water, could be
annihilated, and the rest of it transformed into water, the surrounding
water would not change its position: which agrees with Lardner's
statement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five answers have been received, none of which explains the difficulty
arising from the well-known fact that a floating body is the same weight
as the displaced fluid. HECLA says that "only that portion of the
smaller bucket which descends below the original level of the water can
be properly said to be immersed, and only an equal bulk of water is
displaced." Hence, according to HECLA, a solid, whose weight was equal
to that of an equal bulk of water, would not float till the whole of it
was below "the original level" of the water: but, as a matter of fact,
it would float as soon as it was all under water. MAGPIE says the
fallacy is "the assumption that one body can displace another from a
place where it isn't," and that Lardner's assertion is incorrect, except
when the containing vessel "was originally full to the brim." But the
question of floating depends on the present state of things, not on past
history. OLD KING COLE takes the same view as HECLA. TYMPANUM and VINDEX
assume that "displaced" means "raised above its original level," and
merely explain how it comes to pass that the water, so raised, is less
in bulk than the immersed portion of bucket, and thus land
themselves--or rather set themselves floating--in the same boat as
HECLA.

I regret that there is no Class-list to publish for this Problem.

       *       *       *       *       *


§ 2. BALBUS' ESSAY.

_Problem._--Balbus states that if a certain solid be immersed in a
certain vessel of water, the water will rise through a series of
distances, two inches, one inch, half an inch, &c., which series has no
end. He concludes that the water will rise without limit. Is this true?

_Solution._--No. This series can never reach 4 inches, since, however
many terms we take, we are always short of 4 inches by an amount equal
to the last term taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three answers have been received--but only two seem to me worthy of
honours.

TYMPANUM says that the statement about the stick "is merely a blind, to
which the old answer may well be applied, _solvitur ambulando_, or
rather _mergendo_." I trust TYMPANUM will not test this in his own
person, by taking the place of the man in Balbus' Essay! He would
infallibly be drowned.

OLD KING COLE rightly points out that the series, 2, 1, &c., is a
decreasing Geometrical Progression: while VINDEX rightly identifies the
fallacy as that of "Achilles and the Tortoise."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD KING COLE.
   VINDEX.

       *       *       *       *       *


§ 3. THE GARDEN.

_Problem._--An oblong garden, half a yard longer than wide, consists
entirely of a gravel-walk, spirally arranged, a yard wide and 3,630
yards long. Find the dimensions of the garden.

_Answer._--60, 60-1/2.

_Solution._--The number of yards and fractions of a yard traversed in
walking along a straight piece of walk, is evidently the same as the
number of square-yards and fractions of a square-yard, contained in that
piece of walk: and the distance, traversed in passing through a
square-yard at a corner, is evidently a yard. Hence the area of the
garden is 3,630 square-yards: _i.e._, if _x_ be the width, _x_ (_x_ +
1/2) = 3,630. Solving this Quadratic, we find _x_ = 60. Hence the
dimensions are 60, 60-1/2.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twelve answers have been received--seven right and five wrong.

C. G. L., NABOB, OLD CROW, and TYMPANUM assume that the number of yards
in the length of the path is equal to the number of square-yards in the
garden. This is true, but should have been proved. But each is guilty of
darker deeds. C. G. L.'s "working" consists of dividing 3,630 by 60.
Whence came this divisor, oh Segiel? Divination? Or was it a dream? I
fear this solution is worth nothing. OLD CROW'S is shorter, and so (if
possible) worth rather less. He says the answer "is at once seen to be
60 × 60-1/2"! NABOB'S calculation is short, but "as rich as a Nabob" in
error. He says that the square root of 3,630, multiplied by 2, equals
the length plus the breadth. That is 60.25 × 2 = 120-1/2. His first
assertion is only true of a _square_ garden. His second is irrelevant,
since 60.25 is _not_ the square-root of 3,630! Nay, Bob, this will _not_
do! TYMPANUM says that, by extracting the square-root of 3,630, we get
60 yards with a remainder of 30/60, or half-a-yard, which we add so as
to make the oblong 60 × 60-1/2. This is very terrible: but worse remains
behind. TYMPANUM proceeds thus:--"But why should there be the half-yard
at all? Because without it there would be no space at all for flowers.
By means of it, we find reserved in the very centre a small plot of
ground, two yards long by half-a-yard wide, the only space not occupied
by walk." But Balbus expressly said that the walk "used up the whole of
the area." Oh, TYMPANUM! My tympa is exhausted: my brain is num! I can
say no more.

HECLA indulges, again and again, in that most fatal of all habits in
computation--the making _two_ mistakes which cancel each other. She
takes _x_ as the width of the garden, in yards, and _x_ + 1/2 as its
length, and makes her first "coil" the sum of _x_-1/2, _x_-1/2, _x_-1,
_x_-1, _i.e._ 4_x_-3: but the fourth term should be _x_-1-1/2, so that
her first coil is 1/2 a yard too long. Her second coil is the sum of
_x_-2-1/2, _x_-2-1/2, _x_-3, _x_-3: here the first term should be _x_-2
and the last _x_-3-1/2: these two mistakes cancel, and this coil is
therefore right. And the same thing is true of every other coil but the
last, which needs an extra half-yard to reach the _end_ of the path: and
this exactly balances the mistake in the first coil. Thus the sum total
of the coils comes right though the working is all wrong.

Of the seven who are right, DINAH MITE, JANET, MAGPIE, and TAFFY make
the same assumption as C. G. L. and Co. They then solve by a Quadratic.
MAGPIE also tries it by Arithmetical Progression, but fails to notice
that the first and last "coils" have special values.

ALUMNUS ETONÆ attempts to prove what C. G. L. assumes by a particular
instance, taking a garden 6 by 5-1/2. He ought to have proved it
generally: what is true of one number is not always true of others. OLD
KING COLE solves it by an Arithmetical Progression. It is right, but too
lengthy to be worth as much as a Quadratic.

VINDEX proves it very neatly, by pointing out that a yard of walk
measured along the middle represents a square yard of garden, "whether
we consider the straight stretches of walk or the square yards at the
angles, in which the middle line goes half a yard in one direction and
then turns a right angle and goes half a yard in another direction."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   VINDEX.

II.

   ALUMNUS ETONÆ.
   OLD KING COLE.

III.

   DINAH MITE.
   JANET.
   MAGPIE.
   TAFFY.


ANSWERS TO KNOT X.


§ 1. THE CHELSEA PENSIONERS.

_Problem._--If 70 per cent. have lost an eye, 75 per cent. an ear, 80
per cent. an arm, 85 per cent. a leg: what percentage, _at least_, must
have lost all four?

_Answer._--Ten.


_Solution._--(I adopt that of POLAR STAR, as being better than my own).
Adding the wounds together, we get 70 + 75 + 80 + 85 = 310, among 100
men; which gives 3 to each, and 4 to 10 men. Therefore the least
percentage is 10.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nineteen answers have been received. One is "5," but, as no working is
given with it, it must, in accordance with the rule, remain "a deed
without a name." JANET makes it "35 and 7/10ths." I am sorry she has
misunderstood the question, and has supposed that those who had lost an
ear were 75 per cent. _of those who had lost an eye_; and so on. Of
course, on this supposition, the percentages must all be multiplied
together. This she has done correctly, but I can give her no honours,
as I do not think the question will fairly bear her interpretation,
THREE SCORE AND TEN makes it "19 and 3/8ths." Her solution has given
me--I will not say "many anxious days and sleepless nights," for I wish
to be strictly truthful, but--some trouble in making any sense at all of
it. She makes the number of "pensioners wounded once" to be 310 ("per
cent.," I suppose!): dividing by 4, she gets 77 and a half as "average
percentage:" again dividing by 4, she gets 19 and 3/8ths as "percentage
wounded four times." Does she suppose wounds of different kinds to
"absorb" each other, so to speak? Then, no doubt, the _data_ are
equivalent to 77 pensioners with one wound each, and a half-pensioner
with a half-wound. And does she then suppose these concentrated wounds
to be _transferable_, so that 3/4ths of these unfortunates can obtain
perfect health by handing over their wounds to the remaining 1/4th?
Granting these suppositions, her answer is right; or rather, _if_ the
question had been "A road is covered with one inch of gravel, along 77
and a half per cent. of it. How much of it could be covered 4 inches
deep with the same material?" her answer _would_ have been right. But
alas, that _wasn't_ the question! DELTA makes some most amazing
assumptions: "let every one who has not lost an eye have lost an ear,"
"let every one who has not lost both eyes and ears have lost an arm."
Her ideas of a battle-field are grim indeed. Fancy a warrior who would
continue fighting after losing both eyes, both ears, and both arms! This
is a case which she (or "it?") evidently considers _possible_.

Next come eight writers who have made the unwarrantable assumption that,
because 70 per cent. have lost an eye, _therefore_ 30 per cent. have
_not_ lost one, so that they have _both_ eyes. This is illogical. If you
give me a bag containing 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you
(my face _not_ beaming with gratitude nearly so much as when I received
the bag) to say "I am sorry to tell you that 70 of these sovereigns are
bad," do I thereby guarantee the other 30 to be good? Perhaps I have not
tested them yet. The sides of this illogical octagon are as follows, in
alphabetical order:--ALGERNON BRAY, DINAH MITE, G. S. C., JANE E., J. D.
W., MAGPIE (who makes the delightful remark "therefore 90 per cent. have
two of something," recalling to one's memory that fortunate monarch,
with whom Xerxes was so much pleased that "he gave him ten of
everything!"), S. S. G., and TOKIO.

BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE and T. R. do the question in a piecemeal
fashion--on the principle that the 70 per cent. and the 75 per cent.,
though commenced at opposite ends of the 100, must overlap by _at least_
45 per cent.; and so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I
think, quite the best way of doing it.

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves sufficiently
glorified by being placed in the first class, without my composing a
Triumphal Ode for each!


CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD CAT.
   OLD HEN.
   POLAR STAR.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   WHITE SUGAR.

II.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   T. R.

III.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   DINAH MITE.
   G. S. C.
   JANE E.
   J. D. W.
   MAGPIE.
   S. S. G.
   TOKIO.


§ 2. CHANGE OF DAY.

I must postpone, _sine die_, the geographical problem--partly because I
have not yet received the statistics I am hoping for, and partly because
I am myself so entirely puzzled by it; and when an examiner is himself
dimly hovering between a second class and a third how is he to decide
the position of others?


§ 3. THE SONS' AGES.

_Problem._--"At first, two of the ages are together equal to the third.
A few years afterwards, two of them are together double of the third.
When the number of years since the first occasion is two-thirds of the
sum of the ages on that occasion, one age is 21. What are the other two?

_Answer._--"15 and 18."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--Let the ages at first be _x_, _y_, (_x_ + _y_). Now, if _a_
+ _b_ = 2_c_, then (_a_-_n_) + (_b_-_n_) = 2(_c_-_n_), whatever be the
value of _n_. Hence the second relationship, if _ever_ true, was
_always_ true. Hence it was true at first. But it cannot be true that
_x_ and _y_ are together double of (_x_ + _y_). Hence it must be true of
(_x_ + _y_), together with _x_ or _y_; and it does not matter which we
take. We assume, then, (_x_ + _y_) + _x_ = 2_y_; _i.e._ _y_ = 2_x_.
Hence the three ages were, at first, _x_, 2_x_, 3_x_; and the number of
years, since that time is two-thirds of 6_x_, _i.e._ is 4_x_. Hence the
present ages are 5_x_, 6_x_, 7_x_. The ages are clearly _integers_,
since this is only "the year when one of my sons comes of age." Hence
7_x_ = 21, _x_ = 3, and the other ages are 15, 18.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eighteen answers have been received. One of the writers merely asserts
that the first occasion was 12 years ago, that the ages were then 9, 6,
and 3; and that on the second occasion they were 14, 11, and 8! As a
Roman father, I _ought_ to withhold the name of the rash writer; but
respect for age makes me break the rule: it is THREE SCORE AND TEN. JANE
E. also asserts that the ages at first were 9, 6, 3: then she calculates
the present ages, leaving the _second_ occasion unnoticed. OLD HEN is
nearly as bad; she "tried various numbers till I found one that fitted
_all_ the conditions"; but merely scratching up the earth, and pecking
about, is _not_ the way to solve a problem, oh venerable bird! And close
after OLD HEN prowls, with hungry eyes, OLD CAT, who calmly assumes, to
begin with, that the son who comes of age is the _eldest_. Eat your
bird, Puss, for you will get nothing from me!

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. MINERVA assumes that, on _every_
occasion, a son comes of age; and that it is only such a son who is
"tipped with gold." Is it wise thus to interpret "now, my boys,
calculate your ages, and you shall have the money"? BRADSHAW OF THE
FUTURE says "let" the ages at first be 9, 6, 3, then assumes that the
second occasion was 6 years afterwards, and on these baseless
assumptions brings out the right answers. Guide _future_ travellers, an
thou wilt: thou art no Bradshaw for _this_ Age!

Of those who win honours, the merely "honourable" are two. DINAH MITE
ascertains (rightly) the relationship between the three ages at first,
but then _assumes_ one of them to be "6," thus making the rest of her
solution tentative. M. F. C. does the algebra all right up to the
conclusion that the present ages are 5_z_, 6_z_, and 7_z_; it then
assumes, without giving any reason, that 7_z_ = 21.

Of the more honourable, DELTA attempts a novelty--to discover _which_
son comes of age by elimination: it assumes, successively, that it is
the middle one, and that it is the youngest; and in each case it
_apparently_ brings out an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the
following bit of algebra, "63 = 7_x_ + 4_y_; [** therefore] 21 = _x_ + 4
sevenths of _y_," I trust it will admit that its proof is not _quite_
conclusive. The rest of its work is good. MAGPIE betrays the deplorable
tendency of her tribe--to appropriate any stray conclusion she comes
across, without having any _strict_ logical right to it. Assuming _A_,
_B_, _C_, as the ages at first, and _D_ as the number of the years that
have elapsed since then, she finds (rightly) the 3 equations, 2_A_ =
_B_, _C_ = _B_ + _A_, _D_ = 2_B_. She then says "supposing that _A_ = 1,
then _B_ = 2, _C_ = 3, and _D_ = 4. Therefore for _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_,
four numbers are wanted which shall be to each other as 1:2:3:4." It is
in the "therefore" that I detect the unconscientiousness of this bird.
The conclusion _is_ true, but this is only because the equations are
"homogeneous" (_i.e._ having one "unknown" in each term), a fact which I
strongly suspect had not been grasped--I beg pardon, clawed--by her.
Were I to lay this little pitfall, "_A_ + 1 = _B_, _B_ + 1 = _C_;
supposing _A_ = 1, then _B_ = 2 and _C_ = 3. _Therefore_ for _A_, _B_,
_C_, three numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 1:2:3,"
would you not flutter down into it, oh MAGPIE, as amiably as a Dove?
SIMPLE SUSAN is anything but simple to _me_. After ascertaining that the
3 ages at first are as 3:2:1, she says "then, as two-thirds of their
sum, added to one of them, = 21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and
consequently the highest cannot exceed 15." I suppose her (mental)
argument is something like this:--"two-thirds of sum, + one age, = 21;
[** therefore] sum, + 3 halves of one age, = 31 and a half. But 3 halves of
one age cannot be less than 1 and-a-half (here I perceive that SIMPLE
SUSAN would on no account present a guinea to a new-born baby!) hence
the sum cannot exceed 30." This is ingenious, but her proof, after that,
is (as she candidly admits) "clumsy and roundabout." She finds that
there are 5 possible sets of ages, and eliminates four of them. Suppose
that, instead of 5, there had been 5 million possible sets? Would SIMPLE
SUSAN have courageously ordered in the necessary gallon of ink and ream
of paper?

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like that of SIMPLE SUSAN, partly
tentative, and so does not rise higher than being Clumsily Right.

Among those who have earned the highest honours, ALGERNON BRAY solves
the problem quite correctly, but adds that there is nothing to exclude
the supposition that all the ages were _fractional_. This would make the
number of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I _never_
intended my readers to devote the rest of their lives to writing out
answers! E. M. RIX points out that, if fractional ages be admissible,
any one of the three sons might be the one "come of age"; but she
rightly rejects this supposition on the ground that it would make the
problem indeterminate. WHITE SUGAR is the only one who has detected an
oversight of mine: I had forgotten the possibility (which of course
ought to be allowed for) that the son, who came of age that _year_, need
not have done so by that _day_, so that he _might_ be only 20. This
gives a second solution, viz., 20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal!
Verily, thy "fair discourse hath been as sugar"!


CLASS LIST.

I.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   AN OLD FOGEY.
   E. M. RIX.
   G. S. C.
   S. S. G.
   TOKIO.
   T. R.
   WHITE SUGAR.

II.

   C. R.
   DELTA.
   MAGPIE.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.

III.

   DINAH MITE.
   M. F. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have received more than one remonstrance on my assertion, in the
Chelsea Pensioners' problem, that it was illogical to assume, from the
_datum_ "70 p. c. have lost an eye," that 30 p. c. have _not_. ALGERNON
BRAY states, as a parallel case, "suppose Tommy's father gives him 4
apples, and he eats one of them, how many has he left?" and says "I
think we are justified in answering, 3." I think so too. There is no
"must" here, and the _data_ are evidently meant to fix the answer
_exactly_: but, if the question were set me "how many _must_ he have
left?", I should understand the _data_ to be that his father gave him 4
_at least_, but _may_ have given him more.

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have sent, along with
their answers to the Tenth Knot, regrets that there are no more Knots to
come, or petitions that I should recall my resolution to bring them to
an end. I am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it wisest
to end what, at best, was but a lame attempt. "The stretched metre of an
antique song" is beyond my compass; and my puppets were neither
distinctly _in_ my life (like those I now address), nor yet (like Alice
and the Mock Turtle) distinctly _out_ of it. Yet let me at least fancy,
as I lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent life, dear
reader, a farewell smile from your unseen face, and a kindly farewell
pressure from your unfelt hand! And so, good night! Parting is such
sweet sorrow, that I shall say "good night!" till it be morrow.





CHAPTER 1. LESS BREAD! MORE TAXES!

--and then all the people cheered again, and one man, who was more
excited than the rest, flung his hat high into the air, and shouted
(as well as I could make out) “Who roar for the Sub-Warden?” Everybody
roared, but whether it was for the Sub-Warden, or not, did not clearly
appear: some were shouting “Bread!” and some “Taxes!”, but no one seemed
to know what it was they really wanted.

All this I saw from the open window of the Warden's breakfast-saloon,
looking across the shoulder of the Lord Chancellor, who had sprung
to his feet the moment the shouting began, almost as if he had been
expecting it, and had rushed to the window which commanded the best view
of the market-place.

“What can it all mean?” he kept repeating to himself, as, with his hands
clasped behind him, and his gown floating in the air, he paced rapidly
up and down the room. “I never heard such shouting before--and at this
time of the morning, too! And with such unanimity! Doesn't it strike you
as very remarkable?”

I represented, modestly, that to my ears it appeared that they were
shouting for different things, but the Chancellor would not listen to my
suggestion for a moment. “They all shout the same words, I assure you!”
 he said: then, leaning well out of the window, he whispered to a man who
was standing close underneath, “Keep'em together, ca'n't you? The Warden
will be here directly. Give'em the signal for the march up!” All this
was evidently not meant for my ears, but I could scarcely help hearing
it, considering that my chin was almost on the Chancellor's shoulder.

The 'march up' was a very curious sight:

{Image...The march-up}

a straggling procession of men, marching two and two, began from the
other side of the market-place, and advanced in an irregular zig-zag
fashion towards the Palace, wildly tacking from side to side, like a
sailing vessel making way against an unfavourable wind so that the head
of the procession was often further from us at the end of one tack than
it had been at the end of the previous one.

Yet it was evident that all was being done under orders, for I noticed
that all eyes were fixed on the man who stood just under the window, and
to whom the Chancellor was continually whispering. This man held his hat
in one hand and a little green flag in the other: whenever he waved the
flag the procession advanced a little nearer, when he dipped it they
sidled a little farther off, and whenever he waved his hat they all
raised a hoarse cheer. “Hoo-roah!” they cried, carefully keeping time
with the hat as it bobbed up and down. “Hoo-roah! Noo! Consti! Tooshun!
Less! Bread! More! Taxes!”

“That'll do, that'll do!” the Chancellor whispered. “Let 'em rest a bit
till I give you the word. He's not here yet!” But at this moment the
great folding-doors of the saloon were flung open, and he turned with a
guilty start to receive His High Excellency. However it was only Bruno,
and the Chancellor gave a little gasp of relieved anxiety.

“Morning!” said the little fellow, addressing the remark, in a general
sort of way, to the Chancellor and the waiters. “Doos oo know where
Sylvie is? I's looking for Sylvie!”

“She's with the Warden, I believe, y'reince!” the Chancellor replied
with a low bow. There was, no doubt, a certain amount of absurdity in
applying this title (which, as of course you see without my telling you,
was nothing but 'your Royal Highness' condensed into one syllable) to
a small creature whose father was merely the Warden of Outland: still,
large excuse must be made for a man who had passed several years at the
Court of Fairyland, and had there acquired the almost impossible art of
pronouncing five syllables as one.

But the bow was lost upon Bruno, who had run out of the room, even
while the great feat of The Unpronounceable Monosyllable was being
triumphantly performed.

Just then, a single voice in the distance was understood to shout “A
speech from the Chancellor!” “Certainly, my friends!” the Chancellor
replied with extraordinary promptitude. “You shall have a speech!”
 Here one of the waiters, who had been for some minutes busy making a
queer-looking mixture of egg and sherry, respectfully presented it on
a large silver salver. The Chancellor took it haughtily, drank it off
thoughtfully, smiled benevolently on the happy waiter as he set down the
empty glass, and began. To the best of my recollection this is what he
said.

“Ahem! Ahem! Ahem! Fellow-sufferers, or rather suffering fellows--”
 (“Don't call 'em names!” muttered the man under the window. “I didn't
say felons!” the Chancellor explained.) “You may be sure that I always
sympa--” (“'Ear, 'ear!” shouted the crowd, so loudly as quite to drown
the orator's thin squeaky voice) “--that I always sympa--” he repeated.
(“Don't simper quite so much!” said the man under the window. “It makes
yer look a hidiot!” And, all this time, “'Ear, 'ear!” went rumbling
round the market-place, like a peal of thunder.) “That I always
sympathise!” yelled the Chancellor, the first moment there was silence.
“But your true friend is the Sub-Warden! Day and night he is brooding on
your wrongs--I should say your rights--that is to say your wrongs--no,
I mean your rights--” (“Don't talk no more!” growled the man under the
window. “You're making a mess of it!”) At this moment the Sub-Warden
entered the saloon. He was a thin man, with a mean and crafty face,
and a greenish-yellow complexion; and he crossed the room very slowly,
looking suspiciously about him as if he thought there might be a savage
dog hidden somewhere. “Bravo!” he cried, patting the Chancellor on the
back. “You did that speech very well indeed. Why, you're a born orator,
man!”

“Oh, that's nothing!” the Chancellor replied, modestly, with downcast
eyes. “Most orators are born, you know.”

The Sub-Warden thoughtfully rubbed his chin. “Why, so they are!” he
admitted. “I never considered it in that light. Still, you did it very
well. A word in your ear!”

The rest of their conversation was all in whispers: so, as I could hear
no more, I thought I would go and find Bruno.

I found the little fellow standing in the passage, and being addressed
by one of the men in livery, who stood before him, nearly bent double
from extreme respectfulness, with his hands hanging in front of him
like the fins of a fish. “His High Excellency,” this respectful man was
saying, “is in his Study, y'reince!” (He didn't pronounce this quite so
well as the Chancellor.) Thither Bruno trotted, and I thought it well to
follow him.

The Warden, a tall dignified man with a grave but very pleasant face,
was seated before a writing-table, which was covered with papers, and
holding on his knee one of the sweetest and loveliest little maidens it
has ever been my lot to see. She looked four or five years older than
Bruno, but she had the same rosy cheeks and sparkling eyes, and the same
wealth of curly brown hair. Her eager smiling face was turned upwards
towards her father's, and it was a pretty sight to see the mutual love
with which the two faces--one in the Spring of Life, the other in its
late Autumn--were gazing on each other.

“No, you've never seen him,” the old man was saying: “you couldn't, you
know, he's been away so long--traveling from land to land, and seeking
for health, more years than you've been alive, little Sylvie!” Here
Bruno climbed upon his other knee, and a good deal of kissing, on a
rather complicated system, was the result.

“He only came back last night,” said the Warden, when the kissing was
over: “he's been traveling post-haste, for the last thousand miles or
so, in order to be here on Sylvie's birthday. But he's a very early
riser, and I dare say he's in the Library already. Come with me and see
him. He's always kind to children. You'll be sure to like him.”

“Has the Other Professor come too?” Bruno asked in an awe-struck voice.

“Yes, they arrived together. The Other Professor is--well, you won't
like him quite so much, perhaps. He's a little more dreamy, you know.”

“I wiss Sylvie was a little more dreamy,” said Bruno.

“What do you mean, Bruno?” said Sylvie.

Bruno went on addressing his father. “She says she ca'n't, oo know. But
I thinks it isn't ca'n't, it's wo'n't.”

“Says she ca'n't dream!” the puzzled Warden repeated.

“She do say it,” Bruno persisted. “When I says to her 'Let's stop
lessons!', she says 'Oh, I ca'n't dream of letting oo stop yet!'”

“He always wants to stop lessons,” Sylvie explained, “five minutes after
we begin!”

“Five minutes' lessons a day!” said the Warden. “You won't learn much at
that rate, little man!”

“That's just what Sylvie says,” Bruno rejoined. “She says I wo'n't learn
my lessons. And I tells her, over and over, I ca'n't learn 'em. And what
doos oo think she says? She says 'It isn't ca'n't, it's wo'n't!'”

“Let's go and see the Professor,” the Warden said, wisely avoiding
further discussion. The children got down off his knees, each secured a
hand, and the happy trio set off for the Library--followed by me. I had
come to the conclusion by this time that none of the party (except, for
a few moments, the Lord Chancellor) was in the least able to see me.

“What's the matter with him?” Sylvie asked, walking with a little extra
sedateness, by way of example to Bruno at the other side, who never
ceased jumping up and down.

{Image...Visiting the profesor}

“What was the matter--but I hope he's all right now--was lumbago, and
rheumatism, and that kind of thing. He's been curing himself, you
know: he's a very learned doctor. Why, he's actually invented three new
diseases, besides a new way of breaking your collar-bone!”

“Is it a nice way?” said Bruno.

“Well, hum, not very,” the Warden said, as we entered the Library. “And
here is the Professor. Good morning, Professor! Hope you're quite rested
after your journey!”

A jolly-looking, fat little man, in a flowery dressing-gown, with a
large book under each arm, came trotting in at the other end of the
room, and was going straight across without taking any notice of the
children. “I'm looking for Vol. Three,” he said. “Do you happen to have
seen it?”

“You don't see my children, Professor!” the Warden exclaimed, taking him
by the shoulders and turning him round to face them.

The Professor laughed violently: then he gazed at them through his great
spectacles, for a minute or two, without speaking.

At last he addressed Bruno. “I hope you have had a good night, my
child?” Bruno looked puzzled. “I's had the same night oo've had,” he
replied. “There's only been one night since yesterday!”

It was the Professor's turn to look puzzled now. He took off his
spectacles, and rubbed them with his handkerchief. Then he gazed at them
again. Then he turned to the Warden. “Are they bound?” he enquired.

“No, we aren't,” said Bruno, who thought himself quite able to answer
this question.

The Professor shook his head sadly. “Not even half-bound?”

“Why would we be half-bound?” said Bruno.

“We're not prisoners!”

But the Professor had forgotten all about them by this time, and was
speaking to the Warden again. “You'll be glad to hear,” he was saying,
“that the Barometer's beginning to move--”

“Well, which way?” said the Warden--adding, to the children, “Not that
I care, you know. Only he thinks it affects the weather. He's a
wonderfully clever man, you know. Sometimes he says things that only the
Other Professor can understand. Sometimes he says things that nobody can
understand! Which way is it, Professor? Up or down?”

“Neither!” said the Professor, gently clapping his hands. “It's going
sideways--if I may so express myself.”

“And what kind of weather does that produce?” said the Warden. “Listen,
children! Now you'll hear something worth knowing!”

“Horizontal weather,” said the Professor, and made straight for the
door, very nearly trampling on Bruno, who had only just time to get out
of his way.

“Isn't he learned?” the Warden said, looking after him with admiring
eyes. “Positively he runs over with learning!”

“But he needn't run over me!” said Bruno.

The Professor was back in a moment: he had changed his dressing-gown for
a frock-coat, and had put on a pair of very strange-looking boots, the
tops of which were open umbrellas. “I thought you'd like to see them,”
 he said. “These are the boots for horizontal weather!”

{Image...Boots for horizontal weather}

“But what's the use of wearing umbrellas round one's knees?”

“In ordinary rain,” the Professor admitted, “they would not be of
much use. But if ever it rained horizontally, you know, they would be
invaluable--simply invaluable!”

“Take the Professor to the breakfast-saloon, children,” said the Warden.
“And tell them not to wait for me. I had breakfast early, as I've some
business to attend to.” The children seized the Professor's hands, as
familiarly as if they had known him for years, and hurried him away. I
followed respectfully behind.






CHAPTER 2. L'AMIE INCONNUE.

As we entered the breakfast-saloon, the Professor was saying “--and he
had breakfast by himself, early: so he begged you wouldn't wait for him,
my Lady. This way, my Lady,” he added, “this way!” And then, with (as it
seemed to me) most superfluous politeness, he flung open the door of my
compartment, and ushered in “--a young and lovely lady!” I muttered to
myself with some bitterness. “And this is, of course, the opening
scene of Vol. I. She is the Heroine. And I am one of those subordinate
characters that only turn up when needed for the development of her
destiny, and whose final appearance is outside the church, waiting to
greet the Happy Pair!”

“Yes, my Lady, change at Fayfield,” were the next words I heard (oh that
too obsequious Guard!), “next station but one.” And the door closed, and
the lady settled down into her corner, and the monotonous throb of the
engine (making one feel as if the train were some gigantic monster,
whose very circulation we could feel) proclaimed that we were once more
speeding on our way. “The lady had a perfectly formed nose,” I caught
myself saying to myself, “hazel eyes, and lips--” and here it occurred
to me that to see, for myself, what “the lady” was really like, would be
more satisfactory than much speculation.

I looked round cautiously, and--was entirely disappointed of my hope.
The veil, which shrouded her whole face, was too thick for me to see
more than the glitter of bright eyes and the hazy outline of what might
be a lovely oval face, but might also, unfortunately, be an equally
unlovely one. I closed my eyes again, saying to myself “--couldn't have
a better chance for an experiment in Telepathy! I'll think out her face,
and afterwards test the portrait with the original.”

At first, no result at all crowned my efforts, though I 'divided my
swift mind,' now hither, now thither, in a way that I felt sure would
have made AEneas green with envy: but the dimly-seen oval remained as
provokingly blank as ever--a mere Ellipse, as if in some mathematical
diagram, without even the Foci that might be made to do duty as a nose
and a mouth. Gradually, however, the conviction came upon me that I
could, by a certain concentration of thought, think the veil away, and
so get a glimpse of the mysterious face--as to which the two questions,
“is she pretty?” and “is she plain?”, still hung suspended, in my mind,
in beautiful equipoise.

Success was partial--and fitful--still there was a result: ever and
anon, the veil seemed to vanish, in a sudden flash of light: but,
before I could fully realise the face, all was dark again. In each such
glimpse, the face seemed to grow more childish and more innocent:
and, when I had at last thought the veil entirely away, it was,
unmistakeably, the sweet face of little Sylvie!

“So, either I've been dreaming about Sylvie,” I said to myself, “and
this is the reality. Or else I've really been with Sylvie, and this is a
dream! Is Life itself a dream, I wonder?”

To occupy the time, I got out the letter, which had caused me to take
this sudden railway-journey from my London home down to a strange
fishing-town on the North coast, and read it over again:--


    “DEAR OLD FRIEND,

    “I'm sure it will be as great a pleasure to me, as it can possibly
    be to you, to meet once more after so many years: and of course I
    shall be ready to give you all the benefit of such medical skill as
    I have: only, you know, one mustn't violate professional etiquette!
    And you are already in the hands of a first-rate London doctor,
    with whom it would be utter affectation for me to pretend to compete.
    (I make no doubt he is right in saying the heart is affected:
    all your symptoms point that way.) One thing, at any rate, I have
    already done in my doctorial capacity--secured you a bedroom on the
    ground-floor, so that you will not need to ascend the stairs at all.

    “I shalt expect you by last train on Friday, in accordance with your
    letter: and, till then, I shalt say, in the words of the old song,
    'Oh for Friday nicht!  Friday's lang a-coming!'

    “Yours always,

    “ARTHUR FORESTER.

    “P.S.  Do you believe in Fate?”

This Postscript puzzled me sorely. “He is far too sensible a man,” I
thought, “to have become a Fatalist. And yet what else can he mean by
it?” And, as I folded up the letter and put it away, I inadvertently
repeated the words aloud. “Do you believe in Fate?”

The fair 'Incognita' turned her head quickly at the sudden question.
“No, I don't!” she said with a smile. “Do you?”

“I--I didn't mean to ask the question!” I stammered, a little taken
aback at having begun a conversation in so unconventional a fashion.

The lady's smile became a laugh--not a mocking laugh, but the laugh of a
happy child who is perfectly at her ease. “Didn't you?” she said. “Then
it was a case of what you Doctors call 'unconscious cerebration'?”

“I am no Doctor,” I replied. “Do I look so like one? Or what makes you
think it?”

She pointed to the book I had been reading, which was so lying that its
title, “Diseases of the Heart,” was plainly visible.

“One needn't be a Doctor,” I said, “to take an interest in medical
books. There's another class of readers, who are yet more deeply
interested--”

“You mean the Patients?” she interrupted, while a look of tender pity
gave new sweetness to her face. “But,” with an evident wish to avoid a
possibly painful topic, “one needn't be either, to take an interest in
books of Science. Which contain the greatest amount of Science, do you
think, the books, or the minds?”

“Rather a profound question for a lady!” I said to myself, holding, with
the conceit so natural to Man, that Woman's intellect is essentially
shallow. And I considered a minute before replying. “If you mean living
minds, I don't think it's possible to decide. There is so much written
Science that no living person has ever read: and there is so much
thought-out Science that hasn't yet been written. But, if you mean the
whole human race, then I think the minds have it: everything, recorded
in books, must have once been in some mind, you know.”

“Isn't that rather like one of the Rules in Algebra?” my Lady enquired.
(“Algebra too!” I thought with increasing wonder.) “I mean, if we
consider thoughts as factors, may we not say that the Least Common
Multiple of all the minds contains that of all the books; but not the
other way?”

“Certainly we may!” I replied, delighted with the illustration. “And
what a grand thing it would be,” I went on dreamily, thinking aloud
rather than talking, “if we could only apply that Rule to books! You
know, in finding the Least Common Multiple, we strike out a quantity
wherever it occurs, except in the term where it is raised to its highest
power. So we should have to erase every recorded thought, except in the
sentence where it is expressed with the greatest intensity.”

My Lady laughed merrily. “Some books would be reduced to blank paper,
I'm afraid!” she said.

“They would. Most libraries would be terribly diminished in bulk. But
just think what they would gain in quality!”

“When will it be done?” she eagerly asked. “If there's any chance of it
in my time, I think I'll leave off reading, and wait for it!”

“Well, perhaps in another thousand years or so--”

“Then there's no use waiting!”, said my Lady. “Let's sit down. Uggug, my
pet, come and sit by me!”

“Anywhere but by me!” growled the Sub-warden. “The little wretch always
manages to upset his coffee!”

I guessed at once (as perhaps the reader will also have guessed, if,
like myself, he is very clever at drawing conclusions) that my Lady was
the Sub-Warden's wife, and that Uggug (a hideous fat boy, about the same
age as Sylvie, with the expression of a prize-pig) was their son. Sylvie
and Bruno, with the Lord Chancellor, made up a party of seven.

{Image...A portable plunge-bath}

“And you actually got a plunge-bath every morning?” said the Sub-Warden,
seemingly in continuation of a conversation with the Professor. “Even at
the little roadside-inns?”

“Oh, certainly, certainly!” the Professor replied with a smile on his
jolly face. “Allow me to explain. It is, in fact, a very simple problem
in Hydrodynamics. (That means a combination of Water and Strength.)
If we take a plunge-bath, and a man of great strength (such as myself)
about to plunge into it, we have a perfect example of this science. I
am bound to admit,” the Professor continued, in a lower tone and with
downcast eyes, “that we need a man of remarkable strength. He must be
able to spring from the floor to about twice his own height, gradually
turning over as he rises, so as to come down again head first.”

“Why, you need a flea, not a man!” exclaimed the Sub-Warden.

“Pardon me,” said the Professor. “This particular kind of bath is
not adapted for a flea. Let us suppose,” he continued, folding his
table-napkin into a graceful festoon, “that this represents what is
perhaps the necessity of this Age--the Active Tourist's Portable Bath.
You may describe it briefly, if you like,” looking at the Chancellor,
“by the letters A.T.P.B.”

The Chancellor, much disconcerted at finding everybody looking at him,
could only murmur, in a shy whisper, “Precisely so!”

“One great advantage of this plunge-bath,” continued the Professor, “is
that it requires only half-a-gallon of water--”

“I don't call it a plunge-bath,” His Sub-Excellency remarked, “unless
your Active Tourist goes right under!”

“But he does go right under,” the old man gently replied. “The A.T.
hangs up the P. B. on a nail--thus. He then empties the water-jug into
it--places the empty jug below the bag--leaps into the air--descends
head-first into the bag--the water rises round him to the top of the
bag--and there you are!” he triumphantly concluded. “The A.T. is as much
under water as if he'd gone a mile or two down into the Atlantic!”

“And he's drowned, let us say, in about four minutes--”

“By no means!” the Professor answered with a proud smile. “After about
a minute, he quietly turns a tap at the lower end of the P. B.--all the
water runs back into the jug and there you are again!”

“But how in the world is he to get out of the bag again?”

“That, I take it,” said the Professor, “is the most beautiful part of
the whole invention. All the way up the P.B., inside, are loops for
the thumbs; so it's something like going up-stairs, only perhaps less
comfortable; and, by the time the A. T. has risen out of the bag, all
but his head, he's sure to topple over, one way or the other--the Law of
Gravity secures that. And there he is on the floor again!”

“A little bruised, perhaps?”

“Well, yes, a little bruised; but having had his plunge-bath: that's the
great thing.”

“Wonderful! It's almost beyond belief!” murmured the Sub-Warden. The
Professor took it as a compliment, and bowed with a gratified smile.

“Quite beyond belief!” my Lady added--meaning, no doubt, to be more
complimentary still. The Professor bowed, but he didn't smile this time.
“I can assure you,” he said earnestly, “that, provided the bath was
made, I used it every morning. I certainly ordered it--that I am clear
about--my only doubt is, whether the man ever finished making it. It's
difficult to remember, after so many years--”

At this moment the door, very slowly and creakingly, began to open, and
Sylvie and Bruno jumped up, and ran to meet the well-known footstep.






CHAPTER 3. BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS.

“It's my brother!” the Sub-warden exclaimed, in a warning whisper.
“Speak out, and be quick about it!”

The appeal was evidently addressed to the Lord Chancellor, who instantly
replied, in a shrill monotone, like a little boy repeating the alphabet,
“As I was remarking, your Sub-Excellency, this portentous movement--”

“You began too soon!” the other interrupted, scarcely able to restrain
himself to a whisper, so great was his excitement. “He couldn't have
heard you. Begin again!” “As I was remarking,” chanted the obedient Lord
Chancellor, “this portentous movement has already assumed the dimensions
of a Revolution!”

“And what are the dimensions of a Revolution?” The voice was genial and
mellow, and the face of the tall dignified old man, who had just entered
the room, leading Sylvie by the hand, and with Bruno riding triumphantly
on his shoulder, was too noble and gentle to have scared a less guilty
man: but the Lord Chancellor turned pale instantly, and could hardly
articulate the words “The dimensions your--your High Excellency?
I--I--scarcely comprehend!”

“Well, the length, breadth, and thickness, if you like it better!” And
the old man smiled, half-contemptuously.

The Lord Chancellor recovered himself with a great effort, and pointed
to the open window. “If your High Excellency will listen for a moment
to the shouts of the exasperated populace--” (“of the exasperated
populace!” the Sub-Warden repeated in a louder tone, as the Lord
Chancellor, being in a state of abject terror, had dropped almost into a
whisper) “--you will understand what it is they want.”

And at that moment there surged into the room a hoarse confused cry, in
which the only clearly audible words were “Less--bread--More--taxes!”
 The old man laughed heartily. “What in the world--” he was beginning:
but the Chancellor heard him not. “Some mistake!” he muttered, hurrying
to the window, from which he shortly returned with an air of relief.
“Now listen!” he exclaimed, holding up his hand impressively. And now
the words came quite distinctly, and with the regularity of the ticking
of a clock, “More--bread--Less taxes!'”

“More bread!” the Warden repeated in astonishment. “Why, the new
Government Bakery was opened only last week, and I gave orders to sell
the bread at cost-price during the present scarcity! What can they
expect more?”

“The Bakery's closed, y'reince!” the Chancellor said, more loudly and
clearly than he had spoken yet. He was emboldened by the consciousness
that here, at least, he had evidence to produce: and he placed in the
Warden's hands a few printed notices, that were lying ready, with some
open ledgers, on a side-table.

“Yes, yes, I see!” the Warden muttered, glancing carelessly through
them. “Order countermanded by my brother, and supposed to be my doing!
Rather sharp practice! It's all right!” he added in a louder tone. “My
name is signed to it: so I take it on myself. But what do they mean by
'Less Taxes'? How can they be less? I abolished the last of them a month
ago!”

“It's been put on again, y'reince, and by y'reince's own orders!”, and
other printed notices were submitted for inspection.

The Warden, whilst looking them over, glanced once or twice at the
Sub-Warden, who had seated himself before one of the open ledgers, and
was quite absorbed in adding it up; but he merely repeated “It's all
right. I accept it as my doing.”

“And they do say,” the Chancellor went on sheepishly--looking much
more like a convicted thief than an Officer of State, “that a change
of Government, by the abolition of the Sub-Warden---I mean,” he hastily
added, on seeing the Warden's look of astonishment, “the abolition of
the office of Sub-Warden, and giving the present holder the right to
act as Vice-Warden whenever the Warden is absent--would appease all this
seedling discontent I mean,” he added, glancing at a paper he held in
his hand, “all this seething discontent!”

“For fifteen years,” put in a deep but very harsh voice, “my husband has
been acting as Sub-Warden. It is too long! It is much too long!” My Lady
was a vast creature at all times: but, when she frowned and folded her
arms, as now, she looked more gigantic than ever, and made one try to
fancy what a haystack would look like, if out of temper.

“He would distinguish himself as a Vice!” my Lady proceeded, being far
too stupid to see the double meaning of her words. “There has been no
such Vice in Outland for many a long year, as he would be!”

“What course would you suggest, Sister?” the Warden mildly enquired.

My Lady stamped, which was undignified: and snorted, which was
ungraceful. “This is no jesting matter!” she bellowed.

“I will consult my brother,” said the Warden. “Brother!”

“--and seven makes a hundred and ninety-four, which is sixteen and
two-pence,” the Sub-Warden replied. “Put down two and carry sixteen.”

The Chancellor raised his hands and eyebrows, lost in admiration. “Such
a man of business!” he murmured.

“Brother, could I have a word with you in my Study?” the Warden said in
a louder tone. The Sub-Warden rose with alacrity, and the two left the
room together.

My Lady turned to the Professor, who had uncovered the urn, and was
taking its temperature with his pocket-thermometer. “Professor!” she
began, so loudly and suddenly that even Uggug, who had gone to sleep in
his chair, left off snoring and opened one eye. The Professor pocketed
his thermometer in a moment, clasped his hands, and put his head on one
side with a meek smile.

“You were teaching my son before breakfast, I believe?” my Lady loftily
remarked. “I hope he strikes you as having talent?”

“Oh, very much so indeed, my Lady!” the Professor hastily replied,
unconsciously rubbing his ear, while some painful recollection seemed
to cross his mind. “I was very forcibly struck by His Magnificence, I
assure you!”

“He is a charming boy!” my Lady exclaimed. “Even his snores are more
musical than those of other boys!”

If that were so, the Professor seemed to think, the snores of other boys
must be something too awful to be endured: but he was a cautious man,
and he said nothing.

“And he's so clever!” my Lady continued. “No one will enjoy your Lecture
more by the way, have you fixed the time for it yet? You've never given
one, you know: and it was promised years ago, before you--

“Yes, yes, my Lady, I know! Perhaps next Tuesday or Tuesday week--”

“That will do very well,” said my Lady, graciously. “Of course you will
let the Other Professor lecture as well?”

“I think not, my Lady?” the Professor said with some hesitation. “You
see, he always stands with his back to the audience. It does very well
for reciting; but for lecturing--”

“You are quite right,” said my Lady. “And, now I come to think of it,
there would hardly be time for more than one Lecture. And it will go off
all the better, if we begin with a Banquet, and a Fancy-dress Ball--”

“It will indeed!” the Professor cried, with enthusiasm.

“I shall come as a Grass-hopper,” my Lady calmly proceeded. “What shall
you come as, Professor?”

The Professor smiled feebly. “I shall come as--as early as I can, my
Lady!”

“You mustn't come in before the doors are opened,” said my Lady.

“I ca'n't,” said the Professor. “Excuse me a moment. As this is Lady
Sylvie's birthday, I would like to--” and he rushed away.

Bruno began feeling in his pockets, looking more and more melancholy
as he did so: then he put his thumb in his mouth, and considered for a
minute: then he quietly left the room.

He had hardly done so before the Professor was back again, quite out of
breath. “Wishing you many happy returns of the day, my dear child!” he
went on, addressing the smiling little girl, who had run to meet him.
“Allow me to give you a birthday-present. It's a second-hand pincushion,
my dear. And it only cost fourpence-halfpenny!”

“Thank you, it's very pretty!” And Sylvie rewarded the old man with a
hearty kiss.

“And the pins they gave me for nothing!” the Professor added in high
glee. “Fifteen of 'em, and only one bent!”

“I'll make the bent one into a hook!” said Sylvie. “To catch Bruno with,
when he runs away from his lessons!”

“You ca'n't guess what my present is!” said Uggug, who had taken the
butter-dish from the table, and was standing behind her, with a wicked
leer on his face.

“No, I ca'n't guess,” Sylvie said without looking up. She was still
examining the Professor's pincushion.

“It's this!” cried the bad boy, exultingly, as he emptied the dish over
her, and then, with a grin of delight at his own cleverness, looked
round for applause.

Sylvie coloured crimson, as she shook off the butter from her frock: but
she kept her lips tight shut, and walked away to the window, where she
stood looking out and trying to recover her temper.

Uggug's triumph was a very short one: the Sub-Warden had returned, just
in time to be a witness of his dear child's playfulness, and in another
moment a skilfully-applied box on the ear had changed the grin of
delight into a howl of pain.

“My darling!” cried his mother, enfolding him in her fat arms. “Did they
box his ears for nothing? A precious pet!”

“It's not for nothing!” growled the angry father. “Are you aware, Madam,
that I pay the house-bills, out of a fixed annual sum? The loss of all
that wasted butter falls on me! Do you hear, Madam!”

“Hold your tongue, Sir!” My Lady spoke very quietly--almost in a
whisper. But there was something in her look which silenced him. “Don't
you see it was only a joke? And a very clever one, too! He only meant
that he loved nobody but her! And, instead of being pleased with the
compliment, the spiteful little thing has gone away in a huff!”

The Sub-Warden was a very good hand at changing a subject. He walked
across to the window. “My dear,” he said, “is that a pig that I see down
below, rooting about among your flower-beds?”

“A pig!” shrieked my Lady, rushing madly to the window, and almost
pushing her husband out, in her anxiety to see for herself. “Whose pig
is it? How did it get in? Where's that crazy Gardener gone?”

At this moment Bruno re-entered the room, and passing Uggug (who was
blubbering his loudest, in the hope of attracting notice) as if he was
quite used to that sort of thing, he ran up to Sylvie and threw his arms
round her. “I went to my toy-cupboard,” he said with a very sorrowful
face, “to see if there were somefin fit for a present for oo! And there
isn't nuffin! They's all broken, every one! And I haven't got no money
left, to buy oo a birthday-present! And I ca'n't give oo nuffin but
this!” (“This” was a very earnest hug and a kiss.)

“Oh, thank you, darling!” cried Sylvie. “I like your present best of
all!” (But if so, why did she give it back so quickly?)

His Sub-Excellency turned and patted the two children on the head with
his long lean hands. “Go away, dears!” he said. “There's business to
talk over.”

Sylvie and Bruno went away hand in hand: but, on reaching the door,
Sylvie came back again and went up to Uggug timidly. “I don't mind about
the butter,” she said, “and I--I'm sorry he hurt you!” And she tried to
shake hands with the little ruffian: but Uggug only blubbered louder,
and wouldn't make friends. Sylvie left the room with a sigh.

The Sub-Warden glared angrily at his weeping son. “Leave the room,
Sirrah!” he said, as loud as he dared. His wife was still leaning out of
the window, and kept repeating “I ca'n't see that pig! Where is it?”

“It's moved to the right now it's gone a little to the left,” said the
Sub-Warden: but he had his back to the window, and was making signals to
the Lord Chancellor, pointing to Uggug and the door, with many a cunning
nod and wink.

{Image...Removal of Uggug}

The Chancellor caught his meaning at last, and, crossing the room, took
that interesting child by the ear the next moment he and Uggug were out
of the room, and the door shut behind them: but not before one piercing
yell had rung through the room, and reached the ears of the fond mother.

“What is that hideous noise?” she fiercely asked, turning upon her
startled husband.

“It's some hyaena--or other,” replied the Sub-Warden, looking vaguely up
to the ceiling, as if that was where they usually were to be found. “Let
us to business, my dear. Here comes the Warden.” And he picked up from
the floor a wandering scrap of manuscript, on which I just caught the
words 'after which Election duly holden the said Sibimet and Tabikat
his wife may at their pleasure assume Imperial--' before, with a guilty
look, he crumpled it up in his hand.






CHAPTER 4. A CUNNING CONSPIRACY.

The Warden entered at this moment: and close behind him came the Lord
Chancellor, a little flushed and out of breath, and adjusting his wig,
which appeared to have been dragged partly off his head.

“But where is my precious child?” my Lady enquired, as the four took
their seats at the small side-table devoted to ledgers and bundles and
bills.

“He left the room a few minutes ago with the Lord Chancellor,” the
Sub-Warden briefly explained.

“Ah!” said my Lady, graciously smiling on that high official. “Your
Lordship has a very taking way with children! I doubt if any one could
gain the ear of my darling Uggug so quickly as you can!” For an entirely
stupid woman, my Lady's remarks were curiously full of meaning, of which
she herself was wholly unconscious.

The Chancellor bowed, but with a very uneasy air. “I think the Warden
was about to speak,” he remarked, evidently anxious to change the
subject.

But my Lady would not be checked. “He is a clever boy,” she continued
with enthusiasm, “but he needs a man like your Lordship to draw him
out!”

The Chancellor bit his lip, and was silent. He evidently feared that,
stupid as she looked, she understood what she said this time, and was
having a joke at his expense. He might have spared himself all anxiety:
whatever accidental meaning her words might have, she herself never
meant anything at all.

“It is all settled!” the Warden announced, wasting no time over
preliminaries. “The Sub-Wardenship is abolished, and my brother is
appointed to act as Vice-Warden whenever I am absent. So, as I am going
abroad for a while, he will enter on his new duties at once.”

“And there will really be a Vice after all?” my Lady enquired.

“I hope so!” the Warden smilingly replied.

My Lady looked much pleased, and tried to clap her hands: but you might
as well have knocked two feather-beds together, for any noise it made.
“When my husband is Vice,” she said, “it will be the same as if we had a
hundred Vices!”

“Hear, hear!” cried the Sub-Warden.

“You seem to think it very remarkable,” my Lady remarked with some
severity, “that your wife should speak the truth!”

“No, not remarkable at all!” her husband anxiously explained. “Nothing
is remarkable that you say, sweet one!”

My Lady smiled approval of the sentiment, and went on. “And am I
Vice-Wardeness?”

“If you choose to use that title,” said the Warden: “but 'Your
Excellency' will be the proper style of address. And I trust that both
'His Excellency' and 'Her Excellency' will observe the Agreement I have
drawn up. The provision I am most anxious about is this.” He unrolled a
large parchment scroll, and read aloud the words “'item, that we will be
kind to the poor.' The Chancellor worded it for me,” he added, glancing
at that great Functionary. “I suppose, now, that word 'item' has some
deep legal meaning?”

“Undoubtedly!” replied the Chancellor, as articulately as he could with
a pen between his lips. He was nervously rolling and unrolling several
other scrolls, and making room among them for the one the Warden had
just handed to him. “These are merely the rough copies,” he explained:
“and, as soon as I have put in the final corrections--” making a great
commotion among the different parchments, “--a semi-colon or two that I
have accidentally omitted--” here he darted about, pen in hand, from one
part of the scroll to another, spreading sheets of blotting-paper over
his corrections, “all will be ready for signing.”

“Should it not be read out, first?” my Lady enquired.

“No need, no need!” the Sub-Warden and the Chancellor exclaimed at the
same moment, with feverish eagerness.

“No need at all,” the Warden gently assented. “Your husband and I have
gone through it together. It provides that he shall exercise the full
authority of Warden, and shall have the disposal of the annual revenue
attached to the office, until my return, or, failing that, until Bruno
comes of age: and that he shall then hand over, to myself or to Bruno as
the case may be, the Wardenship, the unspent revenue, and the
contents of the Treasury, which are to be preserved, intact, under his
guardianship.”

All this time the Sub-Warden was busy, with the Chancellor's help,
shifting the papers from side to side, and pointing out to the Warden
the place whew he was to sign. He then signed it himself, and my Lady
and the Chancellor added their names as witnesses.

“Short partings are best,” said the Warden. “All is ready for my
journey. My children are waiting below to see me off” He gravely kissed
my Lady, shook hands with his brother and the Chancellor, and left the
room.

{Image...'What a game!'}

The three waited in silence till the sound of wheels announced that the
Warden was out of hearing: then, to my surprise, they broke into peals
of uncontrollable laughter.

“What a game, oh, what a game!” cried the Chancellor. And he and the
Vice-Warden joined hands, and skipped wildly about the room. My Lady was
too dignified to skip, but she laughed like the neighing of a horse, and
waved her handkerchief above her head: it was clear to her very limited
understanding that something very clever had been done, but what it was
she had yet to learn.

“You said I should hear all about it when the Warden had gone,” she
remarked, as soon as she could make herself heard.

“And so you shall, Tabby!” her husband graciously replied, as he removed
the blotting-paper, and showed the two parchments lying side by side.
“This is the one he read but didn't sign: and this is the one he signed
but didn't read! You see it was all covered up, except the place for
signing the names--”

“Yes, yes!” my Lady interrupted eagerly, and began comparing the two
Agreements.

“'Item, that he shall exercise the authority of Warden, in the Warden's
absence.' Why, that's been changed into 'shall be absolute governor
for life, with the title of Emperor, if elected to that office by the
people.' What! Are you Emperor, darling?”

“Not yet, dear,” the Vice-Warden replied. “It won't do to let this paper
be seen, just at present. All in good time.”

My Lady nodded, and read on. “'Item, that we will be kind to the poor.'
Why, that's omitted altogether!”

“Course it is!” said her husband. “We're not going to bother about the
wretches!”

“Good,” said my Lady, with emphasis, and read on again. “'Item, that the
contents of the Treasury be preserved intact.' Why, that's altered into
'shall be at the absolute disposal of the Vice-Warden'! Well, Sibby,
that was a clever trick! All the Jewels, only think! May I go and put
them on directly?”

“Well, not just yet, Lovey,” her husband uneasily replied. “You see the
public mind isn't quite ripe for it yet. We must feel our way. Of course
we'll have the coach-and-four out, at once. And I'll take the title of
Emperor, as soon as we can safely hold an Election. But they'll hardly
stand our using the Jewels, as long as they know the Warden's alive. We
must spread a report of his death. A little Conspiracy--”

“A Conspiracy!” cried the delighted lady, clapping her hands. “Of all
things, I do like a Conspiracy! It's so interesting!”

The Vice-Warden and the Chancellor interchanged a wink or two. “Let
her conspire to her heart's content!” the cunning Chancellor whispered.
“It'll do no harm!”

“And when will the Conspiracy--”

“Hist!', her husband hastily interrupted her, as the door opened, and
Sylvie and Bruno came in, with their arms twined lovingly round each
other--Bruno sobbing convulsively, with his face hidden on his sister's
shoulder, and Sylvie more grave and quiet, but with tears streaming down
her cheeks.

“Mustn't cry like that!” the Vice-Warden said sharply, but without any
effect on the weeping children. “Cheer 'em up a bit!” he hinted to my
Lady.

“Cake!” my Lady muttered to herself with great decision, crossing the
room and opening a cupboard, from which she presently returned with two
slices of plum-cake. “Eat, and don't cry!” were her short and simple
orders: and the poor children sat down side by side, but seemed in no
mood for eating.

For the second time the door opened--or rather was burst open, this
time, as Uggug rushed violently into the room, shouting “that old
Beggars come again!”

“He's not to have any food--” the Vice-warden was beginning, but the
Chancellor interrupted him. “It's all right,” he said, in a low voice:
“the servants have their orders.”

“He's just under here,” said Uggug, who had gone to the window, and was
looking down into the court-yard.

“Where, my darling?” said his fond mother, flinging her arms round the
neck of the little monster. All of us (except Sylvie and Bruno, who
took no notice of what was going on) followed her to the window. The old
Beggar looked up at us with hungry eyes. “Only a crust of bread, your
Highness!” he pleaded.

{Image...'Drink this!'}

He was a fine old man, but looked sadly ill and worn. “A crust of bread
is what I crave!” he repeated. “A single crust, and a little water!”

“Here's some water, drink this!”

Uggug bellowed, emptying a jug of water over his head.

“Well done, my boy!” cried the Vice-Warden.

“That's the way to settle such folk!”

“Clever boy!”, the Wardeness chimed in. “Hasn't he good spirits?”

“Take a stick to him!” shouted the Vice-Warden, as the old Beggar shook
the water from his ragged cloak, and again gazed meekly upwards.

“Take a red-hot poker to him!” my Lady again chimed in.

Possibly there was no red-hot poker handy: but some sticks were
forthcoming in a moment, and threatening faces surrounded the poor old
wanderer, who waved them back with quiet dignity. “No need to break my
old bones,” he said. “I am going. Not even a crust!”

“Poor, poor old man!” exclaimed a little voice at my side, half choked
with sobs. Bruno was at the window, trying to throw out his slice of
plum-cake, but Sylvie held him back.

“He shalt have my cake!” Bruno cried, passionately struggling out of
Sylvie's arms.

“Yes, yes, darling!” Sylvie gently pleaded. “But don't throw it out!
He's gone away, don't you see? Let's go after him.” And she led him
out of the room, unnoticed by the rest of the party, who were wholly
absorbed in watching the old Beggar.

The Conspirators returned to their seats, and continued their
conversation in an undertone, so as not to be heard by Uggug, who was
still standing at the window.

“By the way, there was something about Bruno succeeding to the
Wrardenship,” said my Lady. “How does that stand in the new Agreement?”

The Chancellor chuckled. “Just the same, word for word,” he said, “with
one exception, my Lady. Instead of 'Bruno,' I've taken the liberty to
put in--” he dropped his voice to a whisper, “to put in 'Uggug,' you
know!”

“Uggug, indeed!” I exclaimed, in a burst of indignation I could no
longer control. To bring out even that one word seemed a gigantic
effort: but, the cry once uttered, all effort ceased at once: a sudden
gust swept away the whole scene, and I found myself sitting up, staring
at the young lady in the opposite corner of the carriage, who had now
thrown back her veil, and was looking at me with an expression of amused
surprise.






CHAPTER 5. A BEGGAR'S PALACE.

That I had said something, in the act of waking, I felt sure: the hoarse
stifled cry was still ringing in my ears, even if the startled look
of my fellow-traveler had not been evidence enough: but what could I
possibly say by way of apology?

“I hope I didn't frighten you?” I stammered out at last. “I have no idea
what I said. I was dreaming.”

“You said 'Uggug indeed!'” the young lady replied, with quivering lips
that would curve themselves into a smile, in spite of all her efforts to
look grave. “At least--you didn't say it--you shouted it!”

“I'm very sorry,” was all I could say, feeling very penitent and
helpless. “She has Sylvie's eyes!” I thought to myself, half-doubting
whether, even now, I were fairly awake. “And that sweet look of innocent
wonder is all Sylvie's too. But Sylvie hasn't got that calm resolute
mouth nor that far-away look of dreamy sadness, like one that has had
some deep sorrow, very long ago--” And the thick-coming fancies almost
prevented my hearing the lady's next words.

“If you had had a 'Shilling Dreadful' in your hand,” she proceeded,
“something about Ghosts or Dynamite or Midnight Murder--one could
understand it: those things aren't worth the shilling, unless they give
one a Nightmare. But really--with only a medical treatise, you know--”
 and she glanced, with a pretty shrug of contempt, at the book over which
I had fallen asleep.

Her friendliness, and utter unreserve, took me aback for a moment; yet
there was no touch of forwardness, or boldness, about the child
for child, almost, she seemed to be: I guessed her at scarcely over
twenty--all was the innocent frankness of some angelic visitant, new
to the ways of earth and the conventionalisms or, if you will, the
barbarisms--of Society. “Even so,” I mused, “will Sylvie look and speak,
in another ten years.”

“You don't care for Ghosts, then,” I ventured to suggest, “unless they
are really terrifying?”

“Quite so,” the lady assented. “The regular Railway-Ghosts--I mean the
Ghosts of ordinary Railway-literature--are very poor affairs. I feel
inclined to say, with Alexander Selkirk, 'Their tameness is shocking to
me'! And they never do any Midnight Murders. They couldn't 'welter in
gore,' to save their lives!”

“'Weltering in gore' is a very expressive phrase, certainly. Can it be
done in any fluid, I wonder?”

“I think not,” the lady readily replied--quite as if she had thought it
out, long ago. “It has to be something thick. For instance, you might
welter in bread-sauce. That, being white, would be more suitable for a
Ghost, supposing it wished to welter!”

“You have a real good terrifying Ghost in that book?” I hinted.

“How could you guess?” she exclaimed with the most engaging frankness,
and placed the volume in my hands. I opened it eagerly, with a not
unpleasant thrill (like what a good ghost-story gives one) at the
'uncanny' coincidence of my having so unexpectedly divined the subject
of her studies.

It was a book of Domestic Cookery, open at the article Bread Sauce.'

I returned the book, looking, I suppose, a little blank, as the lady
laughed merrily at my discomfiture. “It's far more exciting than some
of the modern ghosts, I assure you! Now there was a Ghost last month--I
don't mean a real Ghost in in Supernature--but in a Magazine. It was
a perfectly flavourless Ghost. It wouldn't have frightened a mouse! It
wasn't a Ghost that one would even offer a chair to!”

“Three score years and ten, baldness, and spectacles, have their
advantages after all!”, I said to myself. “Instead of a bashful youth
and maiden, gasping out monosyllables at awful intervals, here we have
an old man and a child, quite at their ease, talking as if they had
known each other for years! Then you think,” I continued aloud, “that
we ought sometimes to ask a Ghost to sit down? But have we any authority
for it? In Shakespeare, for instance--there are plenty of ghosts
there--does Shakespeare ever give the stage-direction 'hands chair to
Ghost'?”

The lady looked puzzled and thoughtful for a moment: then she almost
clapped her hands. “Yes, yes, he does!” she cried. “He makes Hamlet say
'Rest, rest, perturbed Spirit!”'

“And that, I suppose, means an easy-chair?”

“An American rocking-chair, I think--”

“Fayfield Junction, my Lady, change for Elveston!” the guard announced,
flinging open the door of the carriage: and we soon found ourselves,
with all our portable property around us, on the platform.

The accommodation, provided for passengers waiting at this Junction, was
distinctly inadequate--a single wooden bench, apparently intended for
three sitters only: and even this was already partially occupied by
a very old man, in a smock frock, who sat, with rounded shoulders and
drooping head, and with hands clasped on the top of his stick so as to
make a sort of pillow for that wrinkled face with its look of patient
weariness.

“Come, you be off!” the Station-master roughly accosted the poor old
man. “You be off, and make way for your betters! This way, my Lady!” he
added in a perfectly different tone. “If your Ladyship will take a seat,
the train will be up in a few minutes.” The cringing servility of his
manner was due, no doubt, to the address legible on the pile of luggage,
which announced their owner to be “Lady Muriel Orme, passenger to
Elveston, via Fayfield Junction.”

As I watched the old man slowly rise to his feet, and hobble a few paces
down the platform, the lines came to my lips:--


    “From sackcloth couch the Monk arose,
    With toil his stiffen'd limbs he rear'd;
    A hundred years had flung their snows
    On his thin locks and floating beard.”

{Image...'Come, you be off!'}

But the lady scarcely noticed the little incident. After one glance
at the 'banished man,' who stood tremulously leaning on his stick, she
turned to me. “This is not an American rocking-chair, by any means!
Yet may I say,” slightly changing her place, so as to make room for me
beside her, “may I say, in Hamlet's words, 'Rest, rest--'” she broke off
with a silvery laugh.

“--perturbed Spirit!”' I finished the sentence for her. “Yes, that
describes a railway-traveler exactly! And here is an instance of it,” I
added, as the tiny local train drew up alongside the platform, and the
porters bustled about, opening carriage-doors--one of them helping the
poor old man to hoist himself into a third-class carriage, while another
of them obsequiously conducted the lady and myself into a first-class.

She paused, before following him, to watch the progress of the other
passenger. “Poor old man!” she said. “How weak and ill he looks! It was
a shame to let him be turned away like that. I'm very sorry--” At this
moment it dawned on me that these words were not addressed to me, but
that she was unconsciously thinking aloud. I moved away a few steps,
and waited to follow her into the carriage, where I resumed the
conversation.

“Shakespeare must have traveled by rail, if only in a dream: 'perturbed
Spirit' is such a happy phrase.”

“'Perturbed' referring, no doubt,” she rejoined, “to the sensational
booklets peculiar to the Rail. If Steam has done nothing else, it has at
least added a whole new Species to English Literature!”

“No doubt of it,” I echoed. “The true origin of all our medical
books--and all our cookery-books--”

“No, no!” she broke in merrily. “I didn't mean our Literature! We are
quite abnormal. But the booklets--the little thrilling romances, where
the Murder comes at page fifteen, and the Wedding at page forty--surely
they are due to Steam?”

“And when we travel by Electricity if I may venture to develop your
theory we shall have leaflets instead of booklets, and the Murder and
the Wedding will come on the same page.”

“A development worthy of Darwin!”, the lady exclaimed enthusiastically.
“Only you reverse his theory. Instead of developing a mouse into an
elephant, you would develop an elephant into a mouse!” But here we
plunged into a tunnel, and I leaned back and closed my eyes for a
moment, trying to recall a few of the incidents of my recent dream.

“I thought I saw--” I murmured sleepily: and then the phrase insisted
on conjugating itself, and ran into “you thought you saw--he thought he
saw--” and then it suddenly went off into a song:--


    “He thought he saw an Elephant,
    That practised on a fife:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A letter from his wife.
    'At length I realise,' he said,
    “The bitterness of Life!'”

And what a wild being it was who sang these wild words! A Gardener
he seemed to be yet surely a mad one, by the way he brandished his
rake--madder, by the way he broke, ever and anon, into a frantic
jig--maddest of all, by the shriek in which he brought out the last
words of the stanza!

{Image....The gardener}

It was so far a description of himself that he had the feet of an
Elephant: but the rest of him was skin and bone: and the wisps of
loose straw, that bristled all about him, suggested that he had been
originally stuffed with it, and that nearly all the stuffing had come
out.

Sylvie and Bruno waited patiently till the end of the first verse. Then
Sylvie advanced alone (Bruno having suddenly turned shy) and timidly
introduced herself with the words “Please, I'm Sylvie!”

“And who's that other thing?', said the Gardener.

“What thing?” said Sylvie, looking round. “Oh, that's Bruno. He's my
brother.”

“Was he your brother yesterday?” the Gardener anxiously enquired.

“Course I were!” cried Bruno, who had gradually crept nearer, and
didn't at all like being talked about without having his share in the
conversation.

“Ah, well!” the Gardener said with a kind of groan. “Things change so,
here. Whenever I look again, it's sure to be something different! Yet I
does my duty! I gets up wriggle-early at five--”

“If I was oo,” said Bruno, “I wouldn't wriggle so early. It's as bad as
being a worm!” he added, in an undertone to Sylvie.

“But you shouldn't be lazy in the morning, Bruno,” said Sylvie.
“Remember, it's the early bird that picks up the worm!”

“It may, if it likes!” Bruno said with a slight yawn. “I don't like
eating worms, one bit. I always stop in bed till the early bird has
picked them up!”

“I wonder you've the face to tell me such fibs!” cried the Gardener.

To which Bruno wisely replied “Oo don't want a face to tell fibs
wiz--only a mouf.”

Sylvie discreetly changed the subject. “And did you plant all these
flowers?” she said.

“What a lovely garden you've made! Do you know, I'd like to live here
always!”

“In the winter-nights--” the Gardener was beginning.

“But I'd nearly forgotten what we came about!” Sylvie interrupted.
“Would you please let us through into the road? There's a poor old
beggar just gone out--and he's very hungry--and Bruno wants to give him
his cake, you know!”

“It's as much as my place is worth!” the Gardener muttered, taking a key
from his pocket, and beginning to unlock a door in the garden-wall.

“How much are it wurf?” Bruno innocently enquired.

But the Gardener only grinned. “That's a secret!” he said. “Mind you
come back quick!” he called after the children, as they passed out into
the road. I had just time to follow them, before he shut the door again.

We hurried down the road, and very soon caught sight of the old Beggar,
about a quarter of a mile ahead of us, and the children at once set off
running to overtake him.

Lightly and swiftly they skimmed over the ground, and I could not in
the least understand how it was I kept up with them so easily. But the
unsolved problem did not worry me so much as at another time it might
have done, there were so many other things to attend to.

The old Beggar must have been very deaf, as he paid no attention
whatever to Bruno's eager shouting, but trudged wearily on, never
pausing until the child got in front of him and held up the slice of
cake. The poor little fellow was quite out of breath, and could only
utter the one word “Cake!” not with the gloomy decision with which
Her Excellency had so lately pronounced it, but with a sweet childish
timidity, looking up into the old man's face with eyes that loved 'all
things both great and small.'

The old man snatched it from him, and devoured it greedily, as some
hungry wild beast might have done, but never a word of thanks did he
give his little benefactor--only growled “More, more!” and glared at the
half-frightened children.

“There is no more!”, Sylvie said with tears in her eyes. “I'd eaten
mine. It was a shame to let you be turned away like that. I'm very
sorry--”

I lost the rest of the sentence, for my mind had recurred, with a great
shock of surprise, to Lady Muriel Orme, who had so lately uttered
these very words of Sylvie's--yes, and in Sylvie's own voice, and with
Sylvie's gentle pleading eyes!

“Follow me!” were the next words I heard, as the old man waved his hand,
with a dignified grace that ill suited his ragged dress, over a bush,
that stood by the road side, which began instantly to sink into the
earth. At another time I might have doubted the evidence of my eyes,
or at least have felt some astonishment: but, in this strange scene, my
whole being seemed absorbed in strong curiosity as to what would happen
next.

When the bush had sunk quite out of our sight, marble steps were seen,
leading downwards into darkness. The old man led the way, and we eagerly
followed.

The staircase was so dark, at first, that I could only just see the
forms of the children, as, hand-in-hand, they groped their way down
after their guide: but it got lighter every moment, with a strange
silvery brightness, that seemed to exist in the air, as there were no
lamps visible; and, when at last we reached a level floor, the room, in
which we found ourselves, was almost as light as day.

It was eight-sided, having in each angle a slender pillar, round which
silken draperies were twined. The wall between the pillars was entirely
covered, to the height of six or seven feet, with creepers, from which
hung quantities of ripe fruit and of brilliant flowers, that almost hid
the leaves. In another place, perchance, I might have wondered to see
fruit and flowers growing together: here, my chief wonder was that
neither fruit nor flowers were such as I had ever seen before. Higher
up, each wall contained a circular window of coloured glass; and over
all was an arched roof, that seemed to be spangled all over with jewels.

With hardly less wonder, I turned this way and that, trying to make
out how in the world we had come in: for there was no door: and all the
walls were thickly covered with the lovely creepers.

“We are safe here, my darlings!” said the old man, laying a hand on
Sylvie's shoulder, and bending down to kiss her. Sylvie drew back
hastily, with an offended air: but in another moment, with a glad cry of
“Why, it's Father!”, she had run into his arms.

{Image...A beggar's palace}

“Father! Father!” Bruno repeated: and, while the happy children were
being hugged and kissed, I could but rub my eyes and say “Where, then,
are the rags gone to?”; for the old man was now dressed in royal robes
that glittered with jewels and gold embroidery, and wore a circlet of
gold around his head.






CHAPTER 6. THE MAGIC LOCKET.

“Where are we, father?” Sylvie whispered, with her arms twined closely
around the old man's neck, and with her rosy cheek lovingly pressed to
his.

“In Elfland, darling. It's one of the provinces of Fairyland.”

“But I thought Elfland was ever so far from Outland: and we've come such
a tiny little way!”

“You came by the Royal Road, sweet one. Only those of royal blood can
travel along it: but you've been royal ever since I was made King of
Elfland that's nearly a month ago. They sent two ambassadors, to make
sure that their invitation to me, to be their new King, should reach me.
One was a Prince; so he was able to come by the Royal Road, and to come
invisibly to all but me: the other was a Baron; so he had to come by the
common road, and I dare say he hasn't even arrived yet.”

“Then how far have we come?” Sylvie enquired.

“Just a thousand miles, sweet one, since the Gardener unlocked that door
for you.”

“A thousand miles!” Bruno repeated. “And may I eat one?”

“Eat a mile, little rogue?”

“No,” said Bruno. “I mean may I eat one of that fruits?”

“Yes, child,” said his father: “and then you'll find out what Pleasure
is like--the Pleasure we all seek so madly, and enjoy so mournfully!”

Bruno ran eagerly to the wall, and picked a fruit that was shaped
something like a banana, but had the colour of a strawberry.

He ate it with beaming looks, that became gradually more gloomy, and
were very blank indeed by the time he had finished.

“It hasn't got no taste at all!” he complained. “I couldn't feel nuffin
in my mouf! It's a--what's that hard word, Sylvie?”

“It was a Phlizz,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Are they all like that,
father?”

“They're all like that to you, darling, because you don't belong to
Elfland--yet. But to me they are real.”

Bruno looked puzzled. “I'll try anuvver kind of fruits!” he said, and
jumped down off the King's knee. “There's some lovely striped ones, just
like a rainbow!” And off he ran.

Meanwhile the Fairy-King and Sylvie were talking together, but in such
low tones that I could not catch the words: so I followed Bruno, who
was picking and eating other kinds of fruit, in the vain hope of finding
some that had a taste. I tried to pick so me myself--but it was like
grasping air, and I soon gave up the attempt and returned to Sylvie.

“Look well at it, my darling,” the old man was saying, “and tell me how
you like it.”

“'It's just lovely,” cried Sylvie, delightedly. “Bruno, come and
look!” And she held up, so that he might see the light through it, a
heart-shaped Locket, apparently cut out of a single jewel, of a rich
blue colour, with a slender gold chain attached to it.

“It are welly pretty,” Bruno more soberly remarked: and he began
spelling out some words inscribed on it. “All--will--love--Sylvie,” he
made them out at last. “And so they doos!” he cried, clasping his arms
round her neck. “Everybody loves Sylvie!”

“But we love her best, don't we, Bruno?” said the old King, as he took
possession of the Locket. “Now, Sylvie, look at this.” And he showed
her, lying on the palm of his hand, a Locket of a deep crimson colour,
the same shape as the blue one and, like it, attached to a slender
golden chain.

“Lovelier and lovelier!” exclaimed Sylvie, clasping her hands in
ecstasy. “Look, Bruno!”

“And there's words on this one, too,” said Bruno.
“Sylvie--will--love--all.”

“Now you see the difference,” said the old man: “different colours and
different words.”

“Choose one of them, darling. I'll give you which ever you like best.”

{Image...The crimson locket}

Sylvie whispered the words, several times over, with a thoughtful smile,
and then made her decision. “It's very nice to be loved,” she said: “but
it's nicer to love other people! May I have the red one, Father?”

The old man said nothing: but I could see his eyes fill with tears, as
he bent his head and pressed his lips to her forehead in a long loving
kiss. Then he undid the chain, and showed her how to fasten it round her
neck, and to hide it away under the edge of her frock. “It's for you
to keep you know he said in a low voice, not for other people to see.
You'll remember how to use it?”

“Yes, I'll remember,” said Sylvie.

“And now darlings it's time for you to go back or they'll be missing you
and then that poor Gardener will get into trouble!”

Once more a feeling of wonder rose in my mind as to how in the world we
were to get back again--since I took it for granted that wherever the
children went I was to go--but no shadow of doubt seemed to cross
their minds as they hugged and kissed him murmuring over and over again
“Good-bye darling Father!” And then suddenly and swiftly the darkness
of midnight seemed to close in upon us and through the darkness harshly
rang a strange wild song:--


    He thought he saw a Buffalo
    Upon the chimney-piece:
    He looked again, and found it was
    His Sister's Husband's Niece.
    'Unless you leave this house,' he said,
    'I'll send for the Police!'

{Image...'He thought he saw a buffalo'}

“That was me!” he added, looking out at us, through the half-opened
door, as we stood waiting in the road.' “And that's what I'd have
done--as sure as potatoes aren't radishes--if she hadn't have tooken
herself off! But I always loves my pay-rints like anything.”

“Who are oor pay-rints?” said Bruno.

“Them as pay rint for me, a course!” the Gardener replied. “You can come
in now, if you like.”

He flung the door open as he spoke, and we got out, a little dazzled
and stupefied (at least I felt so) at the sudden transition from
the half-darkness of the railway-carriage to the brilliantly-lighted
platform of Elveston Station.

A footman, in a handsome livery, came forwards and respectfully touched
his hat. “The carriage is here, my Lady,” he said, taking from her
the wraps and small articles she was carrying: and Lady Muriel, after
shaking hands and bidding me “Good-night!” with a pleasant smile,
followed him.

It was with a somewhat blank and lonely feeling that I betook myself to
the van from which the luggage was being taken out: and, after giving
directions to have my boxes sent after me, I made my way on foot to
Arthur's lodgings, and soon lost my lonely feeling in the hearty welcome
my old friend gave me, and the cozy warmth and cheerful light of the
little sitting-room into which he led me.

“Little, as you see, but quite enough for us two. Now, take the
easy-chair, old fellow, and let's have another look at you! Well, you
do look a bit pulled down!” and he put on a solemn professional air.
“I prescribe Ozone, quant. suff. Social dissipation, fiant pilulae quam
plurimae: to be taken, feasting, three times a day!”

“But, Doctor!” I remonstrated. “Society doesn't 'receive' three times a
day!”

“That's all you know about it!” the young Doctor gaily replied. “At
home, lawn-tennis, 3 P.M. At home, kettledrum, 5 P.M. At home, music
(Elveston doesn't give dinners), 8 P.M. Carriages at 10. There you are!”

It sounded very pleasant, I was obliged to admit. “And I know some
of the lady-society already,” I added. “One of them came in the same
carriage with me.”

“What was she like? Then perhaps I can identify her.”

“The name was Lady Muriel Orme. As to what she was like--well, I thought
her very beautiful. Do you know her?”

“Yes--I do know her.” And the grave Doctor coloured slightly as he added
“Yes, I agree with you. She is beautiful.”

“I quite lost my heart to her!” I went on mischievously. “We talked--”

“Have some supper!” Arthur interrupted with an air of relief, as the
maid entered with the tray. And he steadily resisted all my attempts to
return to the subject of Lady Muriel until the evening had almost worn
itself away. Then, as we sat gazing into the fire, and conversation was
lapsing into silence, he made a hurried confession.

“I hadn't meant to tell you anything about her,” he said (naming no
names, as if there were only one 'she' in the world!) “till you had
seen more of her, and formed your own judgment of her: but somehow you
surprised it out of me. And I've not breathed a word of it to any one
else. But I can trust you with a secret, old friend! Yes! It's true of
me, what I suppose you said in jest.

“In the merest jest, believe me!” I said earnestly. “Why, man, I'm three
times her age! But if she's your choice, then I'm sure she's all that is
good and--”

“--and sweet,” Arthur went on, “and pure, and self-denying, and
true-hearted, and--” he broke off hastily, as if he could not trust
himself to say more on a subject so sacred and so precious. Silence
followed: and I leaned back drowsily in my easy-chair, filled with
bright and beautiful imaginings of Arthur and his lady-love, and of all
the peace and happiness in store for them.

I pictured them to myself walking together, lingeringly and lovingly,
under arching trees, in a sweet garden of their own, and welcomed back
by their faithful gardener, on their return from some brief excursion.

It seemed natural enough that the gardener should be filled with
exuberant delight at the return of so gracious a master and mistress and
how strangely childlike they looked! I could have taken them for Sylvie
and Bruno less natural that he should show it by such wild dances, such
crazy songs!


    “He thought he saw a Rattlesnake
    That questioned him in Greek:
    He looked again, and found it was
    The Middle of Next Week.
    'The one thing I regret,' he said,
    'Is that it cannot speak!”

--least natural of all that the Vice-Warden and 'my Lady' should be
standing close beside me, discussing an open letter, which had just been
handed to him by the Professor, who stood, meekly waiting, a few yards
off.

“If it were not for those two brats,” I heard him mutter, glancing
savagely at Sylvie and Bruno, who were courteously listening to the
Gardener's song, “there would be no difficulty whatever.”

“Let's hear that bit of the letter again,” said my Lady. And the
Vice-Warden read aloud:--

“--and we therefore entreat you graciously to accept the Kingship, to
which you have been unanimously elected by the Council of Elfland: and
that you will allow your son Bruno of whose goodness, cleverness, and
beauty, reports have reached us--to be regarded as Heir-Apparent.”

“But what's the difficulty?” said my Lady.

“Why, don't you see? The Ambassador, that brought this, is waiting in
the house: and he's sure to see Sylvie and Bruno: and then, when he sees
Uggug, and remembers all that about 'goodness, cleverness, and beauty,'
why, he's sure to--”

“And where will you find a better boy than Uggug?” my Lady indignantly
interrupted. “Or a wittier, or a lovelier?”

To all of which the Vice-Warden simply replied “Don't you be a great
blethering goose! Our only chance is to keep those two brats out of
sight. If you can manage that, you may leave the rest to me. I'll make
him believe Uggug to be a model of cleverness and all that.”

“We must change his name to Bruno, of course?” said my Lady.

The Vice-Warden rubbed his chin. “Humph! No!” he said musingly.
“Wouldn't do. The boy's such an utter idiot, he'd never learn to answer
to it.”

“Idiot, indeed!” cried my Lady. “He's no more an idiot than I am!”

“You're right, my dear,” the Vice-Warden soothingly I replied. “He
isn't, indeed!”

My Lady was appeased. “Let's go in and receive the Ambassador,” she
said, and beckoned to the Professor. “Which room is he waiting in?” she
inquired.

“In the Library, Madam.”

“And what did you say his name was?” said the Vice-Warden.

The Professor referred to a card he held in his hand. “His Adiposity the
Baron Doppelgeist.”

“Why does he come with such a funny name?” said my Lady.

“He couldn't well change it on the journey,” the Professor meekly
replied, “because of the luggage.”

“You go and receive him,” my Lady said to the Vice-Warden, “and I'll
attend to the children.”






CHAPTER 7. THE BARONS EMBASSY.

I was following the Vice-Warden, but, on second thoughts, went after my
Lady, being curious to see how she would manage to keep the children out
of sight.

I found her holding Sylvie's hand, and with her other hand stroking
Bruno's hair in a most tender and motherly fashion: both children were
looking bewildered and half-frightened.

“My own darlings,” she was saying, “I've been planning a little treat
for you! The Professor shall take you a long walk into the woods this
beautiful evening: and you shall take a basket of food with you, and
have a little picnic down by the river!”

Bruno jumped, and clapped his hands. “That are nice!” he cried. “Aren't
it, Sylvie?”

Sylvie, who hadn't quite lost her surprised look, put up her mouth for a
kiss. “Thank you very much,” she said earnestly.

My Lady turned her head away to conceal the broad grin of triumph that
spread over her vast face, like a ripple on a lake. “Little simpletons!”
 she muttered to herself, as she marched up to the house. I followed her
in.

“Quite so, your Excellency,” the Baron was saying as we entered the
Library. “All the infantry were under my command.” He turned, and was
duly presented to my Lady.

“A military hero?” said my Lady. The fat little man simpered. “Well,
yes,” he replied, modestly casting down his eyes. “My ancestors were all
famous for military genius.”

My Lady smiled graciously. “It often runs in families,” she remarked:
“just as a love for pastry does.”

The Baron looked slightly offended, and the Vice-Warden discreetly
changed the subject. “Dinner will soon be ready,” he said. “May I have
the honour of conducting your Adiposity to the guest-chamber?”

“Certainly, certainly!” the Baron eagerly assented. “It would never do
to keep dinner waiting!” And he almost trotted out of the room after the
Vice-Warden.

He was back again so speedily that the Vice-warden had barely time
to explain to my Lady that her remark about “a love for pastry” was
“unfortunate. You might have seen, with half an eye,” he added, “that
that's his line. Military genius, indeed! Pooh!”

“Dinner ready yet?” the Baron enquired, as he hurried into the room.

“Will be in a few minutes,” the Vice-Warden replied. “Meanwhile, let's
take a turn in the garden. You were telling me,” he continued, as the
trio left the house, “something about a great battle in which you had
the command of the infantry--”

“True,” said the Baron. “The enemy, as I was saying, far outnumbered
us: but I marched my men right into the middle of--what's that?” the
Military Hero exclaimed in agitated tones, drawing back behind the
Vice-Warden, as a strange creature rushed wildly upon them, brandishing
a spade.

“It's only the Gardener!” the Vice-Warden replied in an encouraging
tone. “Quite harmless, I assure you. Hark, he's singing! Its his
favorite amusement.”

And once more those shrill discordant tones rang out:--


    “He thought he saw a Banker's Clerk
    Descending from the bus:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Hippopotamus:
    'If this should stay to dine,' he said,
    'There won't be mutch for us!'”

Throwing away the spade, he broke into a frantic jig, snapping his
fingers, and repeating, again and again,


    “There won't be much for us!
    There won't be much for us!”

{Image...It was a hippoptamus}

Once more the Baron looked slightly offended, but the Vice-Warden
hastily explained that the song had no allusion to him, and in fact had
no meaning at all. “You didn't mean anything by it, now did you?”
 He appealed to the Gardener, who had finished his song, and stood,
balancing himself on one leg, and looking at them, with his mouth open.

“I never means nothing,” said the Gardener: and Uggug luckily came up at
the moment, and gave the conversation a new turn.

“Allow me to present my son,” said the Vice-warden; adding, in a
whisper, “one of the best and cleverest boys that ever lived! I'll
contrive for you to see some of his cleverness. He knows everything that
other boys don't know; and in archery, in fishing, in painting, and
in music, his skill is--but you shall judge for yourself. You see that
target over there? He shall shoot an arrow at it. Dear boy,” he went on
aloud, “his Adiposity would like to see you shoot. Bring his Highness'
bow and arrows!”

Uggug looked very sulky as he received the bow and arrow, and prepared
to shoot. Just as the arrow left the bow, the Vice-Warden trod heavily
on the toe of the Baron, who yelled with the pain.

“Ten thousand pardons!” he exclaimed. “I stepped back in my excitement.
See! It is a bull's-eye!”

The Baron gazed in astonishment. “He held the bow so awkwardly, it
seemed impossible!” he muttered. But there was no room for doubt: there
was the arrow, right in the centre of the bull's-eye!

“The lake is close by,” continued the Vice-warden. “Bring his Highness'
fishing-rod!” And Uggug most unwillingly held the rod, and dangled the
fly over the water.

“A beetle on your arm!” cried my Lady, pinching the poor Baron's
arm worse than if ten lobsters had seized it at once. “That kind is
poisonous,” she explained. “But what a pity! You missed seeing the fish
pulled out!”

An enormous dead cod-fish was lying on the bank, with the hook in its
mouth.

“I had always fancied,” the Baron faltered, “that cod were salt-water
fish?”

“Not in this country,” said the Vice-Warden. “Shall we go in? Ask my son
some question on the way any subject you like!” And the sulky boy was
violently shoved forwards, to walk at the Baron's side.

“Could your Highness tell me,” the Baron cautiously began, “how much
seven times nine would come to?”

“Turn to the left!” cried the Vice-Warden, hastily stepping forwards to
show the way---so hastily, that he ran against his unfortunate guest,
who fell heavily on his face.

“So sorry!” my Lady exclaimed, as she and her husband helped him to his
feet again. “My son was in the act of saying 'sixty-three' as you fell!”

The Baron said nothing: he was covered with dust, and seemed much hurt,
both in body and mind. However, when they had got him into the house,
and given him a good brushing, matters looked a little better.

Dinner was served in due course, and every fresh dish seemed to increase
the good-humour of the Baron: but all efforts, to get him to express his
opinion as to Uggug's cleverness, were in vain, until that interesting
youth had left the room, and was seen from the open window, prowling
about the lawn with a little basket, which he was filling with frogs.

“So fond of Natural History as he is, dear boy!” said the doting mother.
“Now do tell us, Baron, what you think of him!”

“To be perfectly candid,” said the cautious Baron, “I would like a
little more evidence. I think you mentioned his skill in--”

“Music?” said the Vice-Warden. “Why, he's simply a prodigy! You shall
hear him play the piano.” And he walked to the window. “Ug--I mean my
boy! Come in for a minute, and bring the music-master with you! To turn
over the music for him,” he added as an explanation.

Uggug, having filled his basket with frogs, had no objection to obey,
and soon appeared in the room, followed by a fierce-looking little man,
who asked the Vice-Warden “Vot music vill you haf?”

“The Sonata that His Highness plays so charmingly,” said the
Vice-Warden. “His Highness haf not--” the music-master began, but was
sharply stopped by the Vice-warden.

“Silence, Sir! Go and turn over the music for his Highness. My dear,”
 (to the Wardeness) “will you show him what to do? And meanwhile, Baron,
I'll just show you a most interesting map we have--of Outland, and
Fairyland, and that sort of thing.”

By the time my Lady had returned, from explaining things to the
music-master, the map had been hung up, and the Baron was already much
bewildered by the Vice-Warden's habit of pointing to one place while he
shouted out the name of another.

{Image...The map of fairyland}

My Lady joining in, pointing out other places, and shouting other names,
only made matters worse; and at last the Baron, in despair, took to
pointing out places for himself, and feebly asked “Is that great yellow
splotch Fairyland?”

“Yes, that's Fairyland,” said the Vice-warden: “and you might as well
give him a hint,” he muttered to my Lady, “about going back to-morrow.
He eats like a shark! It would hardly do for me to mention it.”

His wife caught the idea, and at once began giving hints of the most
subtle and delicate kind. “Just see what a short way it is back to
Fairyland! Why, if you started to-morrow morning, you'd get there in
very little more than a week!”

The Baron looked incredulous. “It took me a full month to come,” he
said.

“But it's ever so much shorter, going back, you know!'

The Baron looked appealingly to the Vice-warden, who chimed in readily.
“You can go back five times, in the time it took you to come here
once--if you start to-morrow morning!”

All this time the Sonata was pealing through the room. The Baron could
not help admitting to himself that it was being magnificently played:
but he tried in vain to get a glimpse of the youthful performer. Every
time he had nearly succeeded in catching sight of him, either the
Vice-Warden or his wife was sure to get in the way, pointing out some
new place on the map, and deafening him with some new name.

He gave in at last, wished a hasty good-night, and left the room, while
his host and hostess interchanged looks of triumph.

“Deftly done!” cried the Vice-Warden. “Craftily contrived! But what
means all that tramping on the stairs?” He half-opened the door, looked
out, and added in a tone of dismay, “The Baron's boxes are being carried
down!”

“And what means all that rumbling of wheels?” cried my Lady. She peeped
through the window curtains. “The Baron's carriage has come round!” she
groaned.

At this moment the door opened: a fat, furious face looked in: a
voice, hoarse with passion, thundered out the words “My room is full of
frogs--I leave you!”: and the door closed again.

And still the noble Sonata went pealing through the room: but it was
Arthur's masterly touch that roused the echoes, and thrilled my very
soul with the tender music of the immortal 'Sonata Pathetique': and
it was not till the last note had died away that the tired but happy
traveler could bring himself to utter the words “good-night!” and to
seek his much-needed pillow.






CHAPTER 8. A RIDE ON A LION.

The next day glided away, pleasantly enough, partly in settling myself
in my new quarters, and partly in strolling round the neighbourhood,
under Arthur's guidance, and trying to form a general idea of Elveston
and its inhabitants. When five o'clock arrived, Arthur proposed without
any embarrassment this time--to take me with him up to 'the Hall,' in
order that I might make acquaintance with the Earl of Ainslie, who had
taken it for the season, and renew acquaintance with his daughter Lady
Muriel.

My first impressions of the gentle, dignified, and yet genial old man
were entirely favourable: and the real satisfaction that showed itself
on his daughter's face, as she met me with the words “this is indeed
an unlooked-for pleasure!”, was very soothing for whatever remains of
personal vanity the failures and disappointments of many long years, and
much buffeting with a rough world, had left in me.

Yet I noted, and was glad to note, evidence of a far deeper feeling than
mere friendly regard, in her meeting with Arthur though this was, as I
gathered, an almost daily occurrence--and the conversation between them,
in which the Earl and I were only occasional sharers, had an ease and a
spontaneity rarely met with except between very old friends: and, as
I knew that they had not known each other for a longer period than the
summer which was now rounding into autumn, I felt certain that 'Love,'
and Love alone, could explain the phenomenon.

“How convenient it would be,” Lady Muriel laughingly remarked, a propos
of my having insisted on saving her the trouble of carrying a cup of tea
across the room to the Earl, “if cups of tea had no weight at all! Then
perhaps ladies would sometimes be permitted to carry them for short
distances!”

“One can easily imagine a situation,” said Arthur, “where things would
necessarily have no weight, relatively to each other, though each would
have its usual weight, looked at by itself.”

“Some desperate paradox!” said the Earl. “Tell us how it could be. We
shall never guess it.”

“Well, suppose this house, just as it is, placed a few billion miles
above a planet, and with nothing else near enough to disturb it: of
course it falls to the planet?”

The Earl nodded. “Of course though it might take some centuries to do
it.”

“And is five-o'clock-tea to be going on all the while?” said Lady
Muriel.

“That, and other things,” said Arthur. “The inhabitants would live their
lives, grow up and die, and still the house would be falling, falling,
falling! But now as to the relative weight of things. Nothing can be
heavy, you know, except by trying to fall, and being prevented from
doing so. You all grant that?”

We all granted that.

“Well, now, if I take this book, and hold it out at arm's length, of
course I feel its weight. It is trying to fall, and I prevent it.
And, if I let go, it fails to the floor. But, if we were all falling
together, it couldn't be trying to fall any quicker, you know: for, if
I let go, what more could it do than fall? And, as my hand would be
falling too--at the same rate--it would never leave it, for that would
be to get ahead of it in the race. And it could never overtake the
failing floor!”

“I see it clearly,” said Lady Muriel. “But it makes one dizzy to think
of such things! How can you make us do it?”

“There is a more curious idea yet,” I ventured to say. “Suppose a cord
fastened to the house, from below, and pulled down by some one on the
planet. Then of course the house goes faster than its natural rate of
falling: but the furniture--with our noble selves--would go on failing
at their old pace, and would therefore be left behind.”

“Practically, we should rise to the ceiling,” said the Earl. “The
inevitable result of which would be concussion of brain.”

“To avoid that,” said Arthur, “let us have the furniture fixed to
the floor, and ourselves tied down to the furniture. Then the
five-o'clock-tea could go on in peace.”

“With one little drawback!” Lady Muriel gaily interrupted. “We should
take the cups down with us: but what about the tea?”

“I had forgotten the tea,” Arthur confessed. “That, no doubt, would rise
to the ceiling unless you chose to drink it on the way!”

“Which, I think, is quite nonsense enough for one while!” said the Earl.
“What news does this gentleman bring us from the great world of London?”

This drew me into the conversation, which now took a more conventional
tone. After a while, Arthur gave the signal for our departure, and in
the cool of the evening we strolled down to the beach, enjoying the
silence, broken only by the murmur of the sea and the far-away music of
some fishermen's song, almost as much as our late pleasant talk.

We sat down among the rocks, by a little pool, so rich in animal,
vegetable, and zoophytic--or whatever is the right word--life, that I
became entranced in the study of it, and, when Arthur proposed returning
to our lodgings, I begged to be left there for a while, to watch and
muse alone.

The fishermen's song grew ever nearer and clearer, as their boat stood
in for the beach; and I would have gone down to see them land their
cargo of fish, had not the microcosm at my feet stirred my curiosity yet
more keenly.

One ancient crab, that was for ever shuffling frantically from side to
side of the pool, had particularly fascinated me: there was a vacancy in
its stare, and an aimless violence in its behaviour, that irresistibly
recalled the Gardener who had befriended Sylvie and Bruno: and, as I
gazed, I caught the concluding notes of the tune of his crazy song.

The silence that followed was broken by the sweet voice of Sylvie.
“Would you please let us out into the road?”

“What! After that old beggar again?” the Gardener yelled, and began
singing:--


    “He thought he saw a Kangaroo
    That worked a coffee-mill:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Vegetable-pill
    'Were I to swallow this,' he said,
    'I should be very ill!'”

{Image...He thought he saw a kangaroo}

“We don't want him to swallow anything,” Sylvie explained. “He's not
hungry. But we want to see him. So Will you please--”

“Certainly!” the Gardener promptly replied. “I always please. Never
displeases nobody. There you are!” And he flung the door open, and let
us out upon the dusty high-road.

We soon found our way to the bush, which had so mysteriously sunk into
the ground: and here Sylvie drew the Magic Locket from its hiding-place,
turned it over with a thoughtful air, and at last appealed to Bruno in a
rather helpless way. “What was it we had to do with it, Bruno? It's all
gone out of my head!”

“Kiss it!” was Bruno's invariable recipe in cases of doubt and
difficulty. Sylvie kissed it, but no result followed.

“Rub it the wrong way,” was Bruno's next suggestion.

“Which is the wrong way?”, Sylvie most reasonably enquired. The obvious
plan was to try both ways.

Rubbing from left to right had no visible effect whatever.

From right to left--“Oh, stop, Sylvie!” Bruno cried in sudden alarm.
“Whatever is going to happen?”

For a number of trees, on the neighbouring hillside, were moving slowly
upwards, in solemn procession: while a mild little brook, that had been
rippling at our feet a moment before, began to swell, and foam, and
hiss, and bubble, in a truly alarming fashion.

“Rub it some other way!” cried Bruno. “Try up-and-down! Quick!”

It was a happy thought. Up-and-down did it: and the landscape, which had
been showing signs of mental aberration in various directions, returned
to its normal condition of sobriety with the exception of a small
yellowish-brown mouse, which continued to run wildly up and down the
road, lashing its tail like a little lion.

“Let's follow it,” said Sylvie: and this also turned out a happy
thought. The mouse at once settled down into a business-like jog-trot,
with which we could easily keep pace. The only phenomenon, that gave
me any uneasiness, was the rapid increase in the size of the little
creature we were following, which became every moment more and more like
a real lion.

Soon the transformation was complete: and a noble lion stood patiently
waiting for us to come up with it. No thought of fear seemed to occur
to the children, who patted and stroked it as if it had been a
Shetland-pony.

{Image...The mouse-lion}

“Help me up!” cried Bruno. And in another moment Sylvie had lifted him
upon the broad back of the gentle beast, and seated herself behind him,
pillion-fashion. Bruno took a good handful of mane in each hand, and
made believe to guide this new kind of steed. “Gee-up!', seemed quite
sufficient by way of verbal direction: the lion at once broke into an
easy canter, and we soon found ourselves in the depths of the forest. I
say 'we,' for I am certain that I accompanied them though how I managed
to keep up with a cantering lion I am wholly unable to explain. But
I was certainly one of the party when we came upon an old beggar-man
cutting sticks, at whose feet the lion made a profound obeisance, Sylvie
and Bruno at the same moment dismounting, and leaping in to the arms of
their father.

“From bad to worse!” the old man said to himself, dreamily, when the
children had finished their rather confused account of the Ambassador's
visit, gathered no doubt from general report, as they had not seen him
themselves. “From bad to worse! That is their destiny. I see it, but
I cannot alter it. The selfishness of a mean and crafty man--the
selfishness of an ambitious and silly woman----the selfishness of a
spiteful and loveless child all tend one way, from bad to worse! And
you, my darlings, must suffer it awhile, I fear. Yet, when things are at
their worst, you can come to me. I can do but little as yet--”

Gathering up a handful of dust and scattering it in the air, he slowly
and solemnly pronounced some words that sounded like a charm, the
children looking on in awe-struck silence:--


    “Let craft, ambition, spite,
    Be quenched in Reason's night,
    Till weakness turn to might,
    Till what is dark be light,
    Till what is wrong be right!”

The cloud of dust spread itself out through the air, as if it were
alive, forming curious shapes that were for ever changing into others.

“It makes letters! It makes words!” Bruno whispered, as he clung,
half-frightened, to Sylvie. “Only I ca'n't make them out! Read them,
Sylvie!”

“I'll try,” Sylvie gravely replied. “Wait a minute--if only I could see
that word--”

“I should be very ill!', a discordant voice yelled in our ears.


    “Were I to swallow this,' he said,
    'I should be very ill!'”





CHAPTER 9. A JESTER AND A BEAR.

Yes, we were in the garden once more: and, to escape that horrid
discordant voice, we hurried indoors, and found ourselves in the
library--Uggug blubbering, the Professor standing by with a bewildered
air, and my Lady, with her arms clasped round her son's neck, repeating,
over and over again, “and did they give him nasty lessons to learn? My
own pretty pet!”

“What's all this noise about?” the Vice-warden angrily enquired, as he
strode into the room. “And who put the hat-stand here?”

And he hung his hat up on Bruno, who was standing in the middle of the
room, too much astonished by the sudden change of scene to make any
attempt at removing it, though it came down to his shoulders, making him
look something like a small candle with a large extinguisher over it.

The Professor mildly explained that His Highness had been graciously
pleased to say he wouldn't do his lessons.

“Do your lessons this instant, you young cub!” thundered the
Vice-Warden. “And take this!” and a resounding box on the ear made the
unfortunate Professor reel across the room.

“Save me!” faltered the poor old man, as he sank, half-fainting, at my
Lady's feet.

“Shave you? Of course I will!” my Lady replied, as she lifted him into a
chair, and pinned an anti-macassar round his neck. “Where's the razor?”

The Vice-Warden meanwhile had got hold of Uggug, and was belabouring him
with his umbrella. “Who left this loose nail in the floor?” he shouted,
“Hammer it in, I say! Hammer it in!” Blow after blow fell on the
writhing Uggug, till he dropped howling to the floor.

{Image...'Hammer it in!'}

Then his father turned to the 'shaving' scene which was being enacted,
and roared with laughter. “Excuse me, dear, I ca'n't help it!” he said
as soon as he could speak. “You are such an utter donkey! Kiss me,
Tabby!”

And he flung his arms round the neck of the terrified Professor, who
raised a wild shriek, but whether he received the threatened kiss or
not I was unable to see, as Bruno, who had by this time released himself
from his extinguisher, rushed headlong out of the room, followed by
Sylvie; and I was so fearful of being left alone among all these crazy
creatures that I hurried after them.

“We must go to Father!” Sylvie panted, as they ran down the garden.
“I'm sure things are at their worst! I'll ask the Gardener to let us out
again.”

“But we ca'n't walk all the way!” Bruno whimpered. “How I wiss we had a
coach-and-four, like Uncle!”

And, shrill and wild, rang through the air the familiar voice:--


    “He thought he saw a Coach-and-Four
    That stood beside his bed:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Bear without a Head.
    'Poor thing,' he said, 'poor silly thing!
    It's waiting to be fed!'”

{Image...A bear without a head}

“No, I ca'n't let you out again!” he said, before the children could
speak. “The Vice-warden gave it me, he did, for letting you out last
time! So be off with you!” And, turning away from them, he began digging
frantically in the middle of a gravel-walk, singing, over and over
again, “'Poor thing,' he said, 'poor silly thing! It's waiting to be
fed!'” but in a more musical tone than the shrill screech in which he
had begun.

The music grew fuller and richer at every moment: other manly voices
joined in the refrain: and soon I heard the heavy thud that told me the
boat had touched the beach, and the harsh grating of the shingle as the
men dragged it up. I roused myself, and, after lending them a hand in
hauling up their boat, I lingered yet awhile to watch them disembark a
goodly assortment of the hard-won 'treasures of the deep.'

When at last I reached our lodgings I was tired and sleepy, and glad
enough to settle down again into the easy-chair, while Arthur hospitably
went to his cupboard, to get me out some cake and wine, without which,
he declared, he could not, as a doctor, permit my going to bed.

And how that cupboard-door did creak! It surely could not be Arthur, who
was opening and shutting it so often, moving so restlessly about, and
muttering like the soliloquy of a tragedy-queen!

No, it was a female voice. Also the figure half-hidden by the
cupboard-door--was a female figure, massive, and in flowing robes.

Could it be the landlady? The door opened, and a strange man entered the
room.

“What is that donkey doing?” he said to himself, pausing, aghast, on the
threshold.

The lady, thus rudely referred to, was his wife. She had got one of the
cupboards open, and stood with her back to him, smoothing down a sheet
of brown paper on one of the shelves, and whispering to herself “So, so!
Deftly done! Craftily contrived!”

Her loving husband stole behind her on tiptoe, and tapped her on the
head. “Boh!” he playfully shouted at her ear. “Never tell me again I
ca'n't say 'boh' to a goose!”

My Lady wrung her hands. “Discovered!” she groaned. “Yet no--he is one
of us! Reveal it not, oh Man! Let it bide its time!”

“Reveal what not?” her husband testily replied, dragging out the sheet
of brown paper. “What are you hiding here, my Lady? I insist upon
knowing!”

My Lady cast down her eyes, and spoke in the littlest of little voices.
“Don't make fun of it, Benjamin!” she pleaded. “It's--it's---don't you
understand? It's a DAGGER!”

“And what's that for?” sneered His Excellency. “We've only got to make
people think he's dead! We haven't got to kill him! And made of tin,
too!” he snarled, contemptuously bending the blade round his thumb.
“Now, Madam, you'll be good enough to explain. First, what do you call
me Benjamin for?”

“It's part of the Conspiracy, Love! One must have an alias, you know--”

“Oh, an alias, is it? Well! And next, what did you get this dagger for?
Come, no evasions! You ca'n't deceive me!”

“I got it for--for--for--” the detected Conspirator stammered, trying
her best to put on the assassin-expression that she had been practising
at the looking-glass. “For--”

“For what, Madam!”

“Well, for eighteenpence, if you must know, dearest! That's what I got
it for, on my--”

“Now don't say your Word and Honour!” groaned the other Conspirator.
“Why, they aren't worth half the money, put together!”

“On my birthday,” my Lady concluded in a meek whisper. “One must have a
dagger, you know. It's part of the--”

“Oh, don't talk of Conspiracies!” her husband savagely interrupted, as
he tossed the dagger into the cupboard. “You know about as much how to
manage a Conspiracy as if you were a chicken. Why, the first thing is to
get a disguise. Now, just look at this!”

And with pardonable pride he fitted on the cap and bells, and the rest
of the Fool's dress, and winked at her, and put his tongue in his cheek.
“Is that the sort of thing, now.” he demanded.

My Lady's eyes flashed with all a Conspirator's enthusiasm. “The very
thing!” she exclaimed, clapping her hands. “You do look, oh, such a
perfect Fool!”

The Fool smiled a doubtful smile. He was not quite clear whether it was
a compliment or not, to express it so plainly. “You mean a Jester? Yes,
that's what I intended. And what do you think your disguise is to be?”
 And he proceeded to unfold the parcel, the lady watching him in rapture.

“Oh, how lovely!” she cried, when at last the dress was unfolded. “What
a splendid disguise! An Esquimaux peasant-woman!”

“An Esquimaux peasant, indeed!” growled the other. “Here, put it on,
and look at yourself in the glass. Why, it's a Bear, ca'n't you use your
eyes?” He checked himself suddenly, as a harsh voice yelled through the
room,


    “He looked again, and found it was
    A Bear without a Head!”

But it was only the Gardener, singing under the open window. The
Vice-Warden stole on tip-toe to the window, and closed it noiselessly,
before he ventured to go on. “Yes, Lovey, a Bear: but not without a
head, I hope! You're the Bear, and me the Keeper. And if any one knows
us, they'll have sharp eyes, that's all!”

“I shall have to practise the steps a bit,” my Lady said, looking out
through the Bear's mouth: “one ca'n't help being rather human just at
first, you know. And of course you'll say 'Come up, Bruin!', won't you?”

“Yes, of course,” replied the Keeper, laying hold of the chain, that
hung from the Bear's collar, with one hand, while with the other he
cracked a little whip. “Now go round the room in a sort of a dancing
attitude. Very good, my dear, very good. Come up, Bruin! Come up, I
say!”

{Image...'Come up, bruin!'}

He roared out the last words for the benefit of Uggug, who had just come
into the room, and was now standing, with his hands spread out, and eyes
and mouth wide open, the very picture of stupid amazement. “Oh, my!” was
all he could gasp out.

The Keeper pretended to be adjusting the bear's collar, which gave him
an opportunity of whispering, unheard by Uggug, “my fault, I'm afraid!
Quite forgot to fasten the door. Plot's ruined if he finds it out! Keep
it up a minute or two longer. Be savage!” Then, while seeming to pull
it back with all his strength, he let it advance upon the scared boy:
my Lady, with admirable presence of mind, kept up what she no doubt
intended for a savage growl, though it was more like the purring of a
cat: and Uggug backed out of the room with such haste that he tripped
over the mat, and was heard to fall heavily outside--an accident to
which even his doting mother paid no heed, in the excitement of the
moment.

The Vice-Warden shut and bolted the door. “Off with the disguises!” he
panted. “There's not a moment to lose. He's sure to fetch the Professor,
and we couldn't take him in, you know!” And in another minute the
disguises were stowed away in the cupboard, the door unbolted, and the
two Conspirators seated lovingly side-by-side on the sofa, earnestly
discussing a book the Vice-Warden had hastily snatched off the table,
which proved to be the City-Directory of the capital of Outland.

The door opened, very slowly and cautiously, and the Professor peeped
in, Uggug's stupid face being just visible behind him.

“It is a beautiful arrangement!” the Vice-warden was saying with
enthusiasm. “You see, my precious one, that there are fifteen houses in
Green Street, before you turn into West Street.”

“Fifteen houses! Is it possible?” my Lady replied. “I thought it was
fourteen!” And, so intent were they on this interesting question, that
neither of them even looked up till the Professor, leading Uggug by the
hand, stood close before them.

My Lady was the first to notice their approach. “Why, here's the
Professor!” she exclaimed in her blandest tones. “And my precious child
too! Are lessons over?”

“A strange thing has happened!” the Professor began in a trembling tone.
“His Exalted Fatness” (this was one of Uggug's many titles) “tells me he
has just seen, in this very room, a Dancing-Bear and a Court-Jester!”

The Vice-Warden and his wife shook with well-acted merriment.

“Not in this room, darling!” said the fond mother. “We've been sitting
here this hour or more, reading--,” here she referred to the book lying
on her lap, “--reading the--the City-Directory.”

“Let me feel your pulse, my boy!” said the anxious father. “Now put out
your tongue. Ah, I thought so! He's a little feverish, Professor, and
has had a bad dream. Put him to bed at once, and give him a cooling
draught.”

“I ain't been dreaming!” his Exalted Fatness remonstrated, as the
Professor led him away.

“Bad grammar, Sir!” his father remarked with some sternness. “Kindly
attend to that little matter, Professor, as soon as you have corrected
the feverishness. And, by the way, Professor!” (The Professor left his
distinguished pupil standing at the door, and meekly returned.) “There
is a rumour afloat, that the people wish to elect an--in point of fact,
an--you understand that I mean an--”

“Not another Professor!” the poor old man exclaimed in horror.

“No! Certainly not!” the Vice-Warden eagerly explained. “Merely an
Emperor, you understand.”

“An Emperor!” cried the astonished Professor, holding his head between
his hands, as if he expected it to come to pieces with the shock. “What
will the Warden--”

“Why, the Warden will most likely be the new Emperor!” my Lady
explained. “Where could we find a better? Unless, perhaps--” she glanced
at her husband.

“Where indeed!” the Professor fervently responded, quite failing to take
the hint.

The Vice-Warden resumed the thread of his discourse. “The reason I
mentioned it, Professor, was to ask you to be so kind as to preside at
the Election. You see it would make the thing respectable--no suspicion
of anything, underhand--”

“I fear I ca'n't, your Excellency!” the old man faltered. “What will the
Warden--”

“True, true!” the Vice-Warden interrupted. “Your position, as
Court-Professor, makes it awkward, I admit. Well, well! Then the
Election shall be held without you.”

“Better so, than if it were held within me!” the Professor murmured with
a bewildered air, as if he hardly knew what he was saying. “Bed, I think
your Highness said, and a cooling-draught?” And he wandered dreamily
back to where Uggug sulkily awaited him.

I followed them out of the room, and down the passage, the Professor
murmuring to himself, all the time, as a kind of aid to his feeble
memory, “C, C, C; Couch, Cooling-Draught, Correct-Grammar,” till, in
turning a corner, he met Sylvie and Bruno, so suddenly that the startled
Professor let go of his fat pupil, who instantly took to his heels.






CHAPTER 10. THE OTHER PROFESSOR.

“We were looking for you!” cried Sylvie, in a tone of great relief. “We
do want you so much, you ca'n't think!”

“What is it, dear children?” the Professor asked, beaming on them with a
very different look from what Uggug ever got from him.

“We want you to speak to the Gardener for us,” Sylvie said, as she and
Bruno took the old man's hands and led him into the hall.

“He's ever so unkind!” Bruno mournfully added. “They's all unkind to us,
now that Father's gone. The Lion were much nicer!”

“But you must explain to me, please,” the Professor said with an anxious
look, “which is the Lion, and which is the Gardener. It's most important
not to get two such animals confused together. And one's very liable to
do it in their case--both having mouths, you know--”

“Doos oo always confuses two animals together?” Bruno asked.

“Pretty often, I'm afraid,” the Professor candidly confessed. “Now, for
instance, there's the rabbit-hutch and the hall-clock.” The Professor
pointed them out. “One gets a little confused with them--both having
doors, you know. Now, only yesterday--would you believe it?--I put some
lettuces into the clock, and tried to wind up the rabbit!”

“Did the rabbit go, after oo wounded it up?” said Bruno.

The Professor clasped his hands on the top of his head, and groaned.
“Go? I should think it did go! Why, it's gone? And where ever it's gone
to--that's what I ca'n't find out! I've done my best--I've read all the
article 'Rabbit' in the great dictionary--Come in!”

“Only the tailor, Sir, with your little bill,” said a meek voice outside
the door.

“Ah, well, I can soon settle his business,” the Professor said to the
children, “if you'll just wait a minute. How much is it, this year, my
man?” The tailor had come in while he was speaking.

“Well, it's been a doubling so many years, you see,” the tailor replied,
a little gruffly, “and I think I'd like the money now. It's two thousand
pound, it is!”

“Oh, that's nothing!” the Professor carelessly remarked, feeling in his
pocket, as if he always carried at least that amount about with him.
“But wouldn't you like to wait just another year, and make it four
thousand? Just think how rich you'd be! Why, you might be a King, if you
liked!”

“I don't know as I'd care about being a King,” the man said
thoughtfully. “But it; dew sound a powerful sight o' money! Well, I
think I'll wait--”

“Of course you will!” said the Professor. “There's good sense in you, I
see. Good-day to you, my man!”

“Will you ever have to pay him that four thousand pounds?” Sylvie asked
as the door closed on the departing creditor.

“Never, my child!” the Professor replied emphatically. “He'll go on
doubling it, till he dies. You see it's always worth while waiting
another year, to get twice as much money! And now what would you like to
do, my little friends? Shall I take you to see the Other Professor?
This would be an excellent opportunity for a visit,” he said to himself,
glancing at his watch: “he generally takes a short rest--of fourteen
minutes and a half--about this time.”

Bruno hastily went round to Sylvie, who was standing at the other side
of the Professor, and put his hand into hers. “I thinks we'd like to
go,” he said doubtfully: “only please let's go all together. It's best
to be on the safe side, oo know!”

“Why, you talk as if you were Sylvie!” exclaimed the Professor.

“I know I did,” Bruno replied very humbly. “I quite forgotted I wasn't
Sylvie. Only I fought he might be rarver fierce!”

The Professor laughed a jolly laugh. “Oh, he's quite tame!” he said.
“He never bites. He's only a little--a little dreamy, you know.” He took
hold of Bruno's other hand; and led the children down a long passage
I had never noticed before--not that there was anything remarkable
in that: I was constantly coming on new rooms and passages in that
mysterious Palace, and very seldom succeeded in finding the old ones
again.

Near the end of the passage the Professor stopped. “This is his room,”
 he said, pointing to the solid wall.

“We ca'n't get in through there!” Bruno exclaimed.

Sylvie said nothing, till she had carefully examined whether the wall
opened anywhere. Then she laughed merrily. “You're playing us a trick,
you dear old thing!” she said. “There's no door here!”

“There isn't any door to the room,” said the Professor. “We shall have
to climb in at the window.”

So we went into the garden, and soon found the window of the Other
Professor's room. It was a ground-floor window, and stood invitingly
open: the Professor first lifted the two children in, and then he and I
climbed in after them.

{Image...The other professor}

The Other Professor was seated at a table, with a large book open before
him, on which his forehead was resting: he had clasped his arms round
the book, and was snoring heavily. “He usually reads like that,”
 the Professor remarked, “when the book's very interesting: and then
sometimes it's very difficult to get him to attend!”

This seemed to be one of the difficult times: the Professor lifted him
up, once or twice, and shook him violently: but he always returned to
his book the moment he was let go of, and showed by his heavy breathing
that the book was as interesting as ever.

“How dreamy he is!” the Professor exclaimed. “He must have got to a very
interesting part of the book!” And he rained quite a shower of thumps on
the Other Professor's back, shouting “Hoy! Hoy!” all the time. “Isn't it
wonderful that he should be so dreamy?” he said to Bruno.

“If he's always as sleepy as that,” Bruno remarked, “a course he's
dreamy!”

“But what are we to do?” said the Professor. “You see he's quite wrapped
up in the book!”

“Suppose oo shuts the book?” Bruno suggested.

“That's it!” cried the delighted Professor. “Of course that'll do it!”
 And he shut up the book so quickly that he caught the Other Professor's
nose between the leaves, and gave it a severe pinch.

The Other Professor instantly rose to his feet, and carried the book
away to the end of the room, where he put it back in its place in the
book-case. “I've been reading for eighteen hours and three-quarters,”
 he said, “and now I shall rest for fourteen minutes and a half. Is the
Lecture all ready?”

“Very nearly,” the Professor humbly replied. “I shall ask you to give me
a hint or two--there will be a few little difficulties--”

“And Banquet, I think you said?”

“Oh, yes! The Banquet comes first, of course. People never enjoy
Abstract Science, you know, when they're ravenous with hunger. And then
there's the Fancy-Dress-Ball. Oh, there'll be lots of entertainment!”

“Where will the Ball come in?” said the Other Professor.

“I think it had better come at the beginning of the Banquet--it brings
people together so nicely, you know.”

“Yes, that's the right order. First the Meeting: then the Eating: then
the Treating--for I'm sure any Lecture you give us will be a treat!”
 said the Other Professor, who had been standing with his back to us all
this time, occupying himself in taking the books out, one by one, and
turning them upside-down. An easel, with a black board on it, stood near
him: and, every time that he turned a book upside-down, he made a mark
on the board with a piece of chalk.

“And as to the 'Pig-Tale'--which you have so kindly promised to give
us--” the Professor went on, thoughtfully rubbing his chin. “I think
that had better come at the end of the Banquet: then people can listen
to it quietly.”

“Shall I sing it?” the Other Professor asked, with a smile of delight.

“If you can,” the Professor replied, cautiously.

“Let me try,” said the Other Professor, seating himself at the
pianoforte. “For the sake of argument, let us assume that it begins on
A flat.” And he struck the note in question. “La, la, la! I think that's
within an octave of it.” He struck the note again, and appealed to
Bruno, who was standing at his side. “Did I sing it like that, my
child?”

“No, oo didn't,” Bruno replied with great decision. “It were more like a
duck.”

“Single notes are apt to have that effect,” the Other Professor said
with a sigh. “Let me try a whole verse,


   There was a Pig, that sat alone,
   Beside a ruined Pump.
   By day and night he made his moan:
   It would have stirred a heart of stone
   To see him wring his hoofs and groan,
   Because he could not jump.

Would you call that a tune, Professor?” he asked, when he had finished.

The Professor considered a little. “Well,” he said at last, “some of the
notes are the same as others and some are different but I should hardly
call it a tune.”

“Let me try it a bit by myself,” said the Other Professor. And he began
touching the notes here and there, and humming to himself like an angry
bluebottle.

“How do you like his singing?” the Professor asked the children in a low
voice.

“It isn't very beautiful,” Sylvie said, hesitatingly.

“It's very extremely ugly!” Bruno said, without any hesitation at all.

“All extremes are bad,” the Professor said, very gravely. “For instance,
Sobriety is a very good thing, when practised in moderation: but even
Sobriety, when carried to an extreme, has its disadvantages.”

“What are its disadvantages?” was the question that rose in my
mind--and, as usual, Bruno asked it for me. “What are its lizard
bandages?'

“Well, this is one of them,” said the Professor. “When a man's tipsy
(that's one extreme, you know), he sees one thing as two. But, when he's
extremely sober (that's the other extreme), he sees two things as one.
It's equally inconvenient, whichever happens.

“What does 'illconvenient' mean?” Bruno whispered to Sylvie.

“The difference between 'convenient' and 'inconvenient' is best
explained by an example,” said the Other Professor, who had overheard
the question. “If you'll just think over any Poem that contains the two
words--such as--”

The Professor put his hands over his ears, with a look of dismay. “If
you once let him begin a Poem,” he said to Sylvie, “he'll never leave
off again! He never does!”

“Did he ever begin a Poem and not leave off again?” Sylvie enquired.

“Three times,” said the Professor.

Bruno raised himself on tiptoe, till his lips were on a level with
Sylvie's ear. “What became of them three Poems?” he whispered. “Is he
saying them all, now?”

“Hush!” said Sylvie. “The Other Professor is speaking!”

“I'll say it very quick,” murmured the Other Professor, with downcast
eyes, and melancholy voice, which contrasted oddly with his face, as
he had forgotten to leave off smiling. (“At least it wasn't exactly a
smile,”) as Sylvie said afterwards: “it looked as if his mouth was made
that shape.”

“Go on then,” said the Professor. “What must be must be.”

“Remember that!” Sylvie whispered to Bruno, “It's a very good rule for
whenever you hurt yourself.”

“And it's a very good rule for whenever I make a noise,” said the saucy
little fellow. “So you remember it too, Miss!”

“Whatever do you mean?” said Sylvie, trying to frown, a thing she never
managed particularly well.

“Oftens and oftens,” said Bruno, “haven't oo told me 'There mustn't
be so much noise, Bruno!' when I've tolded oo 'There must!' Why, there
isn't no rules at all about 'There mustn't'! But oo never believes me!”

“As if any one could believe you, you wicked wicked boy!” said Sylvie.
The words were severe enough, but I am of opinion that, when you are
really anxious to impress a criminal with a sense of his guilt, you
ought not to pronounce the sentence with your lips quite close to his
cheek--since a kiss at the end of it, however accidental, weakens the
effect terribly.






CHAPTER 11. PETER AND PAUL.

“As I was saying,” the other Professor resumed, “if you'll just think
over any Poem, that contains the words--such as,


   'Peter is poor,' said noble Paul,
   'And I have always been his friend:
    And, though my means to give are small,
    At least I can afford to lend.
    How few, in this cold age of greed,
    Do good, except on selfish grounds!
    But I can feel for Peter's need,
    And I WILL LEND HIM FIFTY POUNDS!'

    How great was Peter's joy to find
    His friend in such a genial vein!
    How cheerfully the bond he signed,
    To pay the money back again!
    'We ca'n't,' said Paul, 'be too precise:
    'Tis best to fix the very day:
    So, by a learned friend's advice,
    I've made it Noon, the Fourth of May.

{Image...'How cheefully the bond he signed!'}


    But this is April!  Peter said.
    'The First of April, as I think.
    Five little weeks will soon be fled:
    One scarcely will have time to wink!
    Give me a year to speculate--
    To buy and sell--to drive a trade--'
    Said Paul 'I cannot change the date.
    On May the Fourth it must be paid.'

    'Well, well!' said Peter, with a sigh.
    'Hand me the cash, and I will go.
    I'll form a Joint-Stock Company,
    And turn an honest pound or so.'
    'I'm grieved,' said Paul, 'to seem unkind:
    The money shalt of course be lent:
    But, for a week or two, I find
    It will not be convenient.'

    So, week by week, poor Peter came
    And turned in heaviness away;
    For still the answer was the same,
    'I cannot manage it to-day.'
    And now the April showers were dry--
    The five short weeks were nearly spent--
    Yet still he got the old reply,
    'It is not quite convenient!'

    The Fourth arrived, and punctual Paul
    Came, with his legal friend, at noon.
    'I thought it best,' said he, 'to call:
    One cannot settle things too soon.'
    Poor Peter shuddered in despair:
    His flowing locks he wildly tore:
    And very soon his yellow hair
    Was lying all about the floor.

    The legal friend was standing by,
    With sudden pity half unmanned:
    The tear-drop trembled in his eye,
    The signed agreement in his hand:
    But when at length the legal soul
    Resumed its customary force,
    'The Law,' he said, 'we ca'n't control:
    Pay, or the Law must take its course!'

    Said Paul 'How bitterly I rue
    That fatal morning when I called!
    Consider, Peter, what you do!
    You won't be richer when you're bald!
    Think you, by rending curls away,
    To make your difficulties less?
    Forbear this violence, I pray:
    You do but add to my distress!'

{Image...'Poor peter shuddered in despair'}


    'Not willingly would I inflict,'
    Said Peter, 'on that noble heart
    One needless pang.  Yet why so strict?
    Is this to act a friendly part?
    However legal it may be
    To pay what never has been lent,
    This style of business seems to me
    Extremely inconvenient!

    'No Nobleness of soul have I,
    Like some that in this Age are found!'
    (Paul blushed in sheer humility,
    And cast his eyes upon the ground)
    'This debt will simply swallow all,
    And make my life a life of woe!'
    'Nay, nay, nay Peter!' answered Paul.
    'You must not rail on Fortune so!

    'You have enough to eat and drink:
    You are respected in the world:
    And at the barber's, as I think,
    You often get your whiskers curled.
    Though Nobleness you ca'n't attain
    To any very great extent--
    The path of Honesty is plain,
    However inconvenient!'

    “Tis true, 'said Peter,' I'm alive:
    I keep my station in the world:
    Once in the week I just contrive
    To get my whiskers oiled and curled.
    But my assets are very low:
    My little income's overspent:
    To trench on capital, you know,
    Is always inconvenient!'

    'But pay your debts!' cried honest Paul.
    'My gentle Peter, pay your debts!
    What matter if it swallows all
    That you describe as your “assets”?
    Already you're an hour behind:
    Yet Generosity is best.
    It pinches me--but never mind!
    I WILL NOT CHARGE YOU INTEREST!'

    'How good!  How great!' poor Peter cried.
    'Yet I must sell my Sunday wig--
    The scarf-pin that has been my pride--
    My grand piano--and my pig!'
    Full soon his property took wings:
    And daily, as each treasure went,
    He sighed to find the state of things
    Grow less and less convenient.

    Weeks grew to months, and months to years:
    Peter was worn to skin and bone:
    And once he even said, with tears,
    'Remember, Paul, that promised Loan!'
    Said Paul' I'll lend you, when I can,
    All the spare money I have got--
    Ah, Peter, you're a happy man!
    Yours is an enviable lot!

{Image...Such boots as these you seldom see}


    'I'm getting stout, as you may see:
    It is but seldom I am well:
    I cannot feel my ancient glee
    In listening to the dinner-bell:
    But you, you gambol like a boy,
    Your figure is so spare and light:
    The dinner-bell's a note of joy
    To such a healthy appetite!'

    Said Peter 'I am well aware
    Mine is a state of happiness:
    And yet how gladly could I spare
    Some of the comforts I possess!
    What you call healthy appetite
    I feel as Hunger's savage tooth:
    And, when no dinner is in sight,
    The dinner-bell's a sound of ruth!

    'No scare-crow would accept this coat:
    Such boots as these you seldom see.
    Ah, Paul, a single five-pound-note
    Would make another man of me!'
    Said Paul 'It fills me with surprise
    To hear you talk in such a tone:
    I fear you scarcely realise
    The blessings that are all your own!

    'You're safe from being overfed:
    You're sweetly picturesque in rags:
    You never know the aching head
    That comes along with money-bags:
    And you have time to cultivate
    That best of qualities, Content--
    For which you'll find your present state
    Remarkably convenient!'

    Said Peter 'Though I cannot sound
    The depths of such a man as you,
    Yet in your character I've found
    An inconsistency or two.
    You seem to have long years to spare
    When there's a promise to fulfil:
    And yet how punctual you were
    In calling with that little bill!'

    'One can't be too deliberate,'
    Said Paul, 'in parting with one's pelf.
    With bills, as you correctly state,
    I'm punctuality itself:
    A man may surely claim his dues:
    But, when there's money to be lent,
    A man must be allowed to choose
    Such times as are convenient!'

    It chanced one day, as Peter sat
    Gnawing a crust--his usual meal--
    Paul bustled in to have a chat,
    And grasped his hand with friendly zeal.
    'I knew,' said he, 'your frugal ways:
    So, that I might not wound your pride
    By bringing strangers in to gaze,
    I've left my legal friend outside!

    'You well remember, I am sure,
    When first your wealth began to go,
    And people sneered at one so poor,
    I never used my Peter so!
    And when you'd lost your little all,
    And found yourself a thing despised,
    I need not ask you to recall
    How tenderly I sympathised!

    'Then the advice I've poured on you,
    So full of wisdom and of wit:
    All given gratis, though 'tis true
    I might have fairly charged for it!
    But I refrain from mentioning
    Full many a deed I might relate
    For boasting is a kind of thing
    That I particularly hate.

{Image...'I will lend you fifty more!'}


    'How vast the total sum appears
    Of all the kindnesses I've done,
    From Childhood's half-forgotten years
    Down to that Loan of April One!
    That Fifty Pounds!  You little guessed
    How deep it drained my slender store:
    But there's a heart within this breast,
    And I WILL LEND YOU FIFTY MORE!'

    'Not so,' was Peter's mild reply,
    His cheeks all wet with grateful tears;
    No man recalls, so well as I,
    Your services in bygone years:
    And this new offer, I admit,
    Is very very kindly meant--
    Still, to avail myself of it
    Would not be quite convenient!'

You'll see in a moment what the difference is between 'convenient'
and 'inconvenient.' You quite understand it now, don't you?” he added,
looking kindly at Bruno, who was sitting, at Sylvie's side, on the
floor.

“Yes,” said Bruno, very quietly. Such a short speech was very unusual,
for him: but just then he seemed, I fancied, a little exhausted. In
fact, he climbed up into Sylvie's lap as he spoke, and rested his head
against her shoulder. “What a many verses it was!” he whispered.






CHAPTER 12. A MUSICAL GARDENER.

The Other Professor regarded him with some anxiety. “The smaller animal
ought to go to bed at once,” he said with an air of authority.

“Why at once?” said the Professor.

“Because he can't go at twice,” said the Other Professor.

The Professor gently clapped his hands. “Isn't he wonderful!” he said to
Sylvie. “Nobody else could have thought of the reason, so quick. Why, of
course he ca'n't go at twice! It would hurt him to be divided.”

This remark woke up Bruno, suddenly and completely. “I don't want to be
divided,” he said decisively.

“It does very well on a diagram,” said the Other Professor. “I could
show it you in a minute, only the chalk's a little blunt.”

“Take care!” Sylvie anxiously exclaimed, as he began, rather clumsily,
to point it. “You'll cut your finger off, if you hold the knife so!”

“If oo cuts it off, will oo give it to me, please? Bruno thoughtfully
added.

“It's like this,” said the Other Professor, hastily drawing a long line
upon the black board, and marking the letters 'A,' 'B,' at the two
ends, and 'C' in the middle: “let me explain it to you. If AB were to be
divided into two parts at C--”

“It would be drownded,” Bruno pronounced confidently.

The Other Professor gasped. “What would be drownded?”

“Why the bumble-bee, of course!” said Bruno. “And the two bits would
sink down in the sea!”

Here the Professor interfered, as the Other Professor was evidently too
much puzzled to go on with his diagram.

“When I said it would hurt him, I was merely referring to the action of
the nerves--”

The Other Professor brightened up in a moment. “The action of the
nerves,” he began eagerly, “is curiously slow in some people. I had a
friend, once, that, if you burnt him with a red-hot poker, it would take
years and years before he felt it!”

“And if you only pinched him?” queried Sylvie.

“Then it would take ever so much longer, of course. In fact, I doubt if
the man himself would ever feel it, at all. His grandchildren might.”

“I wouldn't like to be the grandchild of a pinched grandfather, would
you, Mister Sir?” Bruno whispered. “It might come just when you wanted
to be happy!”

That would be awkward, I admitted, taking it quite as a matter of course
that he had so suddenly caught sight of me. “But don't you always want
to be happy, Bruno?”

“Not always,” Bruno said thoughtfully. “Sometimes, when I's too happy,
I wants to be a little miserable. Then I just tell Sylvie about it, oo
know, and Sylvie sets me some lessons. Then it's all right.”

“I'm sorry you don't like lessons,” I said.

“You should copy Sylvie. She's always as busy as the day is long!”

“Well, so am I!” said Bruno.

“No, no!” Sylvie corrected him. “You're as busy as the day is short!”

“Well, what's the difference?” Bruno asked. “Mister Sir, isn't the day
as short as it's long? I mean, isn't it the same length?”

Never having considered the question in this light, I suggested that
they had better ask the Professor; and they ran off in a moment to
appeal to their old friend. The Professor left off polishing his
spectacles to consider. “My dears,” he said after a minute, “the day
is the same length as anything that is the same length as it.” And he
resumed his never-ending task of polishing.

The children returned, slowly and thoughtfully, to report his answer.
“Isn't he wise?”

Sylvie asked in an awestruck whisper. “If I was as wise as that, I
should have a head-ache all day long. I know I should!”

“You appear to be talking to somebody--that isn't here,” the Professor
said, turning round to the children. “Who is it?”

Bruno looked puzzled. “I never talks to nobody when he isn't here!” he
replied. “It isn't good manners. Oo should always wait till he comes,
before oo talks to him!”

The Professor looked anxiously in my direction, and seemed to look
through and through me without seeing me. “Then who are you talking to?”
 he said. “There isn't anybody here, you know, except the Other Professor
and he isn't here!” he added wildly, turning round and round like a
teetotum. “Children! Help to look for him! Quick! He's got lost again!”

The children were on their feet in a moment.

“Where shall we look?” said Sylvie.

“Anywhere!” shouted the excited Professor. “Only be quick about it!” And
he began trotting round and round the room, lifting up the chairs, and
shaking them.

Bruno took a very small book out of the bookcase, opened it, and shook
it in imitation of the Professor. “He isn't here,” he said.

“He ca'n't be there, Bruno!” Sylvie said indignantly.

“Course he ca'n't!” said Bruno. “I should have shooked him out, if he'd
been in there!”

“Has he ever been lost before?” Sylvie enquired, turning up a corner of
the hearth-rug, and peeping under it.

“Once before,” said the Professor: “he once lost himself in a wood--”

“And couldn't he find his-self again?” said Bruno. “Why didn't he shout?
He'd be sure to hear his-self, 'cause he couldn't be far off, oo know.”

“Lets try shouting,” said the Professor.

“What shall we shout?” said Sylvie.

“On second thoughts, don't shout,” the Professor replied. “The
Vice-Warden might hear you. He's getting awfully strict!”

This reminded the poor children of all the troubles, about which they
had come to their old friend. Bruno sat down on the floor and began
crying. “He is so cruel!” he sobbed. “And he lets Uggug take away all my
toys! And such horrid meals!”

“What did you have for dinner to-day?” said the Professor.

“A little piece of a dead crow,” was Bruno's mournful reply.

“He means rook-pie,” Sylvie explained.

“It were a dead crow,” Bruno persisted. “And there were a
apple-pudding--and Uggug ate it all--and I got nuffin but a crust! And
I asked for a orange--and--didn't get it!” And the poor little fellow
buried his face in Sylvie's lap, who kept gently stroking his hair as
she went on. “It's all true, Professor dear! They do treat my darling
Bruno very badly! And they're not kind to me either,” she added in a
lower tone, as if that were a thing of much less importance.

The Professor got out a large red silk handkerchief, and wiped his eyes.
“I wish I could help you, dear children!” he said. “But what can I do?”

“We know the way to Fairyland--where Father's gone--quite well,” said
Sylvie: “if only the Gardener would let us out.”

“Won't he open the door for you?” said the Professor.

“Not for us,” said Sylvie: “but I'm sure he would for you. Do come and
ask him, Professor dear!”

“I'll come this minute!” said the Professor.

Bruno sat up and dried his eyes. “Isn't he kind, Mister Sir?”

“He is indeed,” said I. But the Professor took no notice of my remark.
He had put on a beautiful cap with a long tassel, and was selecting one
of the Other Professor's walking-sticks, from a stand in the corner of
the room. “A thick stick in one's hand makes people respectful,” he was
saying to himself. “Come along, dear children!” And we all went out into
the garden together.

“I shall address him, first of all,” the Professor explained as we went
along, “with a few playful remarks on the weather. I shall then question
him about the Other Professor. This will have a double advantage. First,
it will open the conversation (you can't even drink a bottle of
wine without opening it first): and secondly, if he's seen the Other
Professor, we shall find him that way: and, if he hasn't, we sha'n't.”

On our way, we passed the target, at which Uggug had been made to shoot
during the Ambassador's visit.

“See!” said the Professor, pointing out a hole in the middle of the
bull's-eye. “His Imperial Fatness had only one shot at it; and he went
in just here!”

Bruno carefully examined the hole. “Couldn't go in there,” he whispered
to me. “He are too fat!”

We had no sort of difficulty in finding the Gardener. Though he was
hidden from us by some trees, that harsh voice of his served to direct
us; and, as we drew nearer, the words of his song became more and more
plainly audible:--


    “He thought he saw an Albatross
    That fluttered round the lamp:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Penny-Postage-Stamp.
    'You'd best be getting home,' he said:
    'The nights are very damp!'”

{Image...He thought he saw an albatross}

“Would it be afraid of catching cold?” said Bruno.

“If it got very damp,” Sylvie suggested, “it might stick to something,
you know.”

“And that somefin would have to go by the post, what ever it was!” Bruno
eagerly exclaimed. “Suppose it was a cow! Wouldn't it be dreadful for
the other things!”

“And all these things happened to him,” said the Professor. “That's what
makes the song so interesting.”

“He must have had a very curious life,” said Sylvie.

“You may say that!” the Professor heartily rejoined.

“Of course she may!” cried Bruno.

By this time we had come up to the Gardener, who was standing on one
leg, as usual, and busily employed in watering a bed of flowers with an
empty watering-can.

“It hasn't got no water in it!” Bruno explained to him, pulling his
sleeve to attract his attention.

“It's lighter to hold,” said the Gardener. “A lot of water in it makes
one's arms ache.” And he went on with his work, singing softly to
himself,


     “The nights are very damp!”

“In digging things out of the ground which you probably do now and
then,” the Professor began in a loud voice; “in making things into
heaps--which no doubt you often do; and in kicking things about with one
heel--which you seem never to leave off doing; have you ever happened to
notice another Professor something like me, but different?”

“Never!” shouted the Gardener, so loudly and violently that we all drew
back in alarm. “There ain't such a thing!”

“We will try a less exciting topic,” the Professor mildly remarked to
the children. “You were asking--”

“We asked him to let us through the garden-door,” said Sylvie: “but he
wouldn't: but perhaps he would for you!”

The Professor put the request, very humbly and courteously.

“I wouldn't mind letting you out,” said the Gardener. “But I mustn't
open the door for children. D'you think I'd disobey the Rules? Not for
one-and-sixpence!”

The Professor cautiously produced a couple of shillings.

“That'll do it!” the Gardener shouted, as he hurled the watering-can
across the flower-bed, and produced a handful of keys--one large one,
and a number of small ones.

“But look here, Professor dear!” whispered Sylvie. “He needn't open the
door for us, at all. We can go out with you.”

“True, dear child!” the Professor thankfully replied, as he replaced
the coins in his pocket. “That saves two shillings!” And he took the
children's hands, that they might all go out together when the door
was opened. This, however, did not seem a very likely event, though the
Gardener patiently tried all the small keys, over and over again.

At last the Professor ventured on a gentle suggestion. “Why not try the
large one? I have often observed that a door unlocks much more nicely
with its own key.”

The very first trial of the large key proved a success: the Gardener
opened the door, and held out his hand for the money.

The Professor shook his head. “You are acting by Rule,” he explained,
“in opening the door for me. And now it's open, we are going out by
Rule--the Rule of Three.”

The Gardener looked puzzled, and let us go out; but, as he locked the
door behind us, we heard him singing thoughtfully to himself,


    “He thought he saw a Garden-Door
    That opened with a key:
    He looked again, and found it was
    A Double Rule of Three:
    'And all its mystery,' he said,
    'Is clear as day to me!'”

“I shall now return,” said the Professor, when we had walked a few
yards: “you see, it's impossible to read here, for all my books are in
the house.”

But the children still kept fast hold of his hands. “Do come with us!”
 Sylvie entreated with tears in her eyes.

“Well, well!” said the good-natured old man. “Perhaps I'll come after
you, some day soon. But I must go back now. You see I left off at
a comma, and it's so awkward not knowing how the sentence finishes!
Besides, you've got to go through Dogland first, and I'm always a little
nervous about dogs. But it'll be quite easy to come, as soon as I've
completed my new invention--for carrying one's-self, you know. It wants
just a little more working out.”

“Won't that be very tiring, to carry yourself?” Sylvie enquired.

“Well, no, my child. You see, whatever fatigue one incurs by carrying,
one saves by being carried! Good-bye, dears! Good-bye, Sir!” he added to
my intense surprise, giving my hand an affectionate squeeze.

“Good-bye, Professor!” I replied: but my voice sounded strange and far
away, and the children took not the slightest notice of our farewell.
Evidently they neither saw me nor heard me, as, with their arms lovingly
twined round each other, they marched boldly on.






CHAPTER 13. A VISIT TO DOGLAND.

“There's a house, away there to the left,” said Sylvie, after we had
walked what seemed to me about fifty miles. “Let's go and ask for a
night's lodging.”

“It looks a very comfable house,” Bruno said, as we turned into the
road leading up to it. “I doos hope the Dogs will be kind to us, I is so
tired and hungry!”

A Mastiff, dressed in a scarlet collar, and carrying a musket, was
pacing up and down, like a sentinel, in front of the entrance. He
started, on catching sight of the children, and came forwards to meet
them, keeping his musket pointed straight at Bruno, who stood quite
still, though he turned pale and kept tight hold of Sylvie's hand, while
the Sentinel walked solemnly round and round them, and looked at them
from all points of view.

{Image...The mastiff-sentinel}

“Oobooh, hooh boohooyah!” He growled at last. “Woobah yahwah oobooh! Bow
wahbah woobooyah? Bow wow?” he asked Bruno, severely.

Of course Bruno understood all this, easily enough. All Fairies
understand Doggee---that is, Dog-language. But, as you may find it a
little difficult, just at first, I had better put it into English for
you. “Humans, I verily believe! A couple of stray Humans! What Dog do
you belong to? What do you want?”

“We don't belong to a Dog!” Bruno began, in Doggee. (“Peoples never
belongs to Dogs!” he whispered to Sylvie.)

But Sylvie hastily checked him, for fear of hurting the Mastiff's
feelings. “Please, we want a little food, and a night's lodging--if
there's room in the house,” she added timidly. Sylvie spoke Doggee
very prettily: but I think it's almost better, for you, to give the
conversation in English.

“The house, indeed!” growled the Sentinel. “Have you never seen a Palace
in your life? Come along with me! His Majesty must settle what's to be
done with you.”

They followed him through the entrance-hall, down a long passage, and
into a magnificent Saloon, around which were grouped dogs of all sorts
and sizes. Two splendid Blood-hounds were solemnly sitting up, one on
each side of the crown-bearer. Two or three Bull-dogs---whom I guessed
to be the Body-Guard of the King--were waiting in grim silence: in fact
the only voices at all plainly audible were those of two little dogs,
who had mounted a settee, and were holding a lively discussion that
looked very like a quarrel.

“Lords and Ladies in Waiting, and various Court Officials,” our guide
gruffly remarked, as he led us in. Of me the Courtiers took no notice
whatever: but Sylvie and Bruno were the subject of many inquisitive
looks, and many whispered remarks, of which I only distinctly caught
one--made by a sly-looking Dachshund to his friend “Bah wooh wahyah
hoobah Oobooh, hah bah?” (“She's not such a bad-looking Human, is she?”)

Leaving the new arrivals in the centre of the Saloon, the Sentinel
advanced to a door, at the further end of it, which bore an inscription,
painted on it in Doggee, “Royal Kennel--scratch and Yell.”

Before doing this, the Sentinel turned to the children, and said “Give
me your names.”

“We'd rather not!” Bruno exclaimed, pulling' Sylvie away from the door.
“We want them ourselves. Come back, Sylvie! Come quick!”

“Nonsense!” said Sylvie very decidedly: and gave their names in Doggee.

Then the Sentinel scratched violently at the door, and gave a yell that
made Bruno shiver from head to foot.

“Hooyah wah!” said a deep voice inside. (That's Doggee for “Come in!”)

“It's the King himself!” the Mastiff whispered in an awestruck tone.
“Take off your wigs, and lay them humbly at his paws.” (What we should
call “at his feet.”)

Sylvie was just going to explain, very politely, that really they
couldn't perform that ceremony, because their wigs wouldn't come off,
when the door of the Royal Kennel opened, and an enormous Newfoundland
Dog put his head out. “Bow wow?” was his first question.

“When His Majesty speaks to you,” the Sentinel hastily whispered to
Bruno, “you should prick up your ears!”

Bruno looked doubtfully at Sylvie. “I'd rather not, please,” he said.
“It would hurt.”

{Image...The dog-king}

“It doesn't hurt a bit!” the Sentinel said with some indignation. “Look!
It's like this!” And he pricked up his ears like two railway signals.

Sylvie gently explained matters. “I'm afraid we ca'n't manage it,”
 she said in a low voice. “I'm very sorry: but our ears haven't got the
right--” she wanted to say “machinery” in Doggee: but she had forgotten
the word, and could only think of “steam-engine.”

The Sentinel repeated Sylvie's explanation to the King.

“Can't prick up their ears without a steam-engine!” His Majesty
exclaimed. “They must be curious creatures! I must have a look at them!”
 And he came out of his Kennel, and walked solemnly up to the children.

What was the amazement--nor to say the horror of the whole assembly,
when Sylvie actually patted His Majesty on the head, while Bruno seized
his long ears and pretended to tie them together under his chin!

The Sentinel groaned aloud: a beautiful Greyhound who appeared to be
one of the Ladies in Waiting--fainted away: and all the other Courtiers
hastily drew back, and left plenty of room for the huge Newfoundland to
spring upon the audacious strangers, and tear them limb from limb.

Only--he didn't. On the contrary his Majesty actually smiled so far as
a Dog can smile--and (the other Dogs couldn't believe their eyes, but it
was true, all the same) his Majesty wagged his tail!

“Yah! Hooh hahwooh!” (that is “Well! I never!”) was the universal cry.

His Majesty looked round him severely, and gave a slight growl, which
produced instant silence. “Conduct my friends to the banqueting-hall!”
 he said, laying such an emphasis on “my friends” that several of the
dogs rolled over helplessly on their backs and began to lick Bruno's
feet.

A procession was formed, but I only ventured to follow as far as the
door of the banqueting-hall, so furious was the uproar of barking dogs
within. So I sat down by the King, who seemed to have gone to sleep, and
waited till the children returned to say good-night, when His Majesty
got up and shook himself.

“Time for bed!” he said with a sleepy yawn. “The attendants will show
you your room,” he added, aside, to Sylvie and Bruno. “Bring lights!”
 And, with a dignified air, he held out his paw for them to kiss.

But the children were evidently not well practised in Court-manners.
Sylvie simply stroked the great paw: Bruno hugged it: the Master of the
Ceremonies looked shocked.

All this time Dog-waiters, in splendid livery, were running up with
lighted candles: but, as fast as they put them upon the table, other
waiters ran away with them, so that there never seemed to be one for
me, though the Master kept nudging me with his elbow, and repeating, “I
ca'n't let you sleep here! You're not in bed, you know!”

I made a great effort, and just succeeded in getting out the words “I
know I'm not. I'm in an arm-chair.”

“Well, forty winks will do you no harm,” the Master said, and left me.
I could scarcely hear his words: and no wonder: he was leaning over the
side of a ship, that was miles away from the pier on which I stood. The
ship passed over the horizon and I sank back into the arm-chair.

The next thing I remember is that it was morning: breakfast was just
over: Sylvie was lifting Bruno down from a high chair, and saying to
a Spaniel, who was regarding them with a most benevolent smile, “Yes,
thank you we've had a very nice breakfast. Haven't we, Bruno?”

“There was too many bones in the”--Bruno began, but Sylvie frowned at
him, and laid her finger on her lips, for, at this moment, the travelers
were waited on by a very dignified officer, the Head-Growler, whose duty
it was, first to conduct them to the King to bid him farewell and
then to escort them to the boundary of Dogland. The great Newfoundland
received them most affably but instead of saying “good-bye” he startled
the Head-growler into giving three savage growls, by announcing that he
would escort them himself.

It is a most unusual proceeding, your Majesty! the Head-Growler
exclaimed, almost choking with vexation at being set aside, for he
had put on his best Court-suit, made entirely of cat-skins, for the
occasion.

“I shall escort them myself,” his Majesty repeated, gently but firmly,
laying aside the Royal robes, and changing his crown for a small
coronet, “and you may stay at home.”

“I are glad!” Bruno whispered to Sylvie, when they had got well out of
hearing. “He were so welly cross!” And he not only patted their Royal
escort, but even hugged him round the neck in the exuberance of his
delight.

His Majesty calmly wagged the Royal tail. “It's quite a relief,” he
said, “getting away from that Palace now and then! Royal Dogs have a
dull life of it, I can tell you! Would you mind” (this to Sylvie, in a
low voice, and looking a little shy and embarrassed) “would you mind the
trouble of just throwing that stick for me to fetch?”

Sylvie was too much astonished to do anything for a moment: it sounded
such a monstrous impossibility that a King should wish to run after a
stick. But Bruno was equal to the occasion, and with a glad shout of “Hi
then! Fetch it, good Doggie!” he hurled it over a clump of bushes. The
next moment the Monarch of Dogland had bounded over the bushes, and
picked up the stick, and came galloping back to the children with it in
his mouth. Bruno took it from him with great decision. “Beg for it!”
 he insisted; and His Majesty begged. “Paw!” commanded Sylvie; and His
Majesty gave his paw. In short, the solemn ceremony of escorting the
travelers to the boundaries of Dogland became one long uproarious game
of play!

“But business is business!” the Dog-King said at last. “And I must
go back to mine. I couldn't come any further,” he added, consulting a
dog-watch, which hung on a chain round his neck, “not even if there were
a Cat insight!”

They took an affectionate farewell of His Majesty, and trudged on.

“That were a dear dog!” Bruno exclaimed. “Has we to go far, Sylvie? I's
tired!”

“Not much further, darling!” Sylvie gently replied. “Do you see that
shining, just beyond those trees? I'm almost sure it's the gate of
Fairyland! I know it's all golden--Father told me so and so bright, so
bright!” she went on dreamily.

“It dazzles!” said Bruno, shading his eyes with one little hand, while
the other clung tightly to Sylvie's hand, as if he were half-alarmed at
her strange manner.

For the child moved on as if walking in her sleep, her large eyes gazing
into the far distance, and her breath coming and going in quick pantings
of eager delight. I knew, by some mysterious mental light, that a great
change was taking place in my sweet little friend (for such I loved to
think her) and that she was passing from the condition of a mere Outland
Sprite into the true Fairy-nature.

Upon Bruno the change came later: but it was completed in both
before they reached the golden gate, through which I knew it would be
impossible for me to follow. I could but stand outside, and take a last
look at the two sweet children, ere they disappeared within, and the
golden gate closed with a bang.

And with such a bang! “It never will shut like any other cupboard-door,”
 Arthur explained. “There's something wrong with the hinge. However,
here's the cake and wine. And you've had your forty winks. So you really
must get off to bed, old man! You're fit for nothing else. Witness my
hand, Arthur Forester, M.D.”

By this time I was wide-awake again. “Not quite yet!” I pleaded. “Really
I'm not sleepy now. And it isn't midnight yet.”

“Well, I did want to say another word to you,” Arthur replied in a
relenting tone, as he supplied me with the supper he had prescribed.
“Only I thought you were too sleepy for it to-night.”

We took our midnight meal almost in silence; for an unusual nervousness
seemed to have seized on my old friend.

“What kind of a night is it?” he asked, rising and undrawing the
window-curtains, apparently to change the subject for a minute. I
followed him to the window, and we stood together, looking out, in
silence.

“When I first spoke to you about--” Arthur began, after a long and
embarrassing silence, “that is, when we first talked about her--for I
think it was you that introduced the subject--my own position in life
forbade me to do more than worship her from a distance: and I was
turning over plans for leaving this place finally, and settling
somewhere out of all chance of meeting her again. That seemed to be my
only chance of usefulness in life.”

“Would that have been wise?” I said. “To leave yourself no hope at all?”

“There was no hope to leave,” Arthur firmly replied, though his eyes
glittered with tears as he gazed upwards into the midnight sky, from
which one solitary star, the glorious 'Vega,' blazed out in fitful
splendour through the driving clouds. “She was like that star to
me--bright, beautiful, and pure, but out of reach, out of reach!”

He drew the curtains again, and we returned to our places by the
fireside.

“What I wanted to tell you was this,” he resumed. “I heard this evening
from my solicitor. I can't go into the details of the business, but the
upshot is that my worldly wealth is much more than I thought, and I am
(or shall soon be) in a position to offer marriage, without imprudence,
to any lady, even if she brought nothing. I doubt if there would be
anything on her side: the Earl is poor, I believe. But I should have
enough for both, even if health failed.”

“I wish you all happiness in your married life!” I cried. “Shall you
speak to the Earl to-morrow?”

“Not yet awhile,” said Arthur. “He is very friendly, but I dare not
think he means more than that, as yet. And as for--as for Lady Muriel,
try as I may, I cannot read her feelings towards me. If there is love,
she is hiding it! No, I must wait, I must wait!”

I did not like to press any further advice on my friend, whose judgment,
I felt, was so much more sober and thoughtful than my own; and we parted
without more words on the subject that had now absorbed his thoughts,
nay, his very life.

The next morning a letter from my solicitor arrived, summoning me to
town on important business.






CHAPTER 14. FAIRY-SYLVIE.

For a full month the business, for which I had returned to London,
detained me there: and even then it was only the urgent advice of my
physician that induced me to leave it unfinished and pay another visit
to Elveston.

Arthur had written once or twice during the month; but in none of his
letters was there any mention of Lady Muriel. Still, I did not augur ill
from his silence: to me it looked like the natural action of a lover,
who, even while his heart was singing “She is mine!”, would fear to
paint his happiness in the cold phrases of a written letter, but would
wait to tell it by word of mouth. “Yes,” I thought, “I am to hear his
song of triumph from his own lips!”

The night I arrived we had much to say on other matters: and, tired with
the journey, I went to bed early, leaving the happy secret still untold.
Next day, however, as we chatted on over the remains of luncheon, I
ventured to put the momentous question. “Well, old friend, you have told
me nothing of Lady Muriel--nor when the happy day is to be?”

“The happy day,” Arthur said, looking unexpectedly grave, “is yet in the
dim future. We need to know--or, rather, she needs to know me better.
I know her sweet nature, thoroughly, by this time. But I dare not speak
till I am sure that my love is returned.”

“Don't wait too long!” I said gaily. “Faint heart never won fair lady!”

“It is 'faint heart,' perhaps. But really I dare not speak just yet.”

“But meanwhile,” I pleaded, “you are running a risk that perhaps you
have not thought of. Some other man--”

“No,” said Arthur firmly. “She is heart-whole: I am sure of that. Yet,
if she loves another better than me, so be it! I will not spoil her
happiness. The secret shall die with me. But she is my first--and my
only love!”

“That is all very beautiful sentiment,” I said, “but it is not
practical. It is not like you.


    He either fears his fate too much,
    Or his desert is small,
    Who dares not put it to the touch,
    To win or lose it all.”

“I dare not ask the question whether there is another!” he said
passionately. “It would break my heart to know it!”

“Yet is it wise to leave it unasked? You must not waste your life upon
an 'if'!”

“I tell you I dare not!,”

“May I find it out for you?” I asked, with the freedom of an old friend.

“No, no!” he replied with a pained look. “I entreat you to say nothing.
Let it wait.”

“As you please,” I said: and judged it best to say no more just then.
“But this evening,” I thought, “I will call on the Earl. I may be able
to see how the land lies, without so much as saying a word!”

It was a very hot afternoon--too hot to go for a walk or do anything--or
else it wouldn't have happened, I believe.

In the first place, I want to know--dear Child who reads this!--why
Fairies should always be teaching us to do our duty, and lecturing us
when we go wrong, and we should never teach them anything? You can't
mean to say that Fairies are never greedy, or selfish, or cross, or
deceitful, because that would be nonsense, you know. Well then, don't
you think they might be all the better for a little lecturing and
punishing now and then?

I really don't see why it shouldn't be tried, and I'm almost sure that,
if you could only catch a Fairy, and put it in the corner, and give it
nothing but bread and water for a day or two, you'd find it quite an
improved character--it would take down its conceit a little, at all
events.

The next question is, what is the best time for seeing Fairies? I
believe I can tell you all about that.

The first rule is, that it must be a very hot day--that we may consider
as settled: and you must be just a little sleepy--but not too sleepy to
keep your eyes open, mind. Well, and you ought to feel a little--what
one may call “fairyish “--the Scotch call it “eerie,” and perhaps that's
a prettier word; if you don't know what it means, I'm afraid I can
hardly explain it; you must wait till you meet a Fairy, and then you'll
know.

And the last rule is, that the crickets should not be chirping. I can't
stop to explain that: you must take it on trust for the present.

So, if all these things happen together, you have a good chance of
seeing a Fairy--or at least a much better chance than if they didn't.

The first thing I noticed, as I went lazily along through an open place
in the wood, was a large Beetle lying struggling on its back, and I went
down upon one knee to help the poor thing to its feet again. In some
things, you know, you ca'n't be quite sure what an insect would like:
for instance, I never could quite settle, supposing I were a moth,
whether I would rather be kept out of the candle, or be allowed to fly
straight in and get burnt--or again, supposing I were a spider, I'm not
sure if I should be quite pleased to have my web torn down, and the fly
let loose--but I feel quite certain that, if I were a beetle and had
rolled over on my back, I should always be glad to be helped up again.

So, as I was saying, I had gone down upon one knee, and was just
reaching out a little stick to turn the Beetle over, when I saw a sight
that made me draw back hastily and hold my breath, for fear of making
any noise and frightening the little creature a way.

Not that she looked as if she would be easily frightened: she seemed so
good and gentle that I'm sure she would never expect that any one could
wish to hurt her. She was only a few inches high, and was dressed in
green, so that you really would hardly have noticed her among the long
grass; and she was so delicate and graceful that she quite seemed to
belong to the place, almost as if she were one of the flowers. I may
tell you, besides, that she had no wings (I don't believe in Fairies
with wings), and that she had quantities of long brown hair and large
earnest brown eyes, and then I shall have done all I can to give you an
idea of her.

{Image...Fairy-sylvie}

Sylvie (I found out her name afterwards) had knelt down, just as I was
doing, to help the Beetle; but it needed more than a little stick for
her to get it on its legs again; it was as much as she could do, with
both arms, to roll the heavy thing over; and all the while she was
talking to it, half scolding and half comforting, as a nurse might do
with a child that had fallen down.

“There, there! You needn't cry so much about it. You're not killed
yet--though if you were, you couldn't cry, you know, and so it's a
general rule against crying, my dear! And how did you come to
tumble over? But I can see well enough how it was--I needn't ask you
that--walking over sand-pits with your chin in the air, as usual. Of
course if you go among sand-pits like that, you must expect to tumble.
You should look.”

The Beetle murmured something that sounded like “I did look,” and Sylvie
went on again.

“But I know you didn't! You never do! You always walk with your chin
up--you're so dreadfully conceited. Well, let's see how many legs are
broken this time. Why, none of them, I declare! And what's the good of
having six legs, my dear, if you can only kick them all about in the air
when you tumble? Legs are meant to walk with, you know. Now don't begin
putting out your wings yet; I've more to say. Go to the frog that
lives behind that buttercup--give him my compliments--Sylvie's
compliments--can you say compliments'?”

The Beetle tried and, I suppose, succeeded.

“Yes, that's right. And tell him he's to give you some of that salve I
left with him yesterday. And you'd better get him to rub it in for you.
He's got rather cold hands, but you mustn't mind that.”

I think the Beetle must have shuddered at this idea, for Sylvie went on
in a graver tone. “Now you needn't pretend to be so particular as all
that, as if you were too grand to be rubbed by a frog. The fact is, you
ought to be very much obliged to him. Suppose you could get nobody but a
toad to do it, how would you like that?”

There was a little pause, and then Sylvie added “Now you may go. Be a
good beetle, and don't keep your chin in the air.” And then began one of
those performances of humming, and whizzing, and restless banging about,
such as a beetle indulges in when it has decided on flying, but hasn't
quite made up its mind which way to go. At last, in one of its awkward
zigzags, it managed to fly right into my face, and, by the time I had
recovered from the shock, the little Fairy was gone.

I looked about in all directions for the little creature, but there
was no trace of her--and my 'eerie' feeling was quite gone off, and the
crickets were chirping again merrily--so I knew she was really gone.

And now I've got time to tell you the rule about the crickets. They
always leave off chirping when a Fairy goes by--because a Fairy's a kind
of queen over them, I suppose--at all events it's a much grander
thing than a cricket--so whenever you're walking out, and the crickets
suddenly leave off chirping, you may be sure that they see a Fairy.

I walked on sadly enough, you may be sure. However, I comforted myself
with thinking “It's been a very wonderful afternoon, so far. I'll just
go quietly on and look about me, and I shouldn't wonder if I were to
come across another Fairy somewhere.”

Peering about in this way, I happened to notice a plant with rounded
leaves, and with queer little holes cut in the middle of several of
them. “Ah, the leafcutter bee!” I carelessly remarked--you know I am
very learned in Natural History (for instance, I can always tell kittens
from chickens at one glance)--and I was passing on, when a sudden
thought made me stoop down and examine the leaves.

Then a little thrill of delight ran through me--for I noticed that the
holes were all arranged so as to form letters; there were three leaves
side by side, with “B,” “R,” and “U” marked on them, and after some
search I found two more, which contained an “N” and an “O.”

And then, all in a moment, a flash of inner light seemed to illumine
a part of my life that had all but faded into oblivion--the strange
visions I had experienced during my journey to Elveston: and with a
thrill of delight I thought “Those visions are destined to be linked
with my waking life!”

By this time the 'eerie' feeling had come back again, and I suddenly
observed that no crickets were chirping; so I felt quite sure that Bruno
was somewhere very near.

And so indeed he was--so near that I had very nearly walked over him
without seeing him; which would have been dreadful, always supposing
that Fairies can be walked over my own belief is that they are something
of the nature of Will-o'-the-wisps: and there's no walking over them.

Think of any pretty little boy you know, with rosy cheeks, large dark
eyes, and tangled brown hair, and then fancy him made small enough to go
comfortably into a coffee-cup, and you'll have a very fair idea of him.

“What's your name, little one?” I began, in as soft a voice as I could
manage. And, by the way, why is it we always begin by asking little
children their names? Is it because we fancy a name will help to make
them a little bigger? You never thought of asking a real large man his
name, now, did you? But, however that may be, I felt it quite necessary
to know his name; so, as he didn't answer my question, I asked it again
a little louder. “What's your name, my little man?”

“What's oors?” he said, without looking up.

I told him my name quite gently, for he was much too small to be angry
with.

“Duke of Anything?” he asked, just looking at me for a moment, and then
going on with his work.

“Not Duke at all,” I said, a little ashamed of having to confess it.

“Oo're big enough to be two Dukes,” said the little creature. “I suppose
oo're Sir Something, then?”

“No,” I said, feeling more and more ashamed. “I haven't got any title.”

The Fairy seemed to think that in that case I really wasn't worth the
trouble of talking to, for he quietly went on digging, and tearing the
flowers to pieces.

After a few minutes I tried again. “Please tell me what your name is.”

“Bruno,” the little fellow answered, very readily. “Why didn't oo say
'please' before?”

“That's something like what we used to be taught in the nursery,” I
thought to myself, looking back through the long years (about a hundred
of them, since you ask the question), to the time when I was a little
child. And here an idea came into my head, and I asked him “Aren't you
one of the Fairies that teach children to be good?”

“Well, we have to do that sometimes,” said Bruno, “and a dreadful bother
it is.” As he said this, he savagely tore a heartsease in two, and
trampled on the pieces.

“What are you doing there, Bruno?” I said.

“Spoiling Sylvie's garden,” was all the answer Bruno would give at
first. But, as he went on tearing up the flowers, he muttered to himself
“The nasty cross thing wouldn't let me go and play this morning,--said
I must finish my lessons first--lessons, indeed! I'll vex her finely,
though!”

“Oh, Bruno, you shouldn't do that!” I cried. “Don't you know that's
revenge? And revenge is a wicked, cruel, dangerous thing!”

“River-edge?” said Bruno. “What a funny word! I suppose oo call it cruel
and dangerous 'cause, if oo wented too far and tumbleded in, oo'd get
drownded.”

“No, not river-edge,” I explained: “revenge” (saying the word very
slowly). But I couldn't help thinking that Bruno's explanation did very
well for either word.

“Oh!” said Bruno, opening his eyes very wide, but without trying to
repeat the word.

“Come! Try and pronounce it, Bruno!” I said, cheerfully. “Re-venge,
re-venge.”

But Bruno only tossed his little head, and said he couldn't; that his
mouth wasn't the right shape for words of that kind. And the more I
laughed, the more sulky the little fellow got about it.

“Well, never mind, my little man!” I said. “Shall I help you with that
job?”

“Yes, please,” Bruno said, quite pacified.

“Only I wiss I could think of somefin to vex her more than this. Oo
don't know how hard it is to make her angry!”

“Now listen to me, Bruno, and I'll teach you quite a splendid kind of
revenge!”

“Somefin that'll vex her finely?” he asked with gleaming eyes.

“Something that will vex her finely. First, we'll get up all the weeds
in her garden. See, there are a good many at this end quite hiding the
flowers.”

“But that won't vex her!” said Bruno.

“After that,” I said, without noticing the remark, “we'll water this
highest bed--up here. You see it's getting quite dry and dusty.”

Bruno looked at me inquisitively, but he said nothing this time.

“Then after that,” I went on, “the walks want sweeping a bit; and I
think you might cut down that tall nettle--it's so close to the garden
that it's quite in the way--”

“What is oo talking about?” Bruno impatiently interrupted me. “All that
won't vex her a bit!”

“Won't it?” I said, innocently. “Then, after that, suppose we put in
some of these coloured pebbles--just to mark the divisions between
the different kinds of flowers, you know. That'll have a very pretty
effect.”

Bruno turned round and had another good stare at me. At last there
came an odd little twinkle into his eyes, and he said, with quite a new
meaning in his voice, “That'll do nicely. Let's put 'em in rows--all the
red together, and all the blue together.”

“That'll do capitally,” I said; “and then--what kind of flowers does
Sylvie like best?”

Bruno had to put his thumb in his mouth and consider a little before he
could answer. “Violets,” he said, at last.

“There's a beautiful bed of violets down by the brook--”

“Oh, let's fetch 'em!” cried Bruno, giving a little skip into the air.
“Here! Catch hold of my hand, and I'll help oo along. The grass is
rather thick down that way.”

I couldn't help laughing at his having so entirely forgotten what a
big creature he was talking to. “No, not yet, Bruno,” I said: “we must
consider what's the right thing to do first. You see we've got quite a
business before us.”

“Yes, let's consider,” said Bruno, putting his thumb into his mouth
again, and sitting down upon a dead mouse.

“What do you keep that mouse for?” I said. “You should either bury it,
or else throw it into the brook.”

“Why, it's to measure with!” cried Bruno. “How ever would oo do a garden
without one? We make each bed three mouses and a half long, and two
mouses wide.”

I stopped him, as he was dragging it off by the tail to show me how it
was used, for I was half afraid the 'eerie' feeling might go off before
we had finished the garden, and in that case I should see no more of him
or Sylvie. “I think the best way will be for you to weed the beds, while
I sort out these pebbles, ready to mark the walks with.”

“That's it!” cried Bruno. “And I'll tell oo about the caterpillars while
we work.”

“Ah, let's hear about the caterpillars,” I said, as I drew the pebbles
together into a heap and began dividing them into colours.

And Bruno went on in a low, rapid tone, more as if he were talking to
himself. “Yesterday I saw two little caterpillars, when I was sitting
by the brook, just where oo go into the wood. They were quite green, and
they had yellow eyes, and they didn't see me. And one of them had got a
moth's wing to carry--a great brown moth's wing, oo know, all dry, with
feathers. So he couldn't want it to eat, I should think--perhaps he
meant to make a cloak for the winter?”

“Perhaps,” I said, for Bruno had twisted up the last word into a sort of
question, and was looking at me for an answer.

One word was quite enough for the little fellow, and he went on merrily.
“Well, and so he didn't want the other caterpillar to see the moth's
wing, oo know--so what must he do but try to carry it with all his left
legs, and he tried to walk on the other set. Of course he toppled over
after that.”

“After what?” I said, catching at the last word, for, to tell the truth,
I hadn't been attending much.

“He toppled over,” Bruno repeated, very gravely, “and if oo ever saw a
caterpillar topple over, oo'd know it's a welly serious thing, and not
sit grinning like that--and I sha'n't tell oo no more!”

“Indeed and indeed, Bruno, I didn't mean to grin. See, I'm quite grave
again now.”

But Bruno only folded his arms, and said “Don't tell me. I see a little
twinkle in one of oor eyes--just like the moon.”

“Why do you think I'm like the moon, Bruno?” I asked.

“Oor face is large and round like the moon,” Bruno answered, looking
at me thoughtfully. “It doosn't shine quite so bright--but it's more
cleaner.”

I couldn't help smiling at this. “You know I sometimes wash my face,
Bruno. The moon never does that.”

“Oh, doosn't she though!” cried Bruno; and he leant forwards and added
in a solemn whisper, “The moon's face gets dirtier and dirtier every
night, till it's black all across. And then, when it's dirty all
over--so--” (he passed his hand across his own rosy cheeks as he spoke)
“then she washes it.”

“Then it's all clean again, isn't it?”

“Not all in a moment,” said Bruno. “What a deal of teaching oo wants!
She washes it little by little--only she begins at the other edge, oo
know.”

By this time he was sitting quietly on the dead mouse with his arms
folded, and the weeding wasn't getting on a bit: so I had to say “Work
first, pleasure afterwards: no more talking till that bed's finished.”






CHAPTER 15. BRUNO'S REVENGE.

After that we had a few minutes of silence, while I sorted out the
pebbles, and amused myself with watching Bruno's plan of gardening. It
was quite a new plan to me: he always measured each bed before he weeded
it, as if he was afraid the weeding would make it shrink; and once, when
it came out longer than he wished, he set to work to thump the mouse
with his little fist, crying out “There now! It's all gone wrong again!
Why don't oo keep oor tail straight when I tell oo!”

“I'll tell you what I'll do,” Bruno said in a half-whisper, as we
worked. “Oo like Fairies, don't oo?”

“Yes,” I said: “of course I do, or I shouldn't have come here. I should
have gone to some place where there are no Fairies.”

Bruno laughed contemptuously. “Why, oo might as well say oo'd go to some
place where there wasn't any air--supposing oo didn't like air!”

This was a rather difficult idea to grasp. I tried a change of subject.
“You're nearly the first Fairy I ever saw. Have you ever seen any people
besides me?”

“Plenty!” said Bruno. “We see'em when we walk in the road.”

“But they ca'n't see you. How is it they never tread on you?”

“Ca'n't tread on us,” said Bruno, looking amused at my ignorance. “Why,
suppose oo're walking, here--so--” (making little marks on the ground)
“and suppose there's a Fairy--that's me--walking here. Very well then,
oo put one foot here, and one foot here, so oo doosn't tread on the
Fairy.”

This was all very well as an explanation, but it didn't convince me.
“Why shouldn't I put one foot on the Fairy?” I asked.

“I don't know why,” the little fellow said in a thoughtful tone. “But
I know oo wouldn't. Nobody never walked on the top of a Fairy. Now
I'll tell oo what I'll do, as oo're so fond of Fairies. I'll get oo
an invitation to the Fairy-King's dinner-party. I know one of the
head-waiters.”

I couldn't help laughing at this idea. “Do the waiters invite the
guests?” I asked.

“Oh, not to sit down!” Bruno said. “But to wait at table. Oo'd like
that, wouldn't oo? To hand about plates, and so on.”

“Well, but that's not so nice as sitting at the table, is it?”

“Of course it isn't,” Bruno said, in a tone as if he rather pitied my
ignorance; “but if oo're not even Sir Anything, oo ca'n't expect to be
allowed to sit at the table, oo know.”

I said, as meekly as I could, that I didn't expect it, but it was the
only way of going to a dinner-party that I really enjoyed. And Bruno
tossed his head, and said, in a rather offended tone that I might do as
I pleased--there were many he knew that would give their ears to go.

“Have you ever been yourself, Bruno?”

“They invited me once, last week,” Bruno said, very gravely. “It was
to wash up the soup-plates--no, the cheese-plates I mean that was
grand enough. And I waited at table. And I didn't hardly make only one
mistake.”

“What was it?” I said. “You needn't mind telling me.”

“Only bringing scissors to cut the beef with,” Bruno said carelessly.
“But the grandest thing of all was, I fetched the King a glass of
cider!”

“That was grand!” I said, biting my lip to keep myself from laughing.

“Wasn't it?” said Bruno, very earnestly. “Oo know it isn't every one
that's had such an honour as that!”

This set me thinking of the various queer things we call “an honour” in
this world, but which, after all, haven't a bit more honour in them than
what Bruno enjoyed, when he took the King a glass of cider.

I don't know how long I might not have dreamed on in this way, if Bruno
hadn't suddenly roused me. “Oh, come here quick!” he cried, in a state
of the wildest excitement. “Catch hold of his other horn! I ca'n't hold
him more than a minute!”

He was struggling desperately with a great snail, clinging to one of its
horns, and nearly breaking his poor little back in his efforts to drag
it over a blade of grass.

I saw we should have no more gardening if I let this sort of thing go
on, so I quietly took the snail away, and put it on a bank where he
couldn't reach it. “We'll hunt it afterwards, Bruno,” I said, “if you
really want to catch it. But what's the use of it when you've got it?”

“What's the use of a fox when oo've got it?” said Bruno. “I know oo big
things hunt foxes.”

I tried to think of some good reason why “big things” should hunt foxes,
and he should not hunt snails, but none came into my head: so I said at
last, “Well, I suppose one's as good as the other. I'll go snail-hunting
myself some day.”

“I should think oo wouldn't be so silly,” said Bruno, “as to go
snail-hunting by oor-self. Why, oo'd never get the snail along, if oo
hadn't somebody to hold on to his other horn!”

“Of course I sha'n't go alone,” I said, quite gravely. “By the way,
is that the best kind to hunt, or do you recommend the ones without
shells?”

“Oh, no, we never hunt the ones without shells,” Bruno said, with a
little shudder at the thought of it. “They're always so cross about it;
and then, if oo tumbles over them, they're ever so sticky!”

By this time we had nearly finished the garden. I had fetched some
violets, and Bruno was just helping me to put in the last, when he
suddenly stopped and said “I'm tired.”

“Rest then,” I said: “I can go on without you, quite well.”

Bruno needed no second invitation: he at once began arranging the dead
mouse as a kind of sofa. “And I'll sing oo a little song,” he said, as
he rolled it about.

“Do,” said I: “I like songs very much.”

“Which song will oo choose?” Bruno said, as he dragged the mouse into a
place where he could get a good view of me. “'Ting, ting, ting' is the
nicest.”

There was no resisting such a strong hint as this: however, I pretended
to think about it for a moment, and then said “Well, I like 'Ting, ting,
ting,' best of all.”

{Image...Bruno's revenge}

“That shows oo're a good judge of music,” Bruno said, with a pleased
look. “How many hare-bells would oo like?” And he put his thumb into his
mouth to help me to consider.

As there was only one cluster of hare-bells within easy reach, I said
very gravely that I thought one would do this time, and I picked it
and gave it to him. Bruno ran his hand once or twice up and down
the flowers, like a musician trying an instrument, producing a most
delicious delicate tinkling as he did so. I had never heard flower-music
before--I don't think one can, unless one's in the 'eerie' state and I
don't know quite how to give you an idea of what it was like, except by
saying that it sounded like a peal of bells a thousand miles off.
When he had satisfied himself that the flowers were in tune, he seated
himself on the dead mouse (he never seemed really comfortable anywhere
else), and, looking up at me with a merry twinkle in his eyes, he began.
By the way, the tune was rather a curious one, and you might like to try
it for yourself, so here are the notes.

{Image...Music for hare-bells}


    “Rise, oh, rise!  The daylight dies:
     The owls are hooting, ting, ting, ting!
     Wake, oh, wake!  Beside the lake
     The elves are fluting, ting, ting, ting!
     Welcoming our Fairy King,
     We sing, sing, sing.”

He sang the first four lines briskly and merrily, making the hare-bells
chime in time with the music; but the last two he sang quite slowly and
gently, and merely waved the flowers backwards and forwards. Then he
left off to explain. “The Fairy-King is Oberon, and he lives across the
lake--and sometimes he comes in a little boat--and we go and meet him
and then we sing this song, you know.”

“And then you go and dine with him?” I said, mischievously.

“Oo shouldn't talk,” Bruno hastily said: “it interrupts the song so.”

I said I wouldn't do it again.

“I never talk myself when I'm singing,” he went on very gravely: “so oo
shouldn't either.” Then he tuned the hare-bells once more, and sang:---


    “Hear, oh, hear!  From far and near
    The music stealing, ting, ting, ting!
    Fairy belts adown the dells
    Are merrily pealing, ting, ting, ting!
    Welcoming our Fairy King,
    We ring, ring, ring.

    “See, oh, see!  On every tree
    What lamps are shining, ting, ting, ting!
    They are eyes of fiery flies
    To light our dining, ting, ting, ting!
    Welcoming our Fairy King
    They swing, swing, swing.

    “Haste, oh haste, to take and taste
    The dainties waiting, ting, ting, ting!
    Honey-dew is stored--”

“Hush, Bruno!” I interrupted in a warning whisper. “She's coming!”

Bruno checked his song, and, as she slowly made her way through the
long grass, he suddenly rushed out headlong at her like a little bull,
shouting “Look the other way! Look the other way!”

“Which way?” Sylvie asked, in rather a frightened tone, as she looked
round in all directions to see where the danger could be.

“That way!” said Bruno, carefully turning her round with her face to the
wood. “Now, walk backwards walk gently--don't be frightened: oo sha'n't
trip!”

But Sylvie did trip notwithstanding: in fact he led her, in his hurry,
across so many little sticks and stones, that it was really a wonder
the poor child could keep on her feet at all. But he was far too much
excited to think of what he was doing.

I silently pointed out to Bruno the best place to lead her to, so as to
get a view of the whole garden at once: it was a little rising ground,
about the height of a potato; and, when they had mounted it, I drew back
into the shade, that Sylvie mightn't see me.

I heard Bruno cry out triumphantly “Now oo may look!” and then followed
a clapping of hands, but it was all done by Bruno himself. Sylvie: was
silent--she only stood and gazed with her hands clasped together, and I
was half afraid she didn't like it after all.

Bruno too was watching her anxiously, and when she jumped down off the
mound, and began wandering up and down the little walks, he cautiously
followed her about, evidently anxious that she should form her own
opinion of it all, without any hint from him. And when at last she drew
a long breath, and gave her verdict--in a hurried whisper, and without
the slightest regard to grammar--“It's the loveliest thing as I never
saw in all my life before!” the little fellow looked as well pleased
as if it had been given by all the judges and juries in England put
together.

“And did you really do it all by yourself, Bruno?” said Sylvie. “And all
for me?”

“I was helped a bit,” Bruno began, with a merry little laugh at her
surprise. “We've been at it all the afternoon--I thought oo'd like--”
 and here the poor little fellow's lip began to quiver, and all in a
moment he burst out crying, and running up to Sylvie he flung his arms
passionately round her neck, and hid his face on her shoulder.

There was a little quiver in Sylvie's voice too, as she whispered “Why,
what's the matter, darling?” and tried to lift up his head and kiss him.

But Bruno only clung to her, sobbing, and wouldn't be comforted till
he had confessed. “I tried--to spoil oor garden--first--but I'll
never--never--” and then came another burst of tears, which drowned the
rest of the sentence. At last he got out the words “I liked--putting in
the flowers--for oo, Sylvie--and I never was so happy before.” And the
rosy little face came up at last to be kissed, all wet with tears as it
was.

Sylvie was crying too by this time, and she said nothing but “Bruno,
dear!” and “I never was so happy before,” though why these two children
who had never been so happy before should both be crying was a mystery
to me.

I felt very happy too, but of course I didn't cry: “big things” never
do, you know we leave all that to the Fairies. Only I think it must have
been raining a little just then, for I found a drop or two on my cheeks.

After that they went through the whole garden again, flower by flower,
as if it were a long sentence they were spelling out, with kisses for
commas, and a great hug by way of a full-stop when they got to the end.

“Doos oo know, that was my river-edge, Sylvie?” Bruno solemnly began.

Sylvie laughed merrily. “What do you mean?” she said. And she pushed
back her heavy brown hair with both hands, and looked at him with
dancing eyes in which the big teardrops were still glittering.

Bruno drew in a long breath, and made up his mouth for a great effort.
“I mean revenge,” he said: “now oo under'tand.” And he looked so happy
and proud at having said the word right at last, that I quite envied
him. I rather think Sylvie didn't “under'tand” at all; but she gave him
a little kiss on each cheek, which seemed to do just as well.

So they wandered off lovingly together, in among the buttercups, each
with an arm twined round the other, whispering and laughing as they
went, and never so much as once looked back at poor me. Yes, once,
just before I quite lost sight of them, Bruno half turned his head, and
nodded me a saucy little good-bye over one shoulder. And that was all
the thanks I got for my trouble. The very last thing I saw of them was
this--Sylvie was stooping down with her arms round Bruno's neck, and
saying coaxingly in his ear, “Do you know, Bruno, I've quite forgotten
that hard word. Do say it once more. Come! Only this once, dear!”

But Bruno wouldn't try it again.






CHAPTER 16. A CHANGED CROCODILE.

The Marvellous--the Mysterious--had quite passed out of my life for the
moment: and the Common-place reigned supreme. I turned in the direction
of the Earl's house, as it was now 'the witching hour' of five, and I
knew I should find them ready for a cup of tea and a quiet chat.

Lady Muriel and her father gave me a delightfully warm welcome. They
were not of the folk we meet in fashionable drawing-rooms who conceal
all such feelings as they may chance to possess beneath the impenetrable
mask of a conventional placidity. 'The Man with the Iron Mask' was, no
doubt, a rarity and a marvel in his own age: in modern London no one
would turn his head to give him a second look! No, these were real
people. When they looked pleased, it meant that they were pleased: and
when Lady Muriel said, with a bright smile, “I'm very glad to see you
again!”, I knew that it was true.

Still I did not venture to disobey the injunctions--crazy as I felt
them to be--of the lovesick young Doctor, by so much as alluding to his
existence: and it was only after they had given me full details of a
projected picnic, to which they invited me, that Lady Muriel exclaimed,
almost as an after-thought, “and do, if you can, bring Doctor Forester
with you! I'm sure a day in the country would do him good. I'm afraid he
studies too much--”

It was 'on the tip of my tongue' to quote the words “His only books are
woman's looks!” but I checked myself just in time--with something of the
feeling of one who has crossed a street, and has been all but run over
by a passing 'Hansom.'

“--and I think he has too lonely a life,” she went on, with a gentle
earnestness that left no room whatever to suspect a double meaning. “Do
get him to come! And don't forget the day, Tuesday week. We can drive
you over. It would be a pity to go by rail----there is so much pretty
scenery on the road. And our open carriage just holds four.”

“Oh, I'll persuade him to come!” I said with confidence--thinking “it
would take all my powers of persuasion to keep him away!”

The picnic was to take place in ten days: and though Arthur readily
accepted the invitation I brought him, nothing that I could say would
induce him to call--either with me or without me on the Earl and his
daughter in the meanwhile. No: he feared to “wear out his welcome,” he
said: they had “seen enough of him for one while”: and, when at last the
day for the expedition arrived, he was so childishly nervous and
uneasy that I thought it best so to arrange our plans that we should go
separately to the house--my intention being to arrive some time after
him, so as to give him time to get over a meeting.

With this object I purposely made a considerable circuit on my way to
the Hall (as we called the Earl's house): “and if I could only manage to
lose my way a bit,” I thought to myself, “that would suit me capitally!”

In this I succeeded better, and sooner, than I had ventured to hope
for. The path through the wood had been made familiar to me, by many a
solitary stroll, in my former visit to Elveston; and how I could have
so suddenly and so entirely lost it--even though I was so engrossed in
thinking of Arthur and his lady-love that I heeded little else--was a
mystery to me. “And this open place,” I said to myself, “seems to have
some memory about it I cannot distinctly recall--surely it is the very
spot where I saw those Fairy-Children! But I hope there are no snakes
about!” I mused aloud, taking my seat on a fallen tree. “I certainly do
not like snakes--and I don't suppose Bruno likes them, either!”

“No, he doesn't like them!” said a demure little voice at my side. “He's
not afraid of them, you know. But he doesn't like them. He says they're
too waggly!”

Words fail me to describe the beauty of the little group--couched on a
patch of moss, on the trunk of the fallen tree, that met my eager gaze:
Sylvie reclining with her elbow buried in the moss, and her rosy cheek
resting in the palm of her hand, and Bruno stretched at her feet with
his head in her lap.

{Image...Fairies resting}

“Too waggly?” was all I could say in so sudden an emergency.

“I'm not praticular,” Bruno said, carelessly: “but I do like straight
animals best--”

“But you like a dog when it wags its tail,” Sylvie interrupted. “You
know you do, Bruno!”

“But there's more of a dog, isn't there, Mister Sir?” Bruno appealed to
me. “You wouldn't like to have a dog if it hadn't got nuffin but a head
and a tail?”

I admitted that a dog of that kind would be uninteresting.

“There isn't such a dog as that,” Sylvie thoughtfully remarked.

“But there would be,” cried Bruno, “if the Professor shortened it up for
us!”

“Shortened it up?” I said. “That's something new. How does he do it?”

“He's got a curious machine,” Sylvie was beginning to explain.

“A welly curious machine,” Bruno broke in, not at all willing to
have the story thus taken out of his mouth, “and if oo puts
in--some-finoruvver--at one end, oo know and he turns the handle--and it
comes out at the uvver end, oh, ever so short!”

“As short as short!” Sylvie echoed.

“And one day when we was in Outland, oo know--before we came to
Fairyland me and Sylvie took him a big Crocodile. And he shortened it up
for us. And it did look so funny! And it kept looking round, and saying
'wherever is the rest of me got to?' And then its eyes looked unhappy--”

“Not both its eyes,” Sylvie interrupted.

“Course not!” said the little fellow. “Only the eye that couldn't
see wherever the rest of it had got to. But the eye that could see
wherever--”

“How short was the crocodile?” I asked, as the story was getting a
little complicated.

“Half as short again as when we caught it--so long,” said Bruno,
spreading out his arms to their full stretch.

I tried to calculate what this would come to, but it was too hard for
me. Please make it out for me, dear Child who reads this!

“But you didn't leave the poor thing so short as that, did you?”

“Well, no. Sylvie and me took it back again and we got it stretched
to--to--how much was it, Sylvie?”

“Two times and a half, and a little bit more,” said Sylvie.

“It wouldn't like that better than the other way, I'm afraid?”

“Oh, but it did though!” Bruno put in eagerly. “It were proud of its new
tail! Oo never saw a Crocodile so proud! Why, it could go round and walk
on the top of its tail, and along its back, all the way to its head!”

{Image...A changed crocodile}

“Not quite all the way,” said Sylvie. “It couldn't, you know.”

“Ah, but it did, once!” Bruno cried triumphantly. “Oo weren't
looking--but I watched it. And it walked on tippiety-toe, so as it
wouldn't wake itself, 'cause it thought it were asleep. And it got both
its paws on its tail. And it walked and it walked all the way along its
back. And it walked and it walked on its forehead. And it walked a tiny
little way down its nose! There now!”

This was a good deal worse than the last puzzle. Please, dear Child,
help again!

“I don't believe no Crocodile never walked along its own forehead!”
 Sylvie cried, too much excited by the controversy to limit the number of
her negatives.

“Oo don't know the reason why it did it!” Bruno scornfully retorted. “It
had a welly good reason. I heerd it say 'Why shouldn't I walk on my own
forehead?' So a course it did, oo know!”

“If that's a good reason, Bruno,” I said, “why shouldn't you get up that
tree?”

“Shall, in a minute,” said Bruno: “soon as we've done talking. Only two
peoples ca'n't talk comfably togevver, when one's getting up a tree, and
the other isn't!”

It appeared to me that a conversation would scarcely be 'comfable' while
trees were being climbed, even if both the 'peoples' were doing it: but
it was evidently dangerous to oppose any theory of Bruno's; so I thought
it best to let the question drop, and to ask for an account of the
machine that made things longer.

This time Bruno was at a loss, and left it to Sylvie. “It's like a
mangle,” she said: “if things are put in, they get squoze--”

“Squeezeled!” Bruno interrupted.

“Yes.” Sylvie accepted the correction, but did not attempt to pronounce
the word, which was evidently new to her. “They get--like that--and they
come out, oh, ever so long!”

“Once,” Bruno began again, “Sylvie and me writed--”

“Wrote!” Sylvie whispered.

“Well, we wroted a Nursery-Song, and the Professor mangled it longer for
us. It were 'There was a little Man, And he had a little gun, And the
bullets--'”

“I know the rest,” I interrupted. “But would you say it long I mean the
way that it came out of the mangle?”

“We'll get the Professor to sing it for you,” said Sylvie. “It would
spoil it to say it.”

“I would like to meet the Professor,” I said. “And I would like to take
you all with me, to see some friends of mine, that live near here. Would
you like to come?”

“I don't think the Professor would like to come,” said Sylvie. “He's
very shy. But we'd like it very much. Only we'd better not come this
size, you know.”

The difficulty had occurred to me already: and I had felt that perhaps
there would be a slight awkwardness in introducing two such tiny friends
into Society. “What size will you be?” I enquired.

“We'd better come as--common children,” Sylvie thoughtfully replied.
“That's the easiest size to manage.”

“Could you come to-day?” I said, thinking “then we could have you at the
picnic!”

Sylvie considered a little. “Not to-day,” she replied. “We haven't got
the things ready. We'll come on--Tuesday next, if you like. And now,
really Bruno, you must come and do your lessons.”

“I wiss oo wouldn't say 'really Bruno!'” the little fellow pleaded, with
pouting lips that made him look prettier than ever. “It always show's
there's something horrid coming! And I won't kiss you, if you're so
unkind.”

“Ah, but you have kissed me!” Sylvie exclaimed in merry triumph.

“Well then, I'll unkiss you!” And he threw his arms round her neck for
this novel, but apparently not very painful, operation.

“It's very like kissing!” Sylvie remarked, as soon as her lips were
again free for speech.

“Oo don't know nuffin about it! It were just the conkery!” Bruno replied
with much severity, as he marched away.

Sylvie turned her laughing face to me. “Shall we come on Tuesday?” she
said.

“Very well,” I said: “let it be Tuesday next. But where is the
Professor? Did he come with you to Fairyland?”

“No,” said Sylvie. “But he promised he'd come and see us, some day. He's
getting his Lecture ready. So he has to stay at home.”

“At home?” I said dreamily, not feeling quite sure what she had said.

“Yes, Sir. His Lordship and Lady Muriel are at home. Please to walk this
way.”






CHAPTER 17. THE THREE BADGERS.

Still more dreamily I found myself following this imperious voice into
a room where the Earl, his daughter, and Arthur, were seated. “So you're
come at last!” said Lady Muriel, in a tone of playful reproach.

“I was delayed,” I stammered. Though what it was that had delayed me I
should have been puzzled to explain! Luckily no questions were asked.

The carriage was ordered round, the hamper, containing our contribution
to the Picnic, was duly stowed away, and we set forth.

There was no need for me to maintain the conversation. Lady Muriel and
Arthur were evidently on those most delightful of terms, where one has
no need to check thought after thought, as it rises to the lips, with
the fear 'this will not be appreciated--this will give' offence--this
will sound too serious--this will sound flippant': like very old
friends, in fullest sympathy, their talk rippled on.

“Why shouldn't we desert the Picnic and go in some other direction?” she
suddenly suggested. “A party of four is surely self-sufficing? And as
for food, our hamper--”

“Why shouldn't we? What a genuine lady's argument!” laughed Arthur.
“A lady never knows on which side the onus probandi--the burden of
proving--lies!”

“Do men always know?” she asked with a pretty assumption of meek
docility.

“With one exception--the only one I can think of Dr. Watts, who has
asked the senseless question,


    'Why should I deprive my neighbour
    Of his goods against his will?'

Fancy that as an argument for Honesty! His position seems to be 'I'm
only honest because I see no reason to steal.' And the thief's answer
is of course complete and crushing. 'I deprive my neighbour of his goods
because I want them myself. And I do it against his will because there's
no chance of getting him to consent to it!'”

“I can give you one other exception,” I said: “an argument I heard only
to-day---and not by a lady. 'Why shouldn't I walk on my own forehead?'”

“What a curious subject for speculation!” said Lady Muriel, turning to
me, with eyes brimming over with laughter. “May we know who propounded
the question? And did he walk on his own forehead?”

“I ca'n't remember who it was that said it!” I faltered. “Nor where I
heard it!”

“Whoever it was, I hope we shall meet him at the Picnic!” said Lady
Muriel. “It's a far more interesting question than 'Isn't this a
picturesque ruin?' Aren't those autumn-tints lovely?' I shall have to
answer those two questions ten times, at least, this afternoon!”

“That's one of the miseries of Society!” said Arthur. “Why ca'n't people
let one enjoy the beauties of Nature without having to say so every
minute? Why should Life be one long Catechism?”

“It's just as bad at a picture-gallery,” the Earl remarked. “I went to
the R.A. last May, with a conceited young artist: and he did torment me!
I wouldn't have minded his criticizing the pictures himself: but I had
to agree with him--or else to argue the point, which would have been
worse!”

“It was depreciatory criticism, of course?” said Arthur.

“I don't see the 'of course' at all.”

“Why, did you ever know a conceited man dare to praise a picture?
The one thing he dreads (next to not being noticed) is to be proved
fallible! If you once praise a picture, your character for infallibility
hangs by a thread. Suppose it's a figure-picture, and you venture to say
'draws well.' Somebody measures it, and finds one of the proportions an
eighth of an inch wrong. You are disposed of as a critic! 'Did you say
he draws well?' your friends enquire sarcastically, while you hang your
head and blush. No. The only safe course, if any one says 'draws well,'
is to shrug your shoulders. 'Draws well?' you repeat thoughtfully.
'Draws well? Humph!' That's the way to become a great critic!”

Thus airily chatting, after a pleasant drive through a few miles of
beautiful scenery, we reached the rendezvous--a ruined castle--where the
rest of the picnic-party were already assembled. We spent an hour or
two in sauntering about the ruins: gathering at last, by common consent,
into a few random groups, seated on the side of a mound, which commanded
a good view of the old castle and its surroundings.

The momentary silence, that ensued, was promptly taken possession of or,
more correctly, taken into custody--by a Voice; a voice so smooth, so
monotonous, so sonorous, that one felt, with a shudder, that any other
conversation was precluded, and that, unless some desperate remedy were
adopted, we were fated to listen to a Lecture, of which no man could
foresee the end!

The speaker was a broadly-built man, whose large, flat, pale face was
bounded on the North by a fringe of hair, on the East and West by a
fringe of whisker, and on the South by a fringe of beard--the whole
constituting a uniform halo of stubbly whitey-brown bristles. His
features were so entirely destitute of expression that I could not
help saying to myself--helplessly, as if in the clutches of a
night-mare--“they are only penciled in: no final touches as yet!” And
he had a way of ending every sentence with a sudden smile, which spread
like a ripple over that vast blank surface, and was gone in a moment,
leaving behind it such absolute solemnity that I felt impelled to murmur
“it was not he: it was somebody else that smiled!”

“Do you observe?” (such was the phrase with which the wretch began each
sentence) “Do you observe the way in which that broken arch, at the very
top of the ruin, stands out against the clear sky? It is placed exactly
right: and there is exactly enough of it. A little more, or a little
less, and all would be utterly spoiled!”

{Image...A lecture, on art}

“Oh gifted architect!” murmured Arthur, inaudibly to all but Lady Muriel
and myself. “Foreseeing the exact effect his work would have, when in
ruins, centuries after his death!”

“And do you observe, where those trees slope down the hill,” (indicating
them with a sweep of the hand, and with all the patronising air of the
man who has himself arranged the landscape), “how the mists rising from
the river fill up exactly those intervals where we need indistinctness,
for artistic effect? Here, in the foreground, a few clear touches
are not amiss: but a back-ground without mist, you know! It is simply
barbarous! Yes, we need indistinctness!”

The orator looked so pointedly at me as he uttered these words, that I
felt bound to reply, by murmuring something to the effect that I hardly
felt the need myself--and that I enjoyed looking at a thing, better,
when I could see it.

“Quite so!” the great man sharply took me up. “From your point of view,
that is correctly put. But for anyone who has a soul for Art, such a
view is preposterous. Nature is one thing. Art is another. Nature shows
us the world as it is. But Art--as a Latin author tells us--Art, you
know the words have escaped my memory--”

“Ars est celare Naturam,” Arthur interposed with a delightful
promptitude.

“Quite so!” the orator replied with an air of relief. “I thank you! Ars
est celare Naturam but that isn't it.” And, for a few peaceful moments,
the orator brooded, frowningly, over the quotation. The welcome
opportunity was seized, and another voice struck into the silence.

“What a lovely old ruin it is!” cried a young lady in spectacles, the
very embodiment of the March of Mind, looking at Lady Muriel, as the
proper recipient of all really original remarks. “And don't you admire
those autumn-tints on the trees? I do, intensely!”

Lady Muriel shot a meaning glance at me; but replied with admirable
gravity. “Oh yes indeed, indeed! So true!”

“And isn't strange,” said the young lady, passing with startling
suddenness from Sentiment to Science, “that the mere impact of certain
coloured rays upon the Retina should give us such exquisite pleasure?”

“You have studied Physiology, then?” a certain young Doctor courteously
enquired.

“Oh, yes! Isn't it a sweet Science?”

Arthur slightly smiled. “It seems a paradox, does it not,” he went on,
“that the image formed on the Retina should be inverted?”

“It is puzzling,” she candidly admitted. “Why is it we do not see things
upside-down?”

“You have never heard the Theory, then, that the Brain also is
inverted?”

“No indeed! What a beautiful fact! But how is it proved?”

“Thus,” replied Arthur, with all the gravity of ten Professors rolled
into one. “What we call the vertex of the Brain is really its base: and
what we call its base is really its vertex: it is simply a question of
nomenclature.”

This last polysyllable settled the matter.

“How truly delightful!” the fair Scientist exclaimed with enthusiasm. “I
shall ask our Physiological Lecturer why he never gave us that exquisite
Theory!”

“I'd give something to be present when the question is asked!” Arthur
whispered to me, as, at a signal from Lady Muriel, we moved on to
where the hampers had been collected, and devoted ourselves to the more
substantial business of the day.

We 'waited' on ourselves, as the modern barbarism (combining two good
things in such a way as to secure the discomforts of both and the
advantages of neither) of having a picnic with servants to wait upon
you, had not yet reached this out-of-the-way region--and of course the
gentlemen did not even take their places until the ladies had been duly
provided with all imaginable creature-comforts. Then I supplied myself
with a plate of something solid and a glass of something fluid, and
found a place next to Lady Muriel.

It had been left vacant--apparently for Arthur, as a distinguished
stranger: but he had turned shy, and had placed himself next to the
young lady in spectacles, whose high rasping voice had already
cast loose upon Society such ominous phrases as “Man is a bundle of
Qualities!”, “the Objective is only attainable through the Subjective!”.
Arthur was bearing it bravely: but several faces wore a look of alarm,
and I thought it high time to start some less metaphysical topic.

“In my nursery days,” I began, “when the weather didn't suit for an
out-of-doors picnic, we were allowed to have a peculiar kind, that we
enjoyed hugely. The table cloth was laid under the table, instead of
upon it: we sat round it on the floor: and I believe we really enjoyed
that extremely uncomfortable kind of dinner more than we ever did the
orthodox arrangement!”

“I've no doubt of it,” Lady Muriel replied. “There's nothing a
well-regulated child hates so much as regularity. I believe a really
healthy boy would thoroughly enjoy Greek Grammar--if only he might stand
on his head to learn it! And your carpet-dinner certainly spared you one
feature of a picnic, which is to me its chief drawback.”

“The chance of a shower?” I suggested.

“No, the chance--or rather the certainty of live things occurring in
combination with one's food! Spiders are my bugbear. Now my father
has no sympathy with that sentiment--have you, dear?” For the Earl had
caught the word and turned to listen.

“To each his sufferings, all are men,” he replied in the sweet sad tones
that seemed natural to him: “each has his pet aversion.”

“But you'll never guess his!” Lady Muriel said, with that delicate
silvery laugh that was music to my ears.

I declined to attempt the impossible.

“He doesn't like snakes!” she said, in a stage whisper. “Now, isn't
that an unreasonable aversion? Fancy not liking such a dear, coaxingly,
clingingly affectionate creature as a snake!”

“Not like snakes!” I exclaimed. “Is such a thing possible?”

“No, he doesn't like them,” she repeated with a pretty mock-gravity.
“He's not afraid of them, you know. But he doesn't like them. He says
they're too waggly!”

I was more startled than I liked to show. There was something so uncanny
in this echo of the very words I had so lately heard from that little
forest-sprite, that it was only by a great effort I succeeded in saying,
carelessly, “Let us banish so unpleasant a topic. Won't you sing us
something, Lady Muriel? I know you do sing without music.”

“The only songs I know--without music--are desperately sentimental, I'm
afraid! Are your tears all ready?”

“Quite ready! Quite ready!” came from all sides, and Lady Muriel--not
being one of those lady-singers who think it de rigueur to decline
to sing till they have been petitioned three or four times, and have
pleaded failure of memory, loss of voice, and other conclusive reasons
for silence--began at once:--

{Image...'Three badgers on a mossy stone'}


     “There be three Badgers on a mossy stone,
     Beside a dark and covered way:
     Each dreams himself a monarch on his throne,
     And so they stay and stay
     Though their old Father languishes alone,
     They stay, and stay, and stay.

     “There be three Herrings loitering around,
     Longing to share that mossy seat:
     Each Herring tries to sing what she has found
     That makes Life seem so sweet.
     Thus, with a grating and uncertain sound,
     They bleat, and bleat, and bleat,

     “The Mother-Herring, on the salt sea-wave,
     Sought vainly for her absent ones:
     The Father-Badger, writhing in a cave,
     Shrieked out 'Return, my sons!
     You shalt have buns,' he shrieked, 'if you'll behave!
     Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!'

     “'I fear,' said she, 'your sons have gone astray?
     My daughters left me while I slept.'
     'Yes 'm,' the Badger said: 'it's as you say.'
     'They should be better kept.'
     Thus the poor parents talked the time away,
     And wept, and wept, and wept.”

Here Bruno broke off suddenly. “The Herrings' Song wants anuvver tune,
Sylvie,” he said. “And I ca'n't sing it not wizout oo plays it for me!”

{Image...'Three badgers, writhing in a cave'}

Instantly Sylvie seated herself upon a tiny mushroom, that happened
to grow in front of a daisy, as if it were the most ordinary musical
instrument in the world, and played on the petals as if they were the
notes of an organ. And such delicious tiny music it was! Such teeny-tiny
music!

Bruno held his head on one side, and listened very gravely for a few
moments until he had caught the melody. Then the sweet childish voice
rang out once more:--


     “Oh, dear beyond our dearest dreams,
     Fairer than all that fairest seems!
     To feast the rosy hours away,
     To revel in a roundelay!
     How blest would be
     A life so free---
     Ipwergis-Pudding to consume,
     And drink the subtle Azzigoom!

     “And if in other days and hours,
     Mid other fluffs and other flowers,
     The choice were given me how to dine---
     'Name what thou wilt: it shalt be thine!'
     Oh, then I see
     The life for me
     Ipwergis-Pudding to consume,
     And drink the subtle Azzigoom!”

“Oo may leave off playing now, Sylvie. I can do the uvver tune much
better wizout a compliment.”

“He means 'without accompaniment,'” Sylvie whispered, smiling at my
puzzled look: and she pretended to shut up the stops of the organ.


    “The Badgers did not care to talk to Fish:
    They did not dote on Herrings' songs:
    They never had experienced the dish
    To which that name belongs:
    And oh, to pinch their tails,' (this was their wish,)
    'With tongs, yea, tongs, and tongs!'”

I ought to mention that he marked the parenthesis, in the air, with his
finger. It seemed to me a very good plan. You know there's no sound to
represent it--any more than there is for a question.

Suppose you have said to your friend “You are better to-day,” and that
you want him to understand that you are asking him a question, what
can be simpler than just to make a “?”. in the air with your finger? He
would understand you in a moment!

{Image...'Those aged one waxed gay'}


     “'And are not these the Fish,' the Eldest sighed,
     'Whose Mother dwells beneath the foam'
     'They are the Fish!' the Second one replied.
     'And they have left their home!'
     'Oh wicked Fish,' the Youngest Badger cried,
     'To roam, yea, roam, and roam!'
     “Gently the Badgers trotted to the shore
     The sandy shore that fringed the bay:
     Each in his mouth a living Herring bore--
     Those aged ones waxed gay:
     Clear rang their voices through the ocean's roar,
     'Hooray, hooray, hooray!'”

“So they all got safe home again,” Bruno said, after waiting a minute to
see if I had anything to say: he evidently felt that some remark ought
to be made. And I couldn't help wishing there were some such rule in
Society, at the conclusion of a song--that the singer herself should say
the right thing, and not leave it to the audience. Suppose a young lady
has just been warbling ['with a grating and uncertain sound') Shelley's
exquisite lyric 'I arise from dreams of thee': how much nicer it would
be, instead of your having to say “Oh, thank you, thank you!” for the
young lady herself to remark, as she draws on her gloves, while the
impassioned words 'Oh, press it to thine own, or it will break at last!'
are still ringing in your ears, “--but she wouldn't do it, you know. So
it did break at last.”

“And I knew it would!” she added quietly, as I started at the sudden
crash of broken glass. “You've been holding it sideways for the last
minute, and letting all the champagne run out! Were you asleep, I
wonder? I'm so sorry my singing has such a narcotic effect!”






CHAPTER 18. QUEER STREET, NUMBER FORTY.

Lady Muriel was the speaker. And, for the moment, that was the only fact
I could clearly realise. But how she came to be there and how I came
to be there--and how the glass of champagne came to be there--all these
were questions which I felt it better to think out in silence, and not
commit myself to any statement till I understood things a little more
clearly.

'First accumulate a mass of Facts: and then construct a Theory.' That,
I believe, is the true Scientific Method. I sat up, rubbed my eyes, and
began to accumulate Facts.

A smooth grassy slope, bounded, at the upper end, by venerable ruins
half buried in ivy, at the lower, by a stream seen through arching
trees--a dozen gaily-dressed people, seated in little groups here and
there--some open hampers--the debris of a picnic--such were the
Facts accumulated by the Scientific Researcher. And now, what deep,
far-reaching Theory was he to construct from them? The Researcher found
himself at fault. Yet stay! One Fact had escaped his notice. While all
the rest were grouped in twos and in threes, Arthur was alone: while all
tongues were talking, his was silent: while all faces were gay, his was
gloomy and despondent. Here was a Fact indeed! The Researcher felt that
a Theory must be constructed without delay.

Lady Muriel had just risen and left the party. Could that be the cause
of his despondency? The Theory hardly rose to the dignity of a Working
Hypothesis. Clearly more Facts were needed.

The Researcher looked round him once more: and now the Facts accumulated
in such bewildering profusion, that the Theory was lost among them. For
Lady Muriel had gone to meet a strange gentleman, just visible in the
distance: and now she was returning with him, both of them talking
eagerly and joyfully, like old friends who have been long parted: and
now she was moving from group to group, introducing the new hero of the
hour: and he, young, tall, and handsome, moved gracefully at her side,
with the erect bearing and firm tread of a soldier. Verily, the Theory
looked gloomy for Arthur! His eye caught mine, and he crossed to me.

“He is very handsome,” I said.

“Abominably handsome!” muttered Arthur: then smiled at his own bitter
words. “Lucky no one heard me but you!”

“Doctor Forester,” said Lady Muriel, who had just joined us, “let me
introduce to you my cousin Eric Lindon Captain Lindon, I should say.”

Arthur shook off his ill-temper instantly and completely, as he rose and
gave the young soldier his hand. “I have heard of you,” he said. “I'm
very glad to make the acquaintance of Lady Muriel's cousin.”

“Yes, that's all I'm distinguished for, as yet!” said Eric (so we soon
got to call him) with a winning smile. “And I doubt,” glancing at Lady
Muriel, “if it even amounts to a good-conduct-badge! But it's something
to begin with.”

“You must come to my father, Eric,” said Lady Muriel. “I think he's
wandering among the ruins.” And the pair moved on.

The gloomy look returned to Arthur's face: and I could see it was only
to distract his thoughts that he took his place at the side of the
metaphysical young lady, and resumed their interrupted discussion.

“Talking of Herbert Spencer,” he began, “do you really find no logical
difficulty in regarding Nature as a process of involution, passing from
definite coherent homogeneity to indefinite incoherent heterogeneity?”

Amused as I was at the ingenious jumble he had made of Spencer's words,
I kept as grave a face as I could.

“No physical difficulty,” she confidently replied: “but I haven't
studied Logic much. Would you state the difficulty?”

“Well,” said Arthur, “do you accept it as self-evident? Is it as
obvious, for instance, as that 'things that are greater than the same
are greater than one another'?”

“To my mind,” she modestly replied, “it seems quite as obvious. I grasp
both truths by intuition. But other minds may need some logical--I
forget the technical terms.”

“For a complete logical argument,” Arthur began with admirable
solemnity, “we need two prim Misses--”

“Of course!” she interrupted. “I remember that word now. And they
produce--?”

“A Delusion,” said Arthur.

“Ye--es?” she said dubiously. “I don't seem to remember that so well.
But what is the whole argument called?”

“A Sillygism?

“Ah, yes! I remember now. But I don't need a Sillygism, you know, to
prove that mathematical axiom you mentioned.”

“Nor to prove that 'all angles are equal', I suppose?”

“Why, of course not! One takes such a simple truth as that for granted!”

Here I ventured to interpose, and to offer her a plate of strawberries
and cream. I felt really uneasy at the thought that she might detect the
trick: and I contrived, unperceived by her, to shake my head reprovingly
at the pseudo-philosopher. Equally unperceived by her, Arthur slightly
raised his shoulders, and spread his hands abroad, as who should say
“What else can I say to her?” and moved away, leaving her to discuss her
strawberries by 'involution,' or any other way she preferred.

By this time the carriages, that were to convey the revelers to their
respective homes, had begun to assemble outside the Castle-grounds: and
it became evident--now that Lady Muriel's cousin had joined our party
that the problem, how to convey five people to Elveston, with a carriage
that would only hold four, must somehow be solved.

The Honorable Eric Lindon, who was at this moment walking up and down
with Lady Muriel, might have solved it at once, no doubt, by announcing
his intention of returning on foot. Of this solution there did not seem
to be the very smallest probability.

The next best solution, it seemed to me, was that I should walk home:
and this I at once proposed.

“You're sure you don't mind?” said the Earl. “I'm afraid the carriage
wont take us all, and I don't like to suggest to Eric to desert his
cousin so soon.”

“So far from minding it,” I said, “I should prefer it. It will give me
time to sketch this beautiful old ruin.”

“I'll keep you company,” Arthur suddenly said. And, in answer to what
I suppose was a look of surprise on my face, he said in a low voice, “I
really would rather. I shall be quite de trop in the carriage!”

“I think I'll walk too,” said the Earl. “You'll have to be content with
Eric as your escort,” he added, to Lady Muriel, who had joined us while
he was speaking.

“You must be as entertaining as Cerberus--'three gentlemen rolled into
one'--” Lady Muriel said to her companion. “It will be a grand military
exploit!”

“A sort of Forlorn Hope?” the Captain modestly suggested.

“You do pay pretty compliments!” laughed his fair cousin. “Good day to
you, gentlemen three--or rather deserters three!” And the two young folk
entered the carriage and were driven away.

“How long will your sketch take?” said Arthur.

“Well,” I said, “I should like an hour for it. Don't you think you had
better go without me? I'll return by train. I know there's one in about
an hour's time.”

“Perhaps that would be best,” said the Earl. “The Station is quite
close.”

So I was left to my own devices, and soon found a comfortable seat, at
the foot of a tree, from which I had a good view of the ruins.

“It is a very drowsy day,” I said to myself, idly turning over the
leaves of the sketch-book to find a blank page. “Why, I thought you were
a mile off by this time!” For, to my surprise, the two walkers were back
again.

“I came back to remind you,” Arthur said, “that the trains go every ten
minutes--”

“Nonsense!” I said. “It isn't the Metropolitan Railway!”

“It is the Metropolitan Railway,” the Earl insisted. “'This is a part of
Kensington.”

“Why do you talk with your eyes shut?” said Arthur. “Wake up!”

“I think it's the heat makes me so drowsy,” I said, hoping, but not
feeling quite sure, that I was talking sense. “Am I awake now?”

“I think not,” the Earl judicially pronounced. “What do you think,
Doctor? He's only got one eye open!”

“And he's snoring like anything!” cried Bruno. “Do wake up, you dear old
thing!” And he and Sylvie set to work, rolling the heavy head from side
to side, as if its connection with the shoulders was a matter of no sort
of importance.

And at last the Professor opened his eyes, and sat up, blinking at
us with eyes of utter bewilderment. “Would you have the kindness to
mention,” he said, addressing me with his usual old-fashioned courtesy,
“whereabouts we are just now and who we are, beginning with me?”

I thought it best to begin with the children. “This is Sylvie. Sir; and
this is Bruno.”

“Ah, yes! I know them well enough!” the old man murmured. “Its myself
I'm most anxious about. And perhaps you'll be good enough to mention, at
the same time, how I got here?”

“A harder problem occurs to me,” I ventured to say: “and that is, how
you're to get back again.”

“True, true!” the Professor replied. “That's the Problem, no doubt.
Viewed as a Problem, outside of oneself, it is a most interesting one.
Viewed as a portion of one's own biography, it is, I must admit, very
distressing!” He groaned, but instantly added, with a chuckle, “As to
myself, I think you mentioned that I am--”

“Oo're the Professor!” Bruno shouted in his ear. “Didn't oo know that?
Oo've come from Outland! And it's ever so far away from here!”

The Professor leapt to his feet with the agility of a boy. “Then there's
no time to lose!” he exclaimed anxiously. “I'll just ask this guileless
peasant, with his brace of buckets that contain (apparently) water, if
he'll be so kind as to direct us. Guileless peasant!” he proceeded in a
louder voice. “Would you tell us the way to Outland?”

The guileless peasant turned with a sheepish grin. “Hey?” was all he
said.

“The way--to--Outland!” the Professor repeated.

The guileless peasant set down his buckets and considered. “Ah dunnot--”

“I ought to mention,” the Professor hastily put in, “that whatever you
say will be used in evidence against you.”

The guileless peasant instantly resumed his buckets. “Then ah says
nowt!” he answered briskly, and walked away at a great pace.

The children gazed sadly at the rapidly vanishing figure. “He goes very
quick!” the Professor said with a sigh. “But I know that was the right
thing to say. I've studied your English Laws. However, let's ask
this next man that's coming. He is not guileless, and he is not a
peasant--but I don't know that either point is of vital importance.”

It was, in fact, the Honourable Eric Lindon, who had apparently
fulfilled his task of escorting Lady Muriel home, and was now strolling
leisurely up and down the road outside the house, enjoying; a solitary
cigar.

“Might I trouble you, Sir, to tell us the nearest way to Outland!”
 Oddity as he was, in outward appearance, the Professor was, in that
essential nature which no outward disguise could conceal, a thorough
gentleman.

And, as such, Eric Lindon accepted him instantly. He took the cigar from
his mouth, and delicately shook off the ash, while he considered. “The
name sounds strange to me,” he said. “I doubt if I can help you?'

“It is not very far from Fairyland,” the Professor suggested.

Eric Lindon's eye-brows were slightly raised at these words, and an
amused smile, which he courteously tried to repress, flitted across his
handsome face: “A trifle cracked!” he muttered to himself. “But what a
jolly old patriarch it is!” Then he turned to the children. “And ca'n't
you help him, little folk?” he said, with a gentleness of tone that
seemed to win their hearts at once. “Surely you know all about it?


    'How many miles to Babylon?
    Three-score miles and ten.
    Can I get there by candlelight?
    Yes, and back again!'”

To my surprise, Bruno ran forwards to him, as if he were some old friend
of theirs, seized the disengaged hand and hung on to it with both of his
own: and there stood this tall dignified officer in the middle of the
road, gravely swinging a little boy to and fro, while Sylvie stood ready
to push him, exactly as if a real swing had suddenly been provided for
their pastime.

“We don't want to get to Babylon, oo know!” Bruno explained as he swung.

“And it isn't candlelight: it's daylight!” Sylvie added, giving the
swing a push of extra vigour, which nearly took the whole machine off
its balance.

By this time it was clear to me that Eric Lindon was quite unconscious
of my presence. Even the Professor and the children seemed to have lost
sight of me: and I stood in the midst of the group, as unconcernedly as
a ghost, seeing but unseen.

“How perfectly isochronous!” the Professor exclaimed with enthusiasm.
He had his watch in his hand, and was carefully counting Bruno's
oscillations. “He measures time quite as accurately as a pendulum!”
 {Image...'How perfectly isochronous!'}

“Yet even pendulums,” the good-natured young soldier observed, as he
carefully released his hand from Bruno's grasp, “are not a joy for ever!
Come, that's enough for one bout, little man!' Next time we meet, you
shall have another. Meanwhile you'd better take this old gentleman to
Queer Street, Number--”

“We'll find it!” cried Bruno eagerly, as they dragged the Professor
away.

“We are much indebted to you!” the Professor said, looking over his
shoulder.

“Don't mention it!” replied the officer, raising his hat as a parting
salute.

“What number did you say!” the Professor called from the distance.

The officer made a trumpet of his two hands. “Forty!” he shouted in
stentorian tones. “And not piano, by any means!” he added to himself.
“It's a mad world, my masters, a mad world!” He lit another cigar, and
strolled on towards his hotel.

“What a lovely evening!” I said, joining him as he passed me.

“Lovely indeed,” he said. “Where did you come from? Dropped from the
clouds?”

“I'm strolling your way,” I said; and no further explanation seemed
necessary.

“Have a cigar?”

“Thanks: I'm not a smoker.”

“Is there a Lunatic Asylum near here?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Thought there might be. Met a lunatic just now. Queer old fish as ever
I saw!”

And so, in friendly chat, we took our homeward ways, and wished each
other 'good-night' at the door of his hotel.

Left to myself, I felt the 'eerie' feeling rush over me again, and saw,
standing at the door of Number Forty, the three figures I knew so well.

“Then it's the wrong house?” Bruno was saying.

“No, no! It's the right house,” the Professor cheerfully replied: “but
it's the wrong street. That's where we've made our mistake! Our best
plan, now, will be to--”

It was over. The street was empty, Commonplace life was around me, and
the 'eerie' feeling had fled.






CHAPTER 19. HOW TO MAKE A PHLIZZ.

The week passed without any further communication with the 'Hall,' as
Arthur was evidently fearful that we might 'wear out our welcome'; but
when, on Sunday morning, we were setting out for church, I gladly agreed
to his proposal to go round and enquire after the Earl, who was said to
be unwell.

Eric, who was strolling in the garden, gave us a good report of the
invalid, who was still in bed, with Lady Muriel in attendance.

“Are you coming with us to church?” I enquired.

“Thanks, no,” he courteously replied. “It's not--exactly in my line, you
know. It's an excellent institution--for the poor. When I'm with my own
folk, I go, just to set them an example. But I'm not known here: so I
think I'll excuse myself sitting out a sermon. Country-preachers are
always so dull!”

Arthur was silent till we were out of hearing. Then he said to himself,
almost inaudibly, “Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them.”

“Yes,” I assented: “no doubt that is the principle on which church-going
rests.”

“And when he does go,” he continued (our thoughts ran so much together,
that our conversation was often slightly elliptical), “I suppose he
repeats the words 'I believe in the Communion of Saints'?”

But by this time we had reached the little church, into which a goodly
stream of worshipers, consisting mainly of fishermen and their families,
was flowing.

The service would have been pronounced by any modern aesthetic
religionist--or religious aesthete, which is it?--to be crude and cold:
to me, coming fresh from the ever-advancing developments of a London
church under a soi-disant 'Catholic' Rector, it was unspeakably
refreshing.

There was no theatrical procession of demure little choristers, trying
their best not to simper under the admiring gaze of the congregation:
the people's share in the service was taken by the people themselves,
unaided, except that a few good voices, judiciously posted here and
there among them, kept the singing from going too far astray.

There was no murdering of the noble music, contained in the Bible and
the Liturgy, by its recital in a dead monotone, with no more expression
than a mechanical talking-doll.

No, the prayers were prayed, the lessons were read, and best of all the
sermon was talked; and I found myself repeating, as we left the church,
the words of Jacob, when he 'awaked out of his sleep.' “'Surely the Lord
is in this place! This is none other but the house of God, and this is
the gate of heaven.'”

“Yes,” said Arthur, apparently in answer to my thoughts, “those 'high'
services are fast becoming pure Formalism. More and more the people are
beginning to regard them as 'performances,' in which they only 'assist'
in the French sense. And it is specially bad for the little boys.
They'd be much less self-conscious as pantomime-fairies. With all
that dressing-up, and stagy-entrances and exits, and being always en
evidence, no wonder if they're eaten up with vanity, the blatant little
coxcombs!”

When we passed the Hall on our return, we found the Earl and Lady Muriel
sitting out in the garden. Eric had gone for a stroll.

We joined them, and the conversation soon turned on the sermon we had
just heard, the subject of which was 'selfishness.'

“What a change has come over our pulpits,” Arthur remarked, “since the
time when Paley gave that utterly selfish definition of virtue, 'the
doing good to mankind, in obedience to the will of God, and for the sake
of everlasting happiness'!”

Lady Muriel looked at him enquiringly, but she seemed to have learned
by intuition, what years of experience had taught me, that the way to
elicit Arthur's deepest thoughts was neither to assent nor dissent, but
simply to listen.

“At that time,” he went on, “a great tidal wave of selfishness
was sweeping over human thought. Right and Wrong had somehow been
transformed into Gain and Loss, and Religion had become a sort of
commercial transaction. We may be thankful that our preachers are
beginning to take a nobler view of life.”

“But is it not taught again and again in the Bible?” I ventured to ask.

“Not in the Bible as a whole,” said Arthur. “In the Old Testament, no
doubt, rewards and punishments are constantly appealed to as motives for
action. That teaching is best for children, and the Israelites seem
to have been, mentally, utter children. We guide our children thus,
at first: but we appeal, as soon as possible, to their innate sense of
Right and Wrong: and, when that stage is safely past, we appeal to the
highest motive of all, the desire for likeness to, and union with,
the Supreme Good. I think you will find that to be the teaching of the
Bible, as a whole, beginning with 'that thy days may be long in the
land,' and ending with 'be ye perfect, even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect.'”

We were silent for awhile, and then Arthur went off on another tack.
“Look at the literature of Hymns, now. How cankered it is, through and
through, with selfishness! There are few human compositions more utterly
degraded than some modern Hymns!”

I quoted the stanza


    “Whatever, Lord, we tend to Thee,
    Repaid a thousandfold shall be,
    Then gladly will we give to Thee,
    Giver of all!'

“Yes,” he said grimly: “that is the typical stanza. And the very last
charity-sermon I heard was infected with it. After giving many good
reasons for charity, the preacher wound up with 'and, for all you give,
you will be repaid a thousandfold!' Oh the utter meanness of such a
motive, to be put before men who do know what self-sacrifice is, who
can appreciate generosity and heroism! Talk of Original Sin!” he went
on with increasing bitterness. “Can you have a stronger proof of the
Original Goodness there must be in this nation, than the fact that
Religion has been preached to us, as a commercial speculation, for a
century, and that we still believe in a God?”

“It couldn't have gone on so long,” Lady Muriel musingly remarked, “if
the Opposition hadn't been practically silenced--put under what the
French call la cloture. Surely in any lecture-hall, or in private
society, such teaching would soon have been hooted down?”

“I trust so,” said Arthur: “and, though I don't want to see 'brawling
in church' legalised, I must say that our preachers enjoy an enormous
privilege--which they ill deserve, and which they misuse terribly. We
put our man into a pulpit, and we virtually tell him 'Now, you may stand
there and talk to us for half-an-hour. We won't interrupt you by so much
as a word! You shall have it all your own way!' And what does he give
us in return? Shallow twaddle, that, if it were addressed to you over a
dinner-table, you would think 'Does the man take me for a fool?'”

The return of Eric from his walk checked the tide of Arthur's eloquence,
and, after a few minutes' talk on more conventional topics, we took our
leave. Lady Muriel walked with us to the gate. “You have given me much
to think about,” she said earnestly, as she gave Arthur her hand. “I'm
so glad you came in!” And her words brought a real glow of pleasure into
that pale worn face of his.

On the Tuesday, as Arthur did not seem equal to more walking, I took
a long stroll by myself, having stipulated that he was not to give
the whole day to his books, but was to meet me at the Hall at
about tea-time. On my way back, I passed the Station just as the
afternoon-train came in sight, and sauntered down the stairs to see it
come in. But there was little to gratify my idle curiosity: and, when
the train was empty, and the platform clear, I found it was about time
to be moving on, if I meant to reach the Hall by five.

As I approached the end of the platform, from which a steep irregular
wooden staircase conducted to the upper world, I noticed two passengers,
who had evidently arrived by the train, but who, oddly enough, had
entirely escaped my notice, though the arrivals had been so few. They
were a young woman and a little girl: the former, so far as one could
judge by appearances, was a nursemaid, or possibly a nursery-governess,
in attendance on the child, whose refined face, even more than her
dress, distinguished her as of a higher class than her companion.

The child's face was refined, but it was also a worn and sad one, and
told a tale (or so I seemed to read it) of much illness and suffering,
sweetly and patiently borne. She had a little crutch to help herself
along with: and she was now standing, looking wistfully up the long
staircase, and apparently waiting till she could muster courage to begin
the toilsome ascent.

There are some things one says in life--as well as things one
does--which come automatically, by reflex action, as the physiologists
say (meaning, no doubt, action without reflection, just as lucus is said
to be derived 'a non lucendo'). Closing one's eyelids, when something
seems to be flying into the eye, is one of those actions, and saying
“May I carry the little girl up the stairs?” was another. It wasn't that
any thought of offering help occurred to me, and that then I spoke:
the first intimation I had, of being likely to make that offer, was the
sound of my own voice, and the discovery that the offer had been made.
The servant paused, doubtfully glancing from her charge to me, and then
back again to the child. “Would you like it, dear?” she asked her. But
no such doubt appeared to cross the child's mind: she lifted her arms
eagerly to be taken up. “Please!” was all she said, while a faint smile
flickered on the weary little face. I took her up with scrupulous care,
and her little arm was at once clasped trustfully round my neck.

{Image...The lame child}

She was a very light weight--so light, in fact, that the ridiculous idea
crossed my mind that it was rather easier going up, with her in my
arms, than it would have been without her: and, when we reached the road
above, with its cart-ruts and loose stones--all formidable obstacles for
a lame child--I found that I had said “I'd better carry her over this
rough place,” before I had formed any mental connection between its
roughness and my gentle little burden. “Indeed it's troubling you too
much, Sir!” the maid exclaimed. “She can walk very well on the flat.”
 But the arm, that was twined about my neck, clung just an atom more
closely at the suggestion, and decided me to say “She's no weight,
really. I'll carry her a little further. I'm going your way.”

The nurse raised no further objection: and the next speaker was a ragged
little boy, with bare feet, and a broom over his shoulder, who ran
across the road, and pretended to sweep the perfectly dry road in front
of us. “Give us a 'ap'ny!” the little urchin pleaded, with a broad grin
on his dirty face.

“Don't give him a 'ap'ny!” said the little lady in my arms. The words
sounded harsh: but the tone was gentleness itself. “He's an idle little
boy!” And she laughed a laugh of such silvery sweetness as I had never
yet heard from any lips but Sylvie's. To my astonishment, the boy
actually joined in the laugh, as if there were some subtle sympathy
between them, as he ran away down the road and vanished through a gap in
the hedge.

But he was back in a few moments, having discarded his broom and
provided himself, from some mysterious source, with an exquisite bouquet
of flowers. “Buy a posy, buy a posy! Only a 'ap'ny!” he chanted, with
the melancholy drawl of a professional beggar.

“Don't buy it!” was Her Majesty's edict as she looked down, with a lofty
scorn that seemed curiously mixed with tender interest, on the ragged
creature at her feet.

But this time I turned rebel, and ignored the royal commands. Such
lovely flowers, and of forms so entirely new to me, were not to be
abandoned at the bidding of any little maid, however imperious. I bought
the bouquet: and the little boy, after popping the halfpenny into his
mouth, turned head-over-heels, as if to ascertain whether the human
mouth is really adapted to serve as a money-box.

With wonder, that increased every moment, I turned over the flowers, and
examined them one by one: there was not a single one among them that
I could remember having ever seen before. At last I turned to the
nursemaid. “Do these flowers grow wild about here? I never saw--” but
the speech died away on my lips. The nursemaid had vanished!

“You can put me down, now, if you like,” Sylvie quietly remarked.

I obeyed in silence, and could only ask myself “Is this a dream?”, on
finding Sylvie and Bruno walking one on either side of me, and clinging
to my hands with the ready confidence of childhood.

“You're larger than when I saw you last!” I began. “Really I think we
ought to be introduced again! There's so much of you that I never met
before, you know.”

“Very well!” Sylvie merrily replied. “This is Bruno. It doesn't take
long. He's only got one name!”

“There's another name to me!” Bruno protested, with a reproachful look
at the Mistress of the Ceremonies. “And it's--' Esquire'!”

“Oh, of course. I forgot,” said Sylvie. “Bruno--Esquire!”

“And did you come here to meet me, my children?” I enquired.

“You know I said we'd come on Tuesday,” Sylvie explained. “Are we the
proper size for common children?”

“Quite the right size for children,” I replied, (adding mentally “though
not common children, by any means!”) “But what became of the nursemaid?”

“It are gone!” Bruno solemnly replied.

“Then it wasn't solid, like Sylvie and you?”

“No. Oo couldn't touch it, oo know. If oo walked at it, oo'd go right
froo!”

“I quite expected you'd find it out, once,” said Sylvie. “Bruno ran it
against a telegraph post, by accident. And it went in two halves. But
you were looking the other way.”

I felt that I had indeed missed an opportunity: to witness such an
event as a nursemaid going 'in two halves' does not occur twice in a
life-time!

“When did oo guess it were Sylvie?” Bruno enquired.

{Image...'It went in two halves'}

“I didn't guess it, till it was Sylvie,” I said. “But how did you manage
the nursemaid?”

“Bruno managed it,” said Sylvie. “It's called a Phlizz.”

“And how do you make a Phlizz, Bruno?”

“The Professor teached me how,” said Bruno. “First oo takes a lot of
air--”

“Oh, Bruno!” Sylvie interposed. “The Professor said you weren't to
tell!”

“But who did her voice?” I asked.

“Indeed it's troubling you too much, Sir! She can walk very well on the
flat.”

Bruno laughed merrily as I turned hastily from side to side, looking in
all directions for the speaker. “That were me!” he gleefully proclaimed,
in his own voice.

“She can indeed walk very well on the flat,” I said. “And I think I was
the Flat.”

By this time we were near the Hall. “This is where my friends live,” I
said. “Will you come in and have some tea with them?”

Bruno gave a little jump of joy: and Sylvie said “Yes, please. You'd
like some tea, Bruno, wouldn't you? He hasn't tasted tea,” she explained
to me, “since we left Outland.”

“And that weren't good tea!” said Bruno. “It were so welly weak!”






CHAPTER 20. LIGHT COME, LIGHT GO.

Lady Muriel's smile of welcome could not quite conceal the look of
surprise with which she regarded my new companions.

I presented them in due form. “This is Sylvie, Lady Muriel. And this is
Bruno.”

“Any surname?” she enquired, her eyes twinkling with fun.

“No,” I said gravely. “No surname.”

She laughed, evidently thinking I said it in fun; and stooped to kiss
the children a salute to which Bruno submitted with reluctance: Sylvie
returned it with interest.

While she and Arthur (who had arrived before me) supplied the children
with tea and cake, I tried to engage the Earl in conversation: but he
was restless and distrait, and we made little progress. At last, by a
sudden question, he betrayed the cause of his disquiet.

“Would you let me look at those flowers you have in your hand?”

“Willingly!” I said, handing him the bouquet. Botany was, I knew, a
favourite study of his: and these flowers were to me so entirely new and
mysterious, that I was really curious to see what a botanist would say
of them.

They did not diminish his disquiet. On the contrary, he became every
moment more excited as he turned them over. “These are all from Central
India!” he said, laying aside part of the bouquet. “They are rare, even
there: and I have never seen them in any other part of the world. These
two are Mexican--This one--” (He rose hastily, and carried it to
the window, to examine it in a better light, the flush of excitement
mounting to his very forehead) “--is, I am nearly sure--but I have a
book of Indian Botany here--” He took a volume from the book-shelves,
and turned the leaves with trembling fingers. “Yes! Compare it with this
picture! It is the exact duplicate! This is the flower of the Upas-tree,
which usually grows only in the depths of forests; and the flower fades
so quickly after being plucked, that it is scarcely possible to keep its
form or colour even so far as the outskirts of the forest! Yet this
is in full bloom! Where did you get these flowers?” he added with
breathless eagerness.

I glanced at Sylvie, who, gravely and silently, laid her finger on her
lips, then beckoned to Bruno to follow her, and ran out into the
garden; and I found myself in the position of a defendant whose two most
important witnesses have been suddenly taken away. “Let me give you the
flowers!” I stammered out at last, quite 'at my wit's end' as to how to
get out of the difficulty. “You know much more about them than I do!”

“I accept them most gratefully! But you have not yet told me--” the
Earl was beginning, when we were interrupted, to my great relief, by the
arrival of Eric Lindon.

To Arthur, however, the new-comer was, I saw clearly, anything but
welcome. His face clouded over: he drew a little back from the
circle, and took no further part in the conversation, which was wholly
maintained, for some minutes, by Lady Muriel and her lively cousin, who
were discussing some new music that had just arrived from London.

“Do just try this one!” he pleaded. “The music looks easy to sing at
sight, and the song's quite appropriate to the occasion.”

“Then I suppose it's


    'Five o'clock tea!
    Ever to thee
    Faithful I'll be,
    Five o'clock tea!”'

laughed Lady Muriel, as she sat down to the piano, and lightly struck a
few random chords.

“Not quite: and yet it is a kind of 'ever to thee faithful I'll be!'
It's a pair of hapless lovers: he crosses the briny deep: and she is
left lamenting.”

“That is indeed appropriate!” she replied mockingly, as he placed the
song before her. “And am I to do the lamenting? And who for, if you
please?”

She played the air once or twice through, first in quick, and finally in
slow, time; and then gave us the whole song with as much graceful ease
as if she had been familiar with it all her life:--


    “He stept so lightly to the land,
    All in his manly pride:
    He kissed her cheek, he pressed her hand,
    Yet still she glanced aside.
    'Too gay he seems,' she darkly dreams,
    'Too gallant and too gay
    To think of me--poor simple me---
    When he is far away!'

    'I bring my Love this goodly pearl
    Across the seas,' he said:
    'A gem to deck the dearest girl
    That ever sailor wed!'
    She clasps it tight: her eyes are bright:
    Her throbbing heart would say
    'He thought of me--he thought of me---
    When he was far away!'

    The ship has sailed into the West:
    Her ocean-bird is flown:
    A dull dead pain is in her breast,
    And she is weak and lone:
    Yet there's a smile upon her face,
    A smile that seems to say
    'He'll think of me he'll think of me---
    When he is far away!

    'Though waters wide between us glide,
    Our lives are warm and near:
    No distance parts two faithful hearts
    Two hearts that love so dear:
    And I will trust my sailor-lad,
    For ever and a day,
    To think of me--to think of me---
    When he is far away!'”

The look of displeasure, which had begun to come over Arthur's face
when the young Captain spoke of Love so lightly, faded away as the song
proceeded, and he listened with evident delight. But his face darkened
again when Eric demurely remarked “Don't you think 'my soldier-lad'
would have fitted the tune just as well!”

“Why, so it would!” Lady Muriel gaily retorted. “Soldiers, sailors,
tinkers, tailors, what a lot of words would fit in! I think 'my
tinker-lad' sounds best. Don't you?”

To spare my friend further pain, I rose to go, just as the Earl was
beginning to repeat his particularly embarrassing question about the
flowers.

“You have not yet--'

“Yes, I've had some tea, thank you!” I hastily interrupted him. “And
now we really must be going. Good evening, Lady Muriel!” And we made our
adieux, and escaped, while the Earl was still absorbed in examining the
mysterious bouquet.

Lady Muriel accompanied us to the door. “You couldn't have given
my father a more acceptable present!” she said, warmly. “He is so
passionately fond of Botany. I'm afraid I know nothing of the theory
of it, but I keep his Hortus Siccus in order. I must get some sheets of
blotting-paper, and dry these new treasures for him before they fade.

“That won't be no good at all!” said Bruno, who was waiting for us in
the garden.

“Why won't it?” said I. “You know I had to give the flowers, to stop
questions?”

“Yes, it ca'n't be helped,” said Sylvie: “but they will be sorry when
they find them gone!”

“But how will they go?”

“Well, I don't know how. But they will go. The nosegay was only a
Phlizz, you know. Bruno made it up.”

These last words were in a whisper, as she evidently did not wish Arthur
to hear. But of this there seemed to be little risk: he hardly seemed to
notice the children, but paced on, silent and abstracted; and when, at
the entrance to the wood, they bid us a hasty farewell and ran off, he
seemed to wake out of a day-dream.

The bouquet vanished, as Sylvie had predicted; and when, a day or two
afterwards, Arthur and I once more visited the Hall, we found the Earl
and his daughter, with the old housekeeper, out in the garden, examining
the fastenings of the drawing-room window.

“We are holding an Inquest,” Lady Muriel said, advancing to meet us:
“and we admit you, as Accessories before the Fact, to tell us all you
know about those flowers.”

“The Accessories before the Fact decline to answer any questions,” I
gravely replied. “And they reserve their defence.”

“Well then, turn Queen's Evidence, please! The flowers have disappeared
in the night,” she went on, turning to Arthur, “and we are quite sure
no one in the house has meddled with them. Somebody must have entered by
the window--”

“But the fastenings have not been tampered with,” said the Earl.

“It must have been while you were dining, my Lady,” said the
housekeeper.

“That was it,” said the Earl. “The thief must have seen you bring the
flowers,” turning to me, “and have noticed that you did not take
them away. And he must have known their great value--they are simply
priceless!” he exclaimed, in sudden excitement.

“And you never told us how you got them!” said Lady Muriel.

“Some day,” I stammered, “I may be free to tell you. Just now, would you
excuse me?”

The Earl looked disappointed, but kindly said “Very well, we will ask no
questions.”

{Image...Five o'clock tea}

“But we consider you a very bad Queen's Evidence,” Lady Muriel added
playfully, as we entered the arbour. “We pronounce you to be an
accomplice: and we sentence you to solitary confinement, and to be fed
on bread and butter. Do you take sugar?”

“It is disquieting, certainly,” she resumed, when all
'creature-comforts' had been duly supplied, “to find that the house
has been entered by a thief in this out-of-the-way place. If only the
flowers had been eatables, one might have suspected a thief of quite
another shape--”

“You mean that universal explanation for all mysterious disappearances,
'the cat did it'?” said Arthur.

“Yes,” she replied. “What a convenient thing it would be if all thieves
had the same shape! It's so confusing to have some of them quadrupeds
and others bipeds!”

“It has occurred to me,” said Arthur, “as a curious problem in
Teleology--the Science of Final Causes,” he added, in answer to an
enquiring look from Lady Muriel.

“And a Final Cause is--?”

“Well, suppose we say--the last of a series of connected events--each of
the series being the cause of the next--for whose sake the first event
takes place.”

“But the last event is practically an effect of the first, isn't it? And
yet you call it a cause of it!”

Arthur pondered a moment. “The words are rather confusing, I grant you,”
 he said. “Will this do? The last event is an effect of the first: but
the necessity for that event is a cause of the necessity for the first.”

“That seems clear enough,” said Lady Muriel. “Now let us have the
problem.”

“It's merely this. What object can we imagine in the arrangement by
which each different size (roughly speaking) of living creatures has
its special shape? For instance, the human race has one kind of
shape--bipeds. Another set, ranging from the lion to the mouse, are
quadrupeds. Go down a step or two further, and you come to insects with
six legs--hexapods--a beautiful name, is it not? But beauty, in our
sense of the word, seems to diminish as we go down: the creature becomes
more--I won't say 'ugly' of any of God's creatures--more uncouth. And,
when we take the microscope, and go a few steps lower still, we come
upon animalculae, terribly uncouth, and with a terrible number of legs!”

“The other alternative,” said the Earl, “would be a diminuendo series of
repetitions of the same type. Never mind the monotony of it: let's see
how it would work in other ways. Begin with the race of men, and the
creatures they require: let us say horses, cattle, sheep, and dogs--we
don't exactly require frogs and spiders, do we, Muriel?”

Lady Muriel shuddered perceptibly: it was evidently a painful subject.
“We can dispense with them,” she said gravely.

“Well, then we'll have a second race of men, half-a-yard high--”

“--who would have one source of exquisite enjoyment, not possessed by
ordinary men!” Arthur interrupted.

“What source?” said the Earl.

“Why, the grandeur of scenery! Surely the grandeur of a mountain, to me,
depends on its size, relative to me? Double the height of the mountain,
and of course it's twice as grand. Halve my height, and you produce the
same effect.”

“Happy, happy, happy Small!” Lady Muriel murmured rapturously. “None but
the Short, none but the Short, none but the Short enjoy the Tall!”

“But let me go on,” said the Earl. “We'll have a third race of men, five
inches high; a fourth race, an inch high--”

“They couldn't eat common beef and mutton, I'm sure!” Lady Muriel
interrupted.

“True, my child, I was forgetting. Each set must have its own cattle and
sheep.”

“And its own vegetation,” I added. “What could a cow, an inch high, do
with grass that waved far above its head?”

“That is true. We must have a pasture within a pasture, so to speak. The
common grass would serve our inch-high cows as a green forest of palms,
while round the root of each tall stem would stretch a tiny carpet of
microscopic grass. Yes, I think our scheme will work fairly well. And it
would be very interesting, coming into contact with the races below us.
What sweet little things the inch-high bull-dogs would be! I doubt if
even Muriel would run away from one of them!”

“Don't you think we ought to have a crescendo series, as well?” said
Lady Muriel. “Only fancy being a hundred yards high! One could use an
elephant as a paper-weight, and a crocodile as a pair of scissors!”

“And would you have races of different sizes communicate with one
another?” I enquired. “Would they make war on one another, for instance,
or enter into treaties?”

“War we must exclude, I think. When you could crush a whole nation with
one blow of your fist, you couldn't conduct war on equal terms. But
anything, involving a collision of minds only, would be possible in
our ideal world--for of course we must allow mental powers to all,
irrespective of size. Perhaps the fairest rule would be that, the
smaller the race, the greater should be its intellectual development!”

“Do you mean to say,” said Lady Muriel, “that these manikins of an inch
high are to argue with me?”

“Surely, surely!” said the Earl. “An argument doesn't depend for its
logical force on the size of the creature that utters it!”

She tossed her head indignantly. “I would not argue with any man less
than six inches high!” she cried. “I'd make him work!”

“What at?” said Arthur, listening to all this nonsense with an amused
smile.

“Embroidery!” she readily replied. “What lovely embroidery they would
do!”

“Yet, if they did it wrong,” I said, “you couldn't argue the question. I
don't know why: but I agree that it couldn't be done.”

“The reason is,” said Lady Muriel, “one couldn't sacrifice one's dignity
so far.”

“Of course one couldn't!” echoed Arthur. “Any more than one could argue
with a potato. It would be altogether--excuse the ancient pun--infra
dig.!”

“I doubt it,” said I. “Even a pun doesn't quite convince me.”

“Well, if that is not the reason,” said Lady Muriel, “what reason would
you give?”

I tried hard to understand the meaning of this question: but the
persistent humming of the bees confused me, and there was a drowsiness
in the air that made every thought stop and go to sleep before it had
got well thought out: so all I could say was “That must depend on the
weight of the potato.”

I felt the remark was not so sensible as I should have liked it to be.
But Lady Muriel seemed to take it quite as a matter of course. “In that
case--” she began, but suddenly started, and turned away to listen.
“Don't you hear him?” she said. “He's crying. We must go to him,
somehow.”

And I said to myself “That's very strange.” I quite thought it was
Lady Muriel talking to me. “Why, it's Sylvie all the while!” And I made
another great effort to say something that should have some meaning in
it. “Is it about the potato?”






CHAPTER 21. THROUGH THE IVORY DOOR.

“I don't know,” said Sylvie. “Hush! I must think. I could go to him, by
myself, well enough. But I want you to come too.”

“Let me go with you,” I pleaded. “I can walk as fast as you can, I'm
sure.”

Sylvie laughed merrily. “What nonsense!” she cried. “Why, you ca'n't
walk a bit! You're lying quite flat on your back! You don't understand
these things.”

“I can walk as well as you can,” I repeated. And I tried my best to walk
a few steps: but the ground slipped away backwards, quite as fast as I
could walk, so that I made no progress at all. Sylvie laughed again.

“There, I told you so! You've no idea how funny you look, moving your
feet about in the air, as if you were walking! Wait a bit. I'll ask the
Professor what we'd better do.” And she knocked at his study-door.

The door opened, and the Professor looked out. “What's that crying I
heard just now?” he asked. “Is it a human animal?”

“It's a boy,” Sylvie said.

“I'm afraid you've been teasing him?”

“No, indeed I haven't!” Sylvie said, very earnestly. “I never tease
him!”

“Well, I must ask the Other Professor about it.” He went back into the
study, and we heard him whispering “small human animal--says she hasn't
been teasing him--the kind that's called Boy--”

“Ask her which Boy,” said a new voice. The Professor came out again.

“Which Boy is it that you haven't been teasing?”

Sylvie looked at me with twinkling eyes. “You dear old thing!” she
exclaimed, standing on tiptoe to kiss him, while he gravely stooped to
receive the salute. “How you do puzzle me! Why, there are several boys I
haven't been teasing!”

The Professor returned to his friend: and this time the voice said “Tell
her to bring them here--all of them!”

“I ca'n't, and I won't!” Sylvie exclaimed, the moment he reappeared.
“It's Bruno that's crying: and he's my brother: and, please, we both
want to go: he ca'n't walk, you know: he's--he's dreaming, you know”
 (this in a whisper, for fear of hurting my feelings). “Do let's go
through the Ivory Door!”

“I'll ask him,” said the Professor, disappearing again. He returned
directly. “He says you may. Follow me, and walk on tip-toe.”

The difficulty with me would have been, just then, not to walk on
tip-toe. It seemed very hard to reach down far enough to just touch the
floor, as Sylvie led me through the study.

The Professor went before us to unlock the Ivory Door. I had just time
to glance at the Other Professor, who was sitting reading, with his back
to us, before the Professor showed us out through the door, and locked
it behind us. Bruno was standing with his hands over his face, crying
bitterly.

{Image...'What's the matter, darling?'}

“What's the matter, darling?” said Sylvie, with her arms round his neck.

“Hurted mine self welly much!” sobbed the poor little fellow.

“I'm so sorry, darling! How ever did you manage to hurt yourself so?”

“Course I managed it!” said Bruno, laughing through his tears. “Doos oo
think nobody else but oo ca'n't manage things?”

Matters were looking distinctly brighter, now Bruno had begun to argue.
“Come, let's hear all about it!” I said.

“My foot took it into its head to slip--” Bruno began.

“A foot hasn't got a head!” Sylvie put in, but all in vain.

“I slipted down the bank. And I tripted over a stone. And the stone
hurted my foot! And I trod on a Bee. And the Bee stinged my finger!”
 Poor Bruno sobbed again. The complete list of woes was too much for his
feelings. “And it knewed I didn't mean to trod on it!” he added, as the
climax.

“That Bee should be ashamed of itself!” I said severely, and Sylvie
hugged and kissed the wounded hero till all tears were dried.

“My finger's quite unstung now!” said Bruno. “Why doos there be stones?
Mister Sir, doos oo know?”

“They're good for something,” I said: “even if we don't know what.
What's the good of dandelions, now?”

“Dindledums?” said Bruno. “Oh, they're ever so pretty! And stones aren't
pretty, one bit. Would oo like some dindledums, Mister Sir?”

“Bruno!” Sylvie murmured reproachfully. “You mustn't say 'Mister' and
'Sir,' both at once! Remember what I told you!”

“You telled me I were to say Mister' when I spoked about him, and I were
to say 'Sir' when I spoked to him!”

“Well, you're not doing both, you know.”

“Ah, but I is doing bofe, Miss Praticular!” Bruno exclaimed
triumphantly. “I wishted to speak about the Gemplun--and I wishted to
speak to the Gemplun. So a course I said 'Mister Sir'!”

“That's all right, Bruno,” I said.

“Course it's all right!” said Bruno. “Sylvie just knows nuffin at all!”

“There never was an impertinenter boy!” said Sylvie, frowning till her
bright eyes were nearly invisible.

“And there never was an ignoranter girl!” retorted Bruno. “Come along
and pick some dindledums. That's all she's fit for!” he added in a very
loud whisper to me.

“But why do you say 'Dindledums,' Bruno? Dandelions is the right word.”

“It's because he jumps about so,” Sylvie said, laughing.

“Yes, that's it,” Bruno assented. “Sylvie tells me the words, and then,
when I jump about, they get shooken up in my head--till they're all
froth!”

I expressed myself as perfectly satisfied with this explanation. “But
aren't you going to pick me any dindledums, after all?”

“Course we will!” cried Bruno. “Come along, Sylvie!” And the happy
children raced away, bounding over the turf with the fleetness and grace
of young antelopes.

“Then you didn't find your way back to Outland?” I said to the
Professor.

“Oh yes, I did!” he replied, “We never got to Queer Street; but I found
another way. I've been backwards and forwards several times since then.
I had to be present at the Election, you know, as the author of the new
Money-act. The Emperor was so kind as to wish that I should have the
credit of it. 'Let come what come may,' (I remember the very words of
the Imperial Speech) 'if it should turn out that the Warden is alive,
you will bear witness that the change in the coinage is the Professor's
doing, not mine!' I never was so glorified in my life, before!” Tears
trickled down his cheeks at the recollection, which apparently was not
wholly a pleasant one.

“Is the Warden supposed to be dead?”

“Well, it's supposed so: but, mind you, I don't believe it! The evidence
is very weak--mere hear-say. A wandering Jester, with a Dancing-Bear
(they found their way into the Palace, one day) has been telling people
he comes from Fairyland, and that the Warden died there. I wanted the
Vice-Warden to question him, but, most unluckily, he and my Lady
were always out walking when the Jester came round. Yes, the Warden's
supposed to be dead!” And more tears trickled down the old man's cheeks.

“But what is the new Money-Act?”

The Professor brightened up again. “The Emperor started the thing,” he
said. “He wanted to make everybody in Outland twice as rich as he was
before just to make the new Government popular. Only there wasn't nearly
enough money in the Treasury to do it. So I suggested that he might do
it by doubling the value of every coin and bank-note in Outland. It's
the simplest thing possible. I wonder nobody ever thought of it before!
And you never saw such universal joy. The shops are full from morning to
night. Everybody's buying everything!”

“And how was the glorifying done?”

A sudden gloom overcast the Professor's jolly face. “They did it as I
went home after the Election,” he mournfully replied. “It was kindly
meant but I didn't like it! They waved flags all round me till I was
nearly blind: and they rang bells till I was nearly deaf: and they
strewed the road so thick with flowers that I lost my way!” And the poor
old man sighed deeply.

“How far is it to Outland?” I asked, to change the subject.

“About five days' march. But one must go back--occasionally. You see, as
Court-Professor, I have to be always in attendance on Prince Uggug. The
Empress would be very angry if I left him, even for an hour.”

“But surely, every time you come here, you are absent ten days, at
least?”

“Oh, more than that!” the Professor exclaimed. “A fortnight, sometimes.
But of course I keep a memorandum of the exact time when I started, so
that I can put the Court-time back to the very moment!” “Excuse me,” I
said. “I don't understand.”

Silently the Professor drew front his pocket a square gold watch, with
six or eight hands, and held it out for my inspection. “This,” he began,
“is an Outlandish Watch--”

“So I should have thought.”

“--which has the peculiar property that, instead of its going with the
time, the time goes with it. I trust you understand me now?”

“Hardly,” I said.

“Permit me to explain. So long as it is let alone, it takes its own
course. Time has no effect upon it.”

“I have known such watches,” I remarked.

“It goes, of course, at the usual rate. Only the time has to go with it.
Hence, if I move the hands, I change the time. To move them forwards, in
advance of the true time, is impossible: but I can move them as much as
a month backwards---that is the limit. And then you have the events all
over again--with any alterations experience may suggest.”

“What a blessing such a watch would be,” I thought, “in real life! To
be able to unsay some heedless word--to undo some reckless deed! Might I
see the thing done?”

“With pleasure!” said the good natured Professor. “When I move this
hand back to here,” pointing out the place, “History goes back fifteen
minutes!”

Trembling with excitement, I watched him push the hand round as he
described.

“Hurted mine self welly much!”

Shrilly and suddenly the words rang in my ears, and, more startled than
I cared to show, I turned to look for the speaker.

Yes! There was Bruno, standing with the tears running down his cheeks,
just as I had seen him a quarter of an hour ago; and there was Sylvie
with her arms round his neck!

I had not the heart to make the dear little fellow go through his
troubles a second time, so hastily begged the Professor to push the
hands round into their former position. In a moment Sylvie and Bruno
were gone again, and I could just see them in the far distance, picking
'dindledums.'

“Wonderful, indeed!” I exclaimed.

“It has another property, yet more wonderful,” said the Professor. “You
see this little peg? That is called the 'Reversal Peg.' If you push it
in, the events of the next hour happen in the reverse order. Do not
try it now. I will lend you the Watch for a few days, and you can amuse
yourself with experiments.”

“Thank you very much!” I said as he gave me the Watch. “I'll take the
greatest care of it--why, here are the children again!”

“We could only but find six dindledums,” said Bruno, putting them into
my hands, “'cause Sylvie said it were time to go back. And here's a big
blackberry for ooself! We couldn't only find but two!”

“Thank you: it's very nice,” I said. “And I suppose you ate the other,
Bruno?”

“No, I didn't,” Bruno said, carelessly. “Aren't they pretty dindledums,
Mister Sir?”

“Yes, very: but what makes you limp so, my child?”

“Mine foot's come hurted again!” Bruno mournfully replied. And he sat
down on the ground, and began nursing it.

The Professor held his head between his hands--an attitude that I knew
indicated distraction of mind. “Better rest a minute,” he said. “It may
be better then--or it may be worse. If only I had some of my medicines
here! I'm Court-Physician, you know,” he added, aside to me.

“Shall I go and get you some blackberries, darling?” Sylvie whispered,
with her arms round his neck; and she kissed away a tear that was
trickling down his cheek.

Bruno brightened up in a moment. “That are a good plan!” he
exclaimed. “I thinks my foot would come quite unhurted, if I eated a
blackberry--two or three blackberries--six or seven blackberries--”

Sylvie got up hastily. “I'd better go,” she said, aside to me, “before
he gets into the double figures!”

“Let me come and help you,” I said. “I can reach higher up than you
can.”

“Yes, please,” said Sylvie, putting her hand into mine: and we walked
off together.

“Bruno loves blackberries,” she said, as we paced slowly along by a tall
hedge, “that looked a promising place for them, and it was so sweet of
him to make me eat the only one!”

“Oh, it was you that ate it, then? Bruno didn't seem to like to tell me
about it.”

“No; I saw that,” said Sylvie. “He's always afraid of being praised. But
he made me eat it, really! I would much rather he--oh, what's that?” And
she clung to my hand, half-frightened, as we came in sight of a hare,
lying on its side with legs stretched out just in the entrance to the
wood.

“It's a hare, my child. Perhaps it's asleep.”

“No, it isn't asleep,” Sylvie said, timidly going nearer to look at it:
“it's eyes are open. Is it--is it--her voice dropped to an awestruck
whisper, is it dead, do you think?”

“Yes, it's quite dead,” I said, after stooping to examine it. “Poor
thing! I think it's been hunted to death. I know the harriers were out
yesterday. But they haven't touched it. Perhaps they caught sight of
another, and left it to die of fright and exhaustion.”

“Hunted to death?” Sylvie repeated to herself, very slowly and sadly. “I
thought hunting was a thing they played at like a game. Bruno and I hunt
snails: but we never hurt them when we catch them!”

“Sweet angel!” I thought. “How am I to get the idea of Sport into your
innocent mind?” And as we stood, hand-in-hand, looking down at the dead
hare, I tried to put the thing into such words as she could understand.
“You know what fierce wild-beasts lions and tigers are?” Sylvie nodded.
“Well, in some countries men have to kill them, to save their own lives,
you know.”

“Yes,” said Sylvie: “if one tried to kill me, Bruno would kill it if he
could.”

“Well, and so the men--the hunters--get to enjoy it, you know: the
running, and the fighting, and the shouting, and the danger.”

“Yes,” said Sylvie. “Bruno likes danger.”

“Well, but, in this country, there aren't any lions and tigers, loose:
so they hunt other creatures, you see.” I hoped, but in vain, that this
would satisfy her, and that she would ask no more questions.

“They hunt foxes,” Sylvie said, thoughtfully. “And I think they kill
them, too. Foxes are very fierce. I daresay men don't love them. Are
hares fierce?”

“No,” I said. “A hare is a sweet, gentle, timid animal--almost as gentle
as a lamb.”

“But, if men love hares, why--why--” her voice quivered, and her sweet
eyes were brimming over with tears.

“I'm afraid they don't love them, dear child.”

“All children love them,” Sylvie said. “All ladies love them.”

“I'm afraid even ladies go to hunt them, sometimes.”

Sylvie shuddered. “Oh, no, not ladies!” she earnestly pleaded. “Not Lady
Muriel!”

“No, she never does, I'm sure--but this is too sad a sight for you,
dear. Let's try and find some--”

But Sylvie was not satisfied yet. In a hushed, solemn tone, with bowed
head and clasped hands, she put her final question. “Does GOD love
hares?”

“Yes!” I said. “I'm sure He does! He loves every living thing. Even
sinful men. How much more the animals, that cannot sin!”

“I don't know what 'sin' means,” said Sylvie. And I didn't try to
explain it.

“Come, my child,” I said, trying to lead her away. “Wish good-bye to the
poor hare, and come and look for blackberries.”

“Good-bye, poor hare!” Sylvie obediently repeated, looking over her
shoulder at it as we turned away. And then, all in a moment, her
self-command gave way. Pulling her hand out of mine, she ran back to
where the dead hare was lying, and flung herself down at its side in
such an agony of grief as I could hardly have believed possible in so
young a child.

“Oh, my darling, my darling!” she moaned, over and over again. “And God
meant your life to be so beautiful!”

Sometimes, but always keeping her face hidden on the ground, she would
reach out one little hand, to stroke the poor dead thing, and then once
more bury her face in her hands, and sob as if her heart would break.
{Image...The dead hare}

I was afraid she would really make herself ill: still I thought it best
to let her weep away the first sharp agony of grief: and, after a few
minutes, the sobbing gradually ceased, and Sylvie rose to her feet, and
looked calmly at me, though tears were still streaming down her cheeks.

I did not dare to speak again, just yet; but simply held out my hand to
her, that we might quit the melancholy spot.

Yes, I'll come now, she said. Very reverently she kneeled down, and
kissed the dead hare; then rose and gave me her hand, and we moved on in
silence.

A child's sorrow is violent but short; and it was almost in her usual
voice that she said after a minute “Oh stop stop! Here are some lovely
blackberries!”

We filled our hands with fruit and returned in all haste to where the
Professor and Bruno were seated on a bank awaiting our return.

Just before we came within hearing-distance Sylvie checked me. “Please
don't tell Bruno about the hare!” she said.

Very well, my child. But why not?

Tears again glittered in those sweet eyes and she turned her head away
so that I could scarcely hear her reply. “He's--he's very fond of gentle
creatures you know. And he'd--he'd be so sorry! I don't want him to be
made sorry.”

And your agony of sorrow is to count for nothing, then, sweet unselfish
child! I thought to myself. But no more was said till we had reached
our friends; and Bruno was far too much engrossed, in the feast we had
brought him, to take any notice of Sylvie's unusually grave manner.

“I'm afraid it's getting rather late, Professor?” I said.

“Yes, indeed,” said the Professor. “I must take you all through the
Ivory Door again. You've stayed your full time.”

“Mightn't we stay a little longer!” pleaded Sylvie.

“Just one minute!” added Bruno.

But the Professor was unyielding. “It's a great privilege, coming
through at all,” he said. “We must go now.” And we followed him
obediently to the Ivory Door, which he threw open, and signed to me to
go through first.

“You're coming too, aren't you?” I said to Sylvie.

“Yes,” she said: “but you won't see us after you've gone through.”

“But suppose I wait for you outside?” I asked, as I stepped through the
doorway.

“In that case,” said Sylvie, “I think the potato would be quite
justified in asking your weight. I can quite imagine a really superior
kidney-potato declining to argue with any one under fifteen stone!”

With a great effort I recovered the thread of my thoughts. “We lapse
very quickly into nonsense!” I said.






CHAPTER 22. CROSSING THE LINE.

“Let us lapse back again,” said Lady Muriel. “Take another cup of tea? I
hope that's sound common sense?”

“And all that strange adventure,” I thought, “has occupied the space
of a single comma in Lady Muriel's speech! A single comma, for which
grammarians tell us to 'count one'!” (I felt no doubt that the Professor
had kindly put back the time for me, to the exact point at which I had
gone to sleep.)

When, a few minutes afterwards, we left the house, Arthur's first remark
was certainly a strange one. “We've been there just twenty minutes,” he
said, “and I've done nothing but listen to you and Lady Muriel talking:
and yet, somehow, I feel exactly as if I had been talking with her for
an hour at least!”

And so he had been, I felt no doubt: only, as the time had been put back
to the beginning of the tete-a-tete he referred to, the whole of it
had passed into oblivion, if not into nothingness! But I valued my own
reputation for sanity too highly to venture on explaining to him what
had happened.

For some cause, which I could not at the moment divine, Arthur was
unusually grave and silent during our walk home. It could not be
connected with Eric Lindon, I thought, as he had for some days been away
in London: so that, having Lady Muriel almost 'all to himself'--for
I was only too glad to hear those two conversing, to have any wish to
intrude any remarks of my own--he ought, theoretically, to have been
specially radiant and contented with life. “Can he have heard any bad
news?” I said to myself. And, almost as if he had read my thoughts, he
spoke.

“He will be here by the last train,” he said, in the tone of one who is
continuing a conversation rather than beginning one.

“Captain Lindon, do you mean?”

“Yes--Captain Lindon,” said Arthur: “I said 'he,' because I fancied
we were talking about him. The Earl told me he comes tonight, though
to-morrow is the day when he will know about the Commission that he's
hoping for. I wonder he doesn't stay another day to hear the result, if
he's really so anxious about it as the Earl believes he is.”

“He can have a telegram sent after him,” I said: “but it's not very
soldier-like, running away from possible bad news!”

“He's a very good fellow,” said Arthur: “but I confess it would be good
news for me, if he got his Commission, and his Marching Orders, all at
once! I wish him all happiness--with one exception. Good night!” (We had
reached home by this time.) “I'm not good company to-night--better be
alone.”

It was much the same, next day. Arthur declared he wasn't fit for
Society, and I had to set forth alone for an afternoon-stroll. I took
the road to the Station, and, at the point where the road from the
'Hall' joined it, I paused, seeing my friends in the distance, seemingly
bound for the same goal.

“Will you join us?” the Earl said, after I had exchanged greetings with
him, and Lady Muriel, and Captain Lindon. “This restless young man is
expecting a telegram, and we are going to the Station to meet it.”

“There is also a restless young woman in the case,” Lady Muriel added.

“That goes without saying, my child,” said her father. “Women are always
restless!”

“For generous appreciation of all one's best qualities,” his daughter
impressively remarked, “there's nothing to compare with a father, is
there, Eric?”

“Cousins are not 'in it,'” said Eric: and then somehow the conversation
lapsed into two duologues, the younger folk taking the lead, and the two
old men following with less eager steps.

“And when are we to see your little friends again?” said the Earl. “They
are singularly attractive children.”

“I shall be delighted to bring them, when I can,” I said! “But I don't
know, myself, when I am likely to see them again.”

“I'm not going to question you,” said the Earl: “but there's no harm in
mentioning that Muriel is simply tormented with curiosity! We know most
of the people about here, and she has been vainly trying to guess what
house they can possibly be staying at.”

“Some day I may be able to enlighten her: but just at present--”

“Thanks. She must bear it as best she can. I tell her it's a grand
opportunity for practising patience. But she hardly sees it from that
point of view. Why, there are the children!”

So indeed they were: waiting (for us, apparently) at a stile, which they
could not have climbed over more than a few moments, as Lady Muriel and
her cousin had passed it without seeing them. On catching sight of us,
Bruno ran to meet us, and to exhibit to us, with much pride, the handle
of a clasp-knife--the blade having been broken off--which he had picked
up in the road.

“And what shall you use it for, Bruno?” I said.

“Don't know,” Bruno carelessly replied: “must think.”

“A child's first view of life,” the Earl remarked, with that sweet
sad smile of his, “is that it is a period to be spent in accumulating
portable property. That view gets modified as the years glide away.” And
he held out his hand to Sylvie, who had placed herself by me, looking a
little shy of him.

But the gentle old man was not one with whom any child, human or fairy,
could be shy for long; and she had very soon deserted my hand for
his--Bruno alone remaining faithful to his first friend. We overtook the
other couple just as they reached the Station, and both Lady Muriel and
Eric greeted the children as old friends--the latter with the words “So
you got to Babylon by candlelight, after all?”

“Yes, and back again!” cried Bruno.

Lady Muriel looked from one to the other in blank astonishment. “What,
you know them, Eric?” she exclaimed. “This mystery grows deeper every
day!”

“Then we must be somewhere in the Third Act,” said Eric. “You don't
expect the mystery to be cleared up till the Fifth Act, do you?”

“But it's such a long drama!” was the plaintive reply. “We must have got
to the Fifth Act by this time!”

“Third Act, I assure you,” said the young soldier mercilessly. “Scene, a
railway-platform. Lights down. Enter Prince (in disguise, of course)
and faithful Attendant. This is the Prince--” (taking Bruno's hand)
“and here stands his humble Servant! What is your Royal Highness next
command?” And he made a most courtier-like low bow to his puzzled little
friend.

“Oo're not a Servant!” Bruno scornfully exclaimed. “Oo're a Gemplun!”

“Servant, I assure your Royal Highness!” Eric respectfully insisted.
“Allow me to mention to your Royal Highness my various situations--past,
present, and future.”

“What did oo begin wiz?” Bruno asked, beginning to enter into the jest.
“Was oo a shoe-black?”

“Lower than that, your Royal Highness! Years ago, I offered myself as
a Slave--as a 'Confidential Slave,' I think it's called?” he asked,
turning to Lady Muriel.

But Lady Muriel heard him not: something had gone wrong with her glove,
which entirely engrossed her attention.

“Did oo get the place?” said Bruno.

“Sad to say, Your Royal Highness, I did not! So I had to take a
situation as--as Waiter, which I have now held for some years haven't
I?” He again glanced at Lady Muriel.

“Sylvie dear, do help me to button this glove!” Lady Muriel whispered,
hastily stooping down, and failing to hear the question.

“And what will oo be next?” said Bruno.

“My next place will, I hope, be that of Groom. And after that--”

“Don't puzzle the child so!” Lady Muriel interrupted. “What nonsense you
talk!”

“--after that,” Eric persisted, “I hope to obtain the situation of
Housekeeper, which--Fourth Act!” he proclaimed, with a sudden change of
tone. “Lights turned up. Red lights. Green lights. Distant rumble heard.
Enter a passenger-train!”

And in another minute the train drew up alongside of the platform, and
a stream of passengers began to flow out from the booking office and
waiting-rooms.

“Did you ever make real life into a drama?” said the Earl. “Now just
try. I've often amused myself that way. Consider this platform as
our stage. Good entrances and exits on both sides, you see. Capital
background scene: real engine moving up and down. All this bustle, and
people passing to and fro, must have been most carefully rehearsed! How
naturally they do it! With never a glance at the audience! And every
grouping is quite fresh, you see. No repetition!”

It really was admirable, as soon as I began to enter into it from this
point of view. Even a porter passing, with a barrow piled with luggage,
seemed so realistic that one was tempted to applaud. He was followed
by an angry mother, with hot red face, dragging along two screaming
children, and calling, to some one behind, “John! Come on!” Enter John,
very meek, very silent, and loaded with parcels. And he was followed,
in his turn, by a frightened little nursemaid, carrying a fat baby, also
screaming. All the children screamed.

“Capital byplay!” said the old man aside. “Did you notice the
nursemaid's look of terror? It was simply perfect!”

“You have struck quite a new vein,” I said. “To most of us Life and its
pleasures seem like a mine that is nearly worked out.”

“Worked out!” exclaimed the Earl. “For any one with true dramatic
instincts, it is only the Overture that is ended! The real treat has yet
to begin. You go to a theatre, and pay your ten shillings for a stall,
and what do you get for your money? Perhaps it's a dialogue between a
couple of farmers--unnatural in their overdone caricature of farmers'
dress--more unnatural in their constrained attitudes and gestures--most
unnatural in their attempts at ease and geniality in their talk. Go
instead and take a seat in a third-class railway-carriage, and you'll
get the same dialogue done to the life! Front-seats--no orchestra to
block the view--and nothing to pay!”

“Which reminds me,” said Eric. “There is nothing to pay on receiving a
telegram! Shall we enquire for one?” And he and Lady Muriel strolled off
in the direction of the Telegraph-Office.

“I wonder if Shakespeare had that thought in his mind,” I said, “when he
wrote 'All the world's a stage'?”

The old man sighed. “And so it is,” he said, “look at it as you will.
Life is indeed a drama; a drama with but few encores--and no bouquets!”
 he added dreamily. “We spend one half of it in regretting the things we
did in the other half!”

“And the secret of enjoying it,” he continued, resuming his cheerful
tone, “is intensity!”

“But not in the modern aesthetic sense, I presume? Like the young lady,
in Punch, who begins a conversation with 'Are you intense?'”

“By no means!” replied the Earl. “What I mean is intensity of thought--a
concentrated attention. We lose half the pleasure we might have in Life,
by not really attending. Take any instance you like: it doesn't matter
how trivial the pleasure may be--the principle is the same. Suppose
A and B are reading the same second-rate circulating-library novel. A
never troubles himself to master the relationships of the characters, on
which perhaps all the interest of the story depends: he 'skips' over all
the descriptions of scenery, and every passage that looks rather dull:
he doesn't half attend to the passages he does read: he goes on reading
merely from want of resolution to find another occupation--for hours
after he ought to have put the book aside: and reaches the 'FINIS' in a
state of utter weariness and depression! B puts his whole soul into the
thing--on the principle that 'whatever is worth doing is worth doing
well': he masters the genealogies: he calls up pictures before his
'mind's eye' as he reads about the scenery: best of all, he resolutely
shuts the book at the end of some chapter, while his interest is yet at
its keenest, and turns to other subjects; so that, when next he allows
himself an hour at it, it is like a hungry man sitting down to dinner:
and, when the book is finished, he returns to the work of his daily life
like 'a giant refreshed'!”

“But suppose the book were really rubbish--nothing to repay attention?”

“Well, suppose it,” said the Earl. “My theory meets that case, I assure
you! A never finds out that it is rubbish, but maunders on to the end,
trying to believe he's enjoying himself. B quietly shuts the book, when
he's read a dozen pages, walks off to the Library, and changes it for
a better! I have yet another theory for adding to the enjoyment of
Life--that is, if I have not exhausted your patience? I'm afraid you
find me a very garrulous old man.”

“No indeed!” I exclaimed earnestly. And indeed I felt as if one could
not easily tire of the sweet sadness of that gentle voice.

“It is, that we should learn to take our pleasures quickly, and our
pains slowly.”

“But why? I should have put it the other way, myself.”

“By taking artificial pain--which can be as trivial as you
please--slowly, the result is that, when real pain comes, however
severe, all you need do is to let it go at its ordinary pace, and it's
over in a moment!”

“Very true,” I said, “but how about the pleasure?”

“Why, by taking it quick, you can get so much more into life. It takes
you three hours and a half to hear and enjoy an opera. Suppose I can
take it in, and enjoy it, in half-an-hour. Why, I can enjoy seven
operas, while you are listening; to one!”

“Always supposing you have an orchestra capable of playing them,” I
said. “And that orchestra has yet to be found!”

The old man smiled. “I have heard an 'air played,” he said, “and by no
means a short one--played right through, variations and all, in three
seconds!”

“When? And how?” I asked eagerly, with a half-notion that I was dreaming
again.

“It was done by a little musical-box,” he quietly replied. “After it had
been wound up, the regulator, or something, broke, and it ran down, as I
said, in about three seconds. But it must have played all the notes, you
know!”

“Did you enjoy it? I asked, with all the severity of a cross-examining
barrister.

“No, I didn't!” he candidly confessed. “But then, you know, I hadn't
been trained to that kind of music!”

“I should much like to try your plan,” I said, and, as Sylvie and Bruno
happened to run up to us at the moment, I left them to keep the Earl
company, and strolled along the platform, making each person and event
play its part in an extempore drama for my especial benefit. “What, is
the Earl tired of you already?” I said, as the children ran past me.

“No!” Sylvie replied with great emphasis. “He wants the evening-paper.
So Bruno's going to be a little news-boy!”

“Mind you charge a good price for it!” I called after them.

Returning up the platform, I came upon Sylvie alone. “Well, child,”
 I said, “where's your little news-boy? Couldn't he get you an
evening-paper?”

“He went to get one at the book-stall at the other side,” said Sylvie;
“and he's coming across the line with it--oh, Bruno, you ought to cross
by the bridge!” for the distant thud, thud, of the Express was already
audible.

Suddenly a look of horror came over her face. “Oh, he's fallen down on
the rails!” she cried, and darted past me at a speed that quite defied
the hasty effort I made to stop her.

But the wheezy old Station-Master happened to be close behind me: he
wasn't good for much, poor old man, but he was good for this; and,
before I could turn round, he had the child clasped in his arms, saved
from the certain death she was rushing to. So intent was I in watching
this scene, that I hardly saw a flying figure in a light grey suit,
who shot across from the back of the platform, and was on the line in
another second. So far as one could take note of time in such a moment
of horror, he had about ten clear seconds, before the Express would be
upon him, in which to cross the rails and to pick up Bruno. Whether he
did so or not it was quite impossible to guess: the next thing one knew
was that the Express had passed, and that, whether for life or death,
all was over. When the cloud of dust had cleared away, and the line was
once more visible, we saw with thankful hearts that the child and his
deliverer were safe.

“All right!” Eric called to us cheerfully, as he recrossed the line.
“He's more frightened than hurt!”

{Image...Crossing the line}

He lifted the little fellow up into Lady Muriel's arms, and mounted
the platform as gaily as if nothing had happened: but he was as pale as
death, and leaned heavily on the arm I hastily offered him, fearing he
was about to faint. “I'll just--sit down a moment--” he said dreamily:
“--where's Sylvie?”

Sylvie ran to him, and flung her arms round his neck, sobbing as if her
heart would break. “Don't do that, my darling!” Eric murmured, with a
strange look in his eyes. “Nothing to cry about now, you know. But you
very nearly got yourself killed for nothing!”

“For Bruno!” the little maiden sobbed. “And he would have done it for
me. Wouldn't you, Bruno?”

“Course I would!” Bruno said, looking round with a bewildered air.

Lady Muriel kissed him in silence as she put him down out of her arms.
Then she beckoned Sylvie to come and take his hand, and signed to
the children to go back to where the Earl was seated. “Tell him,” she
whispered with quivering lips, “tell him--all is well!” Then she turned
to the hero of the day. “I thought it was death,” she said. “Thank God,
you are safe! Did you see how near it was?”

“I saw there was just time,” Eric said lightly.

“A soldier must learn to carry his life in his hand, you know. I'm all
right now. Shall we go to the telegraph-office again? I daresay it's
come by this time.”

I went to join the Earl and the children, and we waited--almost in
silence, for no one seemed inclined to talk, and Bruno was half-asleep
on Sylvie's lap--till the others joined us. No telegram had come.

“I'll take a stroll with the children,” I said, feeling that we were a
little de trop, “and I'll look in, in the course of the evening.”

“We must go back into the wood, now,” Sylvie said, as soon as we were
out of hearing. “We ca'n't stay this size any longer.”

“Then you will be quite tiny Fairies again, next time we meet?”

“Yes,” said Sylvie: “but we'll be children again some day--if you'll let
us. Bruno's very anxious to see Lady Muriel again.”

“She are welly nice,” said Bruno.

“I shall be very glad to take you to see her again,” I said. “Hadn't I
better give you back the Professor's Watch? It'll be too large for you
to carry when you're Fairies, you know.”

Bruno laughed merrily. I was glad to see he had quite recovered from the
terrible scene he had gone through. “Oh no, it won't!” he said. “When we
go small, it'll go small!”

“And then it'll go straight to the Professor,” Sylvie added, “and you
won't be able to use it anymore: so you'd better use it all you can,
now. We must go small when the sun sets. Good-bye!”

“Good-bye!” cried Bruno. But their voices sounded very far away, and,
when I looked round, both children had disappeared.

“And it wants only two hours to sunset!” I said as I strolled on. “I
must make the best of my time!”






CHAPTER 23. AN OUTLANDISH WATCH.

As I entered the little town, I came upon two of the fishermen's wives
interchanging that last word “which never was the last”: and it occurred
to me, as an experiment with the Magic Watch, to wait till the little
scene was over, and then to 'encore' it.

“Well, good night t'ye! And ye winna forget to send us word when your
Martha writes?”

“Nay, ah winna forget. An' if she isn't suited, she can but coom back.
Good night t'ye!”

A casual observer might have thought “and there ends the dialogue!” That
casual observer would have been mistaken.

“Ah, she'll like 'em, I war'n' ye! They'll not treat her bad, yer may
depend. They're varry canny fowk. Good night!”

“Ay, they are that! Good night!”

“Good night! And ye'll send us word if she writes?”

“Aye, ah will, yer may depend! Good night t'ye!”

And at last they parted. I waited till they were some twenty yards
apart, and then put the Watch a minute back. The instantaneous change
was startling: the two figures seemed to flash back into their former
places.

“--isn't suited, she can but coom back. Good night t'ye!” one of them
was saying: and so the whole dialogue was repeated, and, when they
had parted for the second time, I let them go their several ways, and
strolled on through the town.

“But the real usefulness of this magic power,” I thought, “would be to
undo some harm, some painful event, some accident--”

I had not long to wait for an opportunity of testing this property also
of the Magic Watch, for, even as the thought passed through my mind, the
accident I was imagining occurred. A light cart was standing at the
door of the 'Great Millinery Depot' of Elveston, laden with card-board
packing-cases, which the driver was carrying into the shop, one by one.
One of the cases had fallen into the street, but it scarcely seemed
worth while to step forward and pick it up, as the man would be back
again in a moment. Yet, in that moment, a young man riding a bicycle
came sharp round the corner of the street and, in trying to avoid
running over the box, upset his machine, and was thrown headlong against
the wheel of the spring-cart. The driver ran out to his assistance, and
he and I together raised the unfortunate cyclist and carried him into
the shop. His head was cut and bleeding; and one knee seemed to be badly
injured; and it was speedily settled that he had better be conveyed at
once to the only Surgery in the place. I helped them in emptying the
cart, and placing in it some pillows for the wounded man to rest on; and
it was only when the driver had mounted to his place, and was starting
for the Surgery, that I bethought me of the strange power I possessed of
undoing all this harm.

“Now is my time!” I said to myself, as I moved back the hand of the
Watch, and saw, almost without surprise this time, all things restored
to the places they had occupied at the critical moment when I had first
noticed the fallen packing-case.

Instantly I stepped out into the street, picked up the box, and replaced
it in the cart: in the next moment the bicycle had spun round the
corner, passed the cart without let or hindrance, and soon vanished in
the distance, in a cloud of dust.

“Delightful power of magic!” I thought. “How much of human suffering I
have--not only relieved, but actually annihilated!” And, in a glow of
conscious virtue, I stood watching the unloading of the cart, still
holding the Magic Watch open in my hand, as I was curious to see what
would happen when we again reached the exact time at which I had put
back the hand.

The result was one that, if only I had considered the thing carefully,
I might have foreseen: as the hand of the Watch touched the mark, the
spring-cart--which had driven off, and was by this time half-way down
the street, was back again at the door, and in the act of starting,
while--oh woe for the golden dream of world-wide benevolence that had
dazzled my dreaming fancy!--the wounded youth was once more reclining
on the heap of pillows, his pale face set rigidly in the hard lines that
told of pain resolutely endured.

“Oh mocking Magic Watch!” I said to myself, as I passed out of the
little town, and took the seaward road that led to my lodgings. “The
good I fancied I could do is vanished like a dream: the evil of this
troublesome world is the only abiding reality!”

And now I must record an experience so strange, that I think it only
fair, before beginning to relate it, to release my much-enduring reader
from any obligation he may feel to believe this part of my story. I
would not have believed it, I freely confess, if I had not seen it
with my own eyes: then why should I expect it of my reader, who, quite
possibly, has never seen anything of the sort?

I was passing a pretty little villa, which stood rather back from the
road, in its own grounds, with bright flower-beds in front---creepers
wandering over the walls and hanging in festoons about the
bow-windows--an easy-chair forgotten on the lawn, with a newspaper lying
near it--a small pug-dog “couchant” before it, resolved to guard the
treasure even at the sacrifice of life--and a front-door standing
invitingly half-open. “Here is my chance,” I thought, “for testing the
reverse action of the Magic Watch!” I pressed the 'reversal-peg' and
walked in. In another house, the entrance of a stranger might cause
surprise--perhaps anger, even going so far as to expel the said stranger
with violence: but here, I knew, nothing of the sort could happen.
The ordinary course of events first, to think nothing about me; then,
hearing my footsteps to look up and see me; and then to wonder what
business I had there--would be reversed by the action of my Watch. They
would first wonder who I was, then see me, then look down, and think no
more about me. And as to being expelled with violence, that event would
necessarily come first in this case. “So, if I can once get in,” I said
to myself, “all risk of expulsion will be over!”

{Image...'The pug-dog sat up'}

The pug-dog sat up, as a precautionary measure, as I passed; but, as I
took no notice of the treasure he was guarding, he let me go by without
even one remonstrant bark. “He that takes my life,” he seemed to be
saying, wheezily, to himself, “takes trash: But he that takes the Daily
Telegraph--!” But this awful contingency I did not face.

The party in the drawing-room--I had walked straight in, you understand,
without ringing the bell, or giving any notice of my approach--consisted
of four laughing rosy children, of ages from about fourteen down to ten,
who were, apparently, all coming towards the door (I found they were
really walking backwards), while their mother, seated by the fire with
some needlework on her lap, was saying, just as I entered the room,
“Now, girls, you may get your things on for a walk.”

To my utter astonishment--for I was not yet accustomed to the action
of the Watch “all smiles ceased,” (as Browning says) on the four pretty
faces, and they all got out pieces of needle-work, and sat down. No one
noticed me in the least, as I quietly took a chair and sat down to watch
them.

When the needle-work had been unfolded, and they were all ready to
begin, their mother said “Come, that's done, at last! You may fold
up your work, girls.” But the children took no notice whatever of the
remark; on the contrary, they set to work at once sewing--if that is
the proper word to describe an operation such as I had never before
witnessed. Each of them threaded her needle with a short end of thread
attached to the work, which was instantly pulled by an invisible force
through the stuff, dragging the needle after it: the nimble fingers of
the little sempstress caught it at the other side, but only to lose it
again the next moment. And so the work went on, steadily undoing itself,
and the neatly-stitched little dresses, or whatever they were, steadily
falling to pieces. Now and then one of the children would pause, as the
recovered thread became inconveniently long, wind it on a bobbin, and
start again with another short end.

At last all the work was picked to pieces and put away, and the lady
led the way into the next room, walking backwards, and making the insane
remark “Not yet, dear: we must get the sewing done first.” After which,
I was not surprised to see the children skipping backwards after her,
exclaiming “Oh, mother, it is such a lovely day for a walk!”

In the dining-room, the table had only dirty plates and empty dishes
on it. However the party--with the addition of a gentleman, as
good-natured, and as rosy, as the children--seated themselves at it very
contentedly.

You have seen people eating cherry-tart, and every now and then
cautiously conveying a cherry-stone from their lips to their plates?
Well, something like that went on all through this ghastly--or shall we
say 'ghostly'?---banquet. An empty fork is raised to the lips: there
it receives a neatly-cut piece of mutton, and swiftly conveys it to the
plate, where it instantly attaches itself to the mutton already there.
Soon one of the plates, furnished with a complete slice of mutton and
two potatoes, was handed up to the presiding gentleman, who quietly
replaced the slice on the joint, and the potatoes in the dish.

Their conversation was, if possible, more bewildering than their mode of
dining. It began by the youngest girl suddenly, and without provocation,
addressing her eldest sister. “Oh, you wicked story-teller!” she said.

I expected a sharp reply from the sister; but, instead of this, she
turned laughingly to her father, and said, in a very loud stage-whisper,
“To be a bride!”

The father, in order to do his part in a conversation that seemed only
fit for lunatics, replied “Whisper it to me, dear.”

But she didn't whisper (these children never did anything they were
told): she said, quite loud, “Of course not! Everybody knows what Dotty
wants!”

And little Dolly shrugged her shoulders, and said, with a pretty
pettishness, “Now, Father, you're not to tease! You know I don't want to
be bride's-maid to anybody!”

“And Dolly's to be the fourth,” was her father's idiotic reply.

Here Number Three put in her oar. “Oh, it is settled, Mother dear,
really and truly! Mary told us all about it. It's to be next
Tuesday four weeks--and three of her cousins are coming; to be
bride's-maids--and--”

“She doesn't forget it, Minnie!” the Mother laughingly replied. “I do
wish they'd get it settled! I don't like long engagements.”

And Minnie wound up the conversation--if so chaotic a series of remarks
deserves the name--with “Only think! We passed the Cedars this morning,
just exactly as Mary Davenant was standing at the gate, wishing good-bye
to Mister---I forget his name. Of course we looked the other way.”

By this time I was so hopelessly confused that I gave up listening, and
followed the dinner down into the kitchen.

But to you, O hypercritical reader, resolute to believe no item of this
weird adventure, what need to tell how the mutton was placed on the
spit, and slowly unroasted--how the potatoes were wrapped in their
skins, and handed over to the gardener to be buried--how, when the
mutton had at length attained to rawness, the fire, which had gradually
changed from red-heat to a mere blaze, died down so suddenly that
the cook had only just time to catch its last flicker on the end of a
match--or how the maid, having taken the mutton off the spit, carried
it (backwards, of course) out of the house, to meet the butcher, who was
coming (also backwards) down the road?

The longer I thought over this strange adventure, the more hopelessly
tangled the mystery became: and it was a real relief to meet Arthur in
the road, and get him to go with me up to the Hall, to learn what news
the telegraph had brought. I told him, as we went, what had happened at
the Station, but as to my further adventures I thought it best, for the
present, to say nothing.

The Earl was sitting alone when we entered. “I am glad you are come in
to keep me company,” he said. “Muriel is gone to bed--the excitement of
that terrible scene was too much for her--and Eric has gone to the hotel
to pack his things, to start for London by the early train.”

“Then the telegram has come?” I said.

“Did you not hear? Oh, I had forgotten: it came in after you left the
Station. Yes, it's all right: Eric has got his commission; and, now that
he has arranged matters with Muriel, he has business in town that must
be seen to at once.”

“What arrangement do you mean?” I asked with a sinking heart, as the
thought of Arthur's crushed hopes came to my mind. “Do you mean that
they are engaged?”

“They have been engaged--in a sense--for two years,” the old man gently
replied: “that is, he has had my promise to consent to it, so soon as
he could secure a permanent and settled line in life. I could never
be happy with my child married to a man without an object to live
for--without even an object to die for!”

“I hope they will be happy,” a strange voice said. The speaker was
evidently in the room, but I had not heard the door open, and I looked
round in some astonishment. The Earl seemed to share my surprise. “Who
spoke?” he exclaimed.

“It was I,” said Arthur, looking at us with a worn, haggard face, and
eyes from which the light of life seemed suddenly to have faded. “And
let me wish you joy also, dear friend,” he added, looking sadly at the
Earl, and speaking in the same hollow tones that had startled us so
much.

“Thank you,” the old man said, simply and heartily.

A silence followed: then I rose, feeling sure that Arthur would wish to
be alone, and bade our gentle host 'Good night': Arthur took his hand,
but said nothing: nor did he speak again, as we went home till we were
in the house and had lit our bed-room candles. Then he said more to
himself than to me, “The heart knoweth its own bitterness. I never
understood those words till now.”

The next few days passed wearily enough. I felt no inclination to call
by myself at the Hall; still less to propose that Arthur should go
with me: it seemed better to wait till Time--that gentle healer of our
bitterest sorrows should have helped him to recover from the first shock
of the disappointment that had blighted his life.

Business however soon demanded my presence in town; and I had to
announce to Arthur that I must leave him for a while. “But I hope to run
down again in a month,” I added. “I would stay now, if I could. I don't
think it's good for you to be alone.”

“No, I ca'n't face solitude, here, for long,” said Arthur. “But don't
think about me. I have made up my mind to accept a post in India, that
has been offered me. Out there, I suppose I shall find something to live
for; I ca'n't see anything at present. 'This life of mine I guard, as
God's high gift, from scathe and wrong, Not greatly care to lose!'”

“Yes,” I said: “your name-sake bore as heavy a blow, and lived through
it.”

“A far heavier one than mine,” said Arthur. “The woman he loved proved
false. There is no such cloud as that on my memory of--of--” He left the
name unuttered, and went on hurriedly. “But you will return, will you
not?”

“Yes, I shall come back for a short time.”

“Do,” said Arthur: “and you shall write and tell me of our friends. I'll
send you my address when I'm settled down.”






CHAPTER 24. THE FROGS' BIRTHDAY-TREAT.

And so it came to pass that, just a week after the day when my
Fairy-friends first appeared as Children, I found myself taking a
farewell-stroll through the wood, in the hope of meeting them once more.
I had but to stretch myself on the smooth turf, and the 'eerie' feeling
was on me in a moment.

“Put oor ear welly low down,” said Bruno, “and I'll tell oo a secret!
It's the Frogs' Birthday-Treat--and we've lost the Baby!”

“What Baby?” I said, quite bewildered by this complicated piece of news.

“The Queen's Baby, a course!” said Bruno. “Titania's Baby. And we's
welly sorry. Sylvie, she's--oh so sorry!”

“How sorry is she?” I asked, mischievously.

“Three-quarters of a yard,” Bruno replied with perfect solemnity. “And
I'm a little sorry too,” he added, shutting his eyes so as not to see
that he was smiling.

“And what are you doing about the Baby?”

“Well, the soldiers are all looking for it--up and down everywhere.”

“The soldiers?” I exclaimed.

“Yes, a course!” said Bruno. “When there's no fighting to be done, the
soldiers doos any little odd jobs, oo know.”

I was amused at the idea of its being a 'little odd job' to find the
Royal Baby. “But how did you come to lose it?” I asked.

“We put it in a flower,” Sylvie, who had just joined us, explained with
her eyes full of tears. “Only we ca'n't remember which!”

“She says us put it in a flower,” Bruno interrupted, “'cause she doosn't
want I to get punished. But it were really me what put it there. Sylvie
were picking Dindledums.”

{Image...The queen's baby}

“You shouldn't say 'us put it in a flower',” Sylvie very gravely
remarked.

“Well, hus, then,” said Bruno. “I never can remember those horrid H's!”

“Let me help you to look for it,” I said. So Sylvie and I made a 'voyage
of discovery' among all the flowers; but there was no Baby to be seen.

“What's become of Bruno?” I said, when we had completed our tour.

“He's down in the ditch there,” said Sylvie, “amusing a young Frog.”

I went down on my hands and knees to look for him, for I felt very
curious to know how young Frogs ought to be amused. After a minute's
search, I found him sitting at the edge of the ditch, by the side of the
little Frog, and looking rather disconsolate.

“How are you getting on, Bruno?” I said, nodding to him as he looked up.

“Ca'n't amuse it no more,” Bruno answered, very dolefully, “'cause
it won't say what it would like to do next! I've showed it all
the duck-weeds--and a live caddis-worm----but it won't say nuffin!
What--would oo like?'” he shouted into the ear of the Frog: but the
little creature sat quite still, and took no notice of him. “It's deaf,
I think!” Bruno said, turning away with a sigh. “And it's time to get
the Theatre ready.”

“Who are the audience to be?”

“Only but Frogs,” said Bruno. “But they haven't comed yet. They wants to
be drove up, like sheep.”

“Would it save time,” I suggested, “if I were to walk round with Sylvie,
to drive up the Frogs, while you get the Theatre ready?”

“That are a good plan!” cried Bruno. “But where are Sylvie?”

“I'm here!” said Sylvie, peeping over the edge of the bank. “I was just
watching two Frogs that were having a race.”

“Which won it?” Bruno eagerly inquired.

Sylvie was puzzled. “He does ask such hard questions!” she confided to
me.

“And what's to happen in the Theatre?” I asked.

“First they have their Birthday-Feast,” Sylvie said: “then Bruno does
some Bits of Shakespeare; then he tells them a Story.”

“I should think the Frogs like the Feast best. Don't they?”

“Well, there's generally very few of them that get any. They will keep
their mouths shut so tight! And it's just as well they do,” she added,
“because Bruno likes to cook it himself: and he cooks very queerly. Now
they're all in. Would you just help me to put them with their heads the
right way?”

We soon managed this part of the business, though the Frogs kept up a
most discontented croaking all the time.

“What are they saying?” I asked Sylvie.

“They're saying 'Fork! Fork!' It's very silly of them! You're not going
to have forks!” she announced with some severity. “Those that want any
Feast have just got to open their mouths, and Bruno 'll put some of it
in!”

At this moment Bruno appeared, wearing a little white apron to show that
he was a Cook, and carrying a tureen full of very queer-looking soup.
I watched very carefully as he moved about among the Frogs; but I could
not see that any of them opened their mouths to be fed--except one
very young one, and I'm nearly sure it did it accidentally, in yawning.
However Bruno instantly put a large spoonful of soup into its mouth, and
the poor little thing coughed violently for some time.

So Sylvie and I had to share the soup between us, and to pretend to
enjoy it, for it certainly was very queerly cooked.

I only ventured to take one spoonful of it (“Sylvie's Summer-Soup,”
 Bruno said it was), and must candidly confess that it was not at all
nice; and I could not feel surprised that so many of the guests had kept
their mouths shut up tight.

“What's the soup made of, Bruno?” said Sylvie, who had put a spoonful of
it to her lips, and was making a wry face over it.

And Bruno's answer was anything but encouraging. “Bits of things!”

The entertainment was to conclude with “Bits of Shakespeare,” as Sylvie
expressed it, which were all to be done by Bruno, Sylvie being fully
engaged in making the Frogs keep their heads towards the stage: after
which Bruno was to appear in his real character, and tell them a Story
of his own invention.

“Will the Story have a Moral to it?” I asked Sylvie, while Bruno was
away behind the hedge, dressing for the first 'Bit.'

“I think so,” Sylvie replied doubtfully. “There generally is a Moral,
only he puts it in too soon.”

“And will he say all the Bits of Shakespeare?”

“No, he'll only act them,” said Sylvie. “He knows hardly any of the
words. When I see what he's dressed like, I've to tell the Frogs what
character it is. They're always in such a hurry to guess! Don't you
hear them all saying 'What? What?'” And so indeed they were: it had only
sounded like croaking, till Sylvie explained it, but I could now make
out the “Wawt? Wawt?” quite distinctly.

“But why do they try to guess it before they see it?”

“I don't know,” Sylvie said: “but they always do. Sometimes they begin
guessing weeks and weeks before the day!”

(So now, when you hear the Frogs croaking in a particularly melancholy
way, you may be sure they're trying to guess Bruno's next Shakespeare
'Bit'. Isn't that interesting?)

However, the chorus of guessing was cut short by Bruno, who suddenly
rushed on from behind the scenes, and took a flying leap down among the
Frogs, to re-arrange them.

For the oldest and fattest Frog--who had never been properly arranged so
that he could see the stage, and so had no idea what was going on--was
getting restless, and had upset several of the Frogs, and turned others
round with their heads the wrong way. And it was no good at all, Bruno
said, to do a 'Bit' of Shakespeare when there was nobody to look at it
(you see he didn't count me as anybody). So he set to work with a stick,
stirring them up, very much as you would stir up tea in a cup, till most
of them had at least one great stupid eye gazing at the stage.

“Oo must come and sit among them, Sylvie,” he said in despair, “I've
put these two side-by-side, with their noses the same way, ever so many
times, but they do squarrel so!”

So Sylvie took her place as 'Mistress of the Ceremonies,' and Bruno
vanished again behind the scenes, to dress for the first 'Bit.'

“Hamlet!” was suddenly proclaimed, in the clear sweet tones I knew so
well. The croaking all ceased in a moment, and I turned to the stage,
in some curiosity to see what Bruno's ideas were as to the behaviour of
Shakespeare's greatest Character.

According to this eminent interpreter of the Drama, Hamlet wore a short
black cloak (which he chiefly used for muffling up his face, as if he
suffered a good deal from toothache), and turned out his toes very much
as he walked. “To be or not to be!” Hamlet remarked in a cheerful tone,
and then turned head-over-heels several times, his cloak dropping off in
the performance.

I felt a little disappointed: Bruno's conception of the part seemed so
wanting in dignity. “Won't he say any more of the speech?” I whispered
to Sylvie.

“I think not,” Sylvie whispered in reply. “He generally turns
head-over-heels when he doesn't know any more words.”

Bruno had meanwhile settled the question by disappearing from the stage;
and the Frogs instantly began inquiring the name of the next Character.

“You'll know directly!” cried Sylvie, as she adjusted two or three young
Frogs that had struggled round with their backs to the stage. “Macbeth!”
 she added, as Bruno re-appeared.

Macbeth had something twisted round him, that went over one shoulder and
under the other arm, and was meant, I believe, for a Scotch plaid. He
had a thorn in his hand, which he held out at arm's length, as if he
were a little afraid of it. “Is this a dagger?” Macbeth inquired, in a
puzzled sort of tone: and instantly a chorus of “Thorn! Thorn!” arose
from the Frogs (I had quite learned to understand their croaking by this
time).

“It's a dagger!” Sylvie proclaimed in a peremptory tone. “Hold your
tongues!” And the croaking ceased at once.

Shakespeare has not told us, so far as I know, that Macbeth had any such
eccentric habit as turning head-over-heels in private life: but Bruno
evidently considered it quite an essential part of the character, and
left the stage in a series of somersaults. However, he was back again
in a few moments, having tucked under his chin the end of a tuft of
wool (probably left on the thorn by a wandering sheep), which made a
magnificent beard, that reached nearly down to his feet.

“Shylock!” Sylvie proclaimed. “No, I beg your pardon!” she hastily
corrected herself, “King Lear! I hadn't noticed the crown.” (Bruno had
very cleverly provided one, which fitted him exactly, by cutting out the
centre of a dandelion to make room for his head.)

King Lear folded his arms (to the imminent peril of his beard) and said,
in a mild explanatory tone, “Ay, every inch a king!” and then paused,
as if to consider how this could best be proved. And here, with all
possible deference to Bruno as a Shakespearian critic, I must express my
opinion that the poet did not mean his three great tragic heroes to be
so strangely alike in their personal habits; nor do I believe that he
would have accepted the faculty of turning head-over-heels as any proof
at all of royal descent. Yet it appeared that King Lear, after deep
meditation, could think of no other argument by which to prove his
kingship: and, as this was the last of the 'Bits' of Shakespeare (“We
never do more than three,” Sylvie explained in a whisper), Bruno gave
the audience quite a long series of somersaults before he finally
retired, leaving the enraptured Frogs all crying out “More! More!” which
I suppose was their way of encoring a performance. But Bruno wouldn't
appear again, till the proper time came for telling the Story.

{Image...The frogs' birthday-treat}

When he appeared at last in his real character, I noticed a remarkable
change in his behaviour.

He tried no more somersaults. It was clearly his opinion that, however
suitable the habit of turning head-over-heels might be to such petty
individuals as Hamlet and King Lear, it would never do for Bruno to
sacrifice his dignity to such an extent. But it was equally clear that
he did not feel entirely at his ease, standing all alone on the stage,
with no costume to disguise him: and though he began, several times,
“There were a Mouse--,” he kept glancing up and down, and on all sides,
as if in search of more comfortable quarters from which to tell the
Story. Standing on one side of the stage, and partly overshadowing it,
was a tall foxglove, which seemed, as the evening breeze gently swayed
it hither and thither, to offer exactly the sort of accommodation that
the orator desired. Having once decided on his quarters, it needed only
a second or two for him to run up the stem like a tiny squirrel, and
to seat himself astride on the topmost bend, where the fairy-bells
clustered most closely, and from whence he could look down on his
audience from such a height that all shyness vanished, and he began his
Story merrily.

“Once there were a Mouse and a Crocodile and a Man and a Goat and a
Lion.” I had never heard the 'dramatis personae' tumbled into a story
with such profusion and in such reckless haste; and it fairly took my
breath away. Even Sylvie gave a little gasp, and allowed three of the
Frogs, who seemed to be getting tired of the entertainment, to hop away
into the ditch, without attempting to stop them.

“And the Mouse found a Shoe, and it thought it were a Mouse-trap. So it
got right in, and it stayed in ever so long.”

“Why did it stay in?” said Sylvie. Her function seemed to be much the
same as that of the Chorus in a Greek Play: she had to encourage the
orator, and draw him out, by a series of intelligent questions.

“'Cause it thought it couldn't get out again,” Bruno explained. “It were
a clever mouse. It knew it couldn't get out of traps!”

“But why did it go in at all?” said Sylvie.

“--and it jamp, and it jamp,” Bruno proceeded, ignoring this question,
“and at last it got right out again. And it looked at the mark in the
Shoe. And the Man's name were in it. So it knew it wasn't its own Shoe.”

“Had it thought it was?” said Sylvie.

“Why, didn't I tell oo it thought it were a Mouse-trap?” the indignant
orator replied. “Please, Mister Sir, will oo make Sylvie attend?” Sylvie
was silenced, and was all attention: in fact, she and I were most of the
audience now, as the Frogs kept hopping away, and there were very few of
them left.

“So the Mouse gave the Man his Shoe. And the Man were welly glad, cause
he hadn't got but one Shoe, and he were hopping to get the other.”

Here I ventured on a question. “Do you mean 'hopping,' or 'hoping'?”

“Bofe,” said Bruno. “And the Man took the Goat out of the Sack.” (“We
haven't heard of the sack before,” I said. “Nor you won't hear of it
again,” said Bruno). “And he said to the Goat, 'Oo will walk about here
till I comes back.' And he went and he tumbled into a deep hole. And the
Goat walked round and round. And it walked under the Tree. And it wug
its tail. And it looked up in the Tree. And it sang a sad little Song.
Oo never heard such a sad little Song!”

“Can you sing it, Bruno?” I asked.

“Iss, I can,” Bruno readily replied. “And I sa'n't. It would make Sylvie
cry--”

“It wouldn't!,” Sylvie interrupted in great indignation. “And I don't
believe the Goat sang it at all!”

“It did, though!” said Bruno. “It singed it right froo. I sawed it
singing with its long beard--”

“It couldn't sing with its beard,” I said, hoping to puzzle the little
fellow: “a beard isn't a voice.”

“Well then, oo couldn't walk with Sylvie!” Bruno cried triumphantly.
“Sylvie isn't a foot!”

I thought I had better follow Sylvie's example, and be silent for a
while. Bruno was too sharp for us.

“And when it had singed all the Song, it ran away--for to get along to
look for the Man, oo know. And the Crocodile got along after it--for to
bite it, oo know. And the Mouse got along after the Crocodile.”

“Wasn't the Crocodile running?” Sylvie enquired. She appealed to me.
“Crocodiles do run, don't they?”

I suggested “crawling” as the proper word.

“He wasn't running,” said Bruno, “and he wasn't crawling. He went
struggling along like a portmanteau. And he held his chin ever so high
in the air--”

“What did he do that for?” said Sylvie.

“'cause he hadn't got a toofache!” said Bruno. “Ca'n't oo make out
nuffin wizout I 'splain it? Why, if he'd had a toofache, a course he'd
have held his head down--like this--and he'd have put a lot of warm
blankets round it!”

“If he'd had any blankets,” Sylvie argued.

“Course he had blankets!” retorted her brother. “Doos oo think
Crocodiles goes walks wizout blankets? And he frowned with his eyebrows.
And the Goat was welly flightened at his eyebrows!”

“I'd never be afraid of eyebrows!” exclaimed Sylvie.

“I should think oo would, though, if they'd got a Crocodile fastened to
them, like these had! And so the Man jamp, and he jamp, and at last he
got right out of the hole.”

Sylvie gave another little gasp: this rapid dodging about among the
characters of the Story had taken away her breath.

“And he runned away for to look for the Goat, oo know. And he heard the
Lion grunting---”

“Lions don't grunt,” said Sylvie.

“This one did,” said Bruno. “And its mouth were like a large cupboard.
And it had plenty of room in its mouth. And the Lion runned after the
Man for to eat him, oo know. And the Mouse runned after the Lion.”

“But the Mouse was running after the Crocodile,” I said: “he couldn't
run after both!”

Bruno sighed over the density of his audience, but explained very
patiently. “He did runned after bofe: 'cause they went the same way! And
first he caught the Crocodile, and then he didn't catch the Lion. And
when he'd caught the Crocodile, what doos oo think he did--'cause he'd
got pincers in his pocket?”

“I ca'n't guess,” said Sylvie.

{Image...'He wrenched out that crocodile's toof!'}

“Nobody couldn't guess it!” Bruno cried in high glee. “Why, he wrenched
out that Crocodile's toof!”

“Which tooth?” I ventured to ask.

But Bruno was not to be puzzled. “The toof he were going to bite the
Goat with, a course!”

“He couldn't be sure about that,” I argued, “unless he wrenched out all
its teeth.”

Bruno laughed merrily, and half sang, as he swung himself backwards and
forwards, “He did--wrenched--out--all its teef!”

“Why did the Crocodile wait to have them wrenched out?” said Sylvie.

“It had to wait,” said Bruno.

I ventured on another question. “But what became of the Man who said
'You may wait here till I come back'?”

“He didn't say 'Oo may,'” Bruno explained. “He said, 'Oo will.' Just
like Sylvie says to me 'Oo will do oor lessons till twelve o'clock.' Oh,
I wiss,” he added with a little sigh, “I wiss Sylvie would say 'Oo may
do oor lessons'!”

This was a dangerous subject for discussion, Sylvie seemed to think. She
returned to the Story. “But what became of the Man?”

“Well, the Lion springed at him. But it came so slow, it were three
weeks in the air--”

“Did the Man wait for it all that time?” I said.

“Course he didn't!” Bruno replied, gliding head-first down the stem of
the fox-glove, for the Story was evidently close to its end. “He sold
his house, and he packed up his things, while the Lion were coming. And
he went and he lived in another town. So the Lion ate the wrong man.”

This was evidently the Moral: so Sylvie made her final proclamation to
the Frogs. “The Story's finished! And whatever is to be learned from
it,” she added, aside to me, “I'm sure I don't know!”

I did not feel quite clear about it myself, so made no suggestion: but
the Frogs seemed quite content, Moral or no Moral, and merely raised a
husky chorus of “Off! Off!” as they hopped away.






CHAPTER 25. LOOKING EASTWARD.

“It's just a week,” I said, three days later, to Arthur, “since we heard
of Lady Muriel's engagement. I think I ought to call, at any rate, and
offer my congratulations. Won't you come with me?”

A pained expression passed over his face.

“When must you leave us?” he asked.

“By the first train on Monday.”

“Well--yes, I will come with you. It would seem strange and unfriendly
if I didn't. But this is only Friday. Give me till Sunday afternoon. I
shall be stronger then.”

Shading his eyes with one hand, as if half-ashamed of the tears that
were coursing down his cheeks, he held the other out to me. It trembled
as I clasped it.

I tried to frame some words of sympathy; but they seemed poor and cold,
and I left them unspoken. “Good night!” was all I said.

“Good night, dear friend!” he replied. There was a manly vigour in his
tone that convinced me he was wrestling with, and triumphing over,
the great sorrow that had so nearly wrecked his life--and that, on the
stepping-stone of his dead self, he would surely rise to higher things!

There was no chance, I was glad to think, as we set out on Sunday
afternoon, of meeting Eric at the Hall, as he had returned to town
the day after his engagement was announced. His presence might have
disturbed the calm--the almost unnatural calm--with which Arthur met
the woman who had won his heart, and murmured the few graceful words of
sympathy that the occasion demanded.

Lady Muriel was perfectly radiant with happiness: sadness could not live
in the light of such a smile: and even Arthur brightened under it, and,
when she remarked “You see I'm watering my flowers, though it is the
Sabbath-Day,” his voice had almost its old ring of cheerfulness as he
replied “Even on the Sabbath-Day works of mercy are allowed. But this
isn't the Sabbath-Day. The Sabbath-day has ceased to exist.”

“I know it's not Saturday,” Lady Muriel replied; “but isn't Sunday often
called 'the Christian Sabbath'?”

“It is so called, I think, in recognition of the spirit of the Jewish
institution, that one day in seven should be a day of rest. But I hold
that Christians are freed from the literal observance of the Fourth
Commandment.”

“Then where is our authority for Sunday observance?”

“We have, first, the fact that the seventh day was 'sanctified', when
God rested from the work of Creation. That is binding on us as Theists.
Secondly, we have the fact that 'the Lord's Day' is a Christian
institution. That is binding on us as Christians.”

“And your practical rules would be--?”

“First, as Theists, to keep it holy in some special way, and to make
it, so far as is reasonably possible, a day of rest. Secondly, as
Christians, to attend public worship.”

“And what of amusements?”

“I would say of them, as of all kinds of work, whatever is innocent on a
week-day, is innocent on Sunday, provided it does not interfere with the
duties of the day.”

“Then you would allow children to play on Sunday?”

“Certainly I should. Why make the day irksome to their restless
natures?”

“I have a letter somewhere,” said Lady Muriel, “from an old friend,
describing the way in which Sunday was kept in her younger days. I will
fetch it for you.”

“I had a similar description, viva voce, years ago,” Arthur said when
she had left us, “from a little girl. It was really touching to hear
the melancholy tone in which she said 'On Sunday I mustn't play with my
doll! On Sunday I mustn't run on the sands! On Sunday I mustn't dig
in the garden!' Poor child! She had indeed abundant cause for hating
Sunday!”

“Here is the letter,” said Lady Muriel, returning. “Let me read you a
piece of it.”

“When, as a child, I first opened my eyes on a Sunday-morning, a feeling
of dismal anticipation, which began at least on the Friday, culminated.
I knew what was before me, and my wish, if not my word, was 'Would
God it were evening!' It was no day of rest, but a day of texts,
of catechisms (Watts'), of tracts about converted swearers, godly
charwomen, and edifying deaths of sinners saved.

“Up with the lark, hymns and portions of Scripture had to be learned by
heart till 8 o'clock, when there were family-prayers, then breakfast,
which I was never able to enjoy, partly from the fast already undergone,
and partly from the outlook I dreaded.

“At 9 came Sunday-School; and it made me indignant to be put into
the class with the village-children, as well as alarmed lest, by some
mistake of mine, I should be put below them.

“The Church-Service was a veritable Wilderness of Zin. I wandered in
it, pitching the tabernacle of my thoughts on the lining of the square
family-pew, the fidgets of my small brothers, and the horror of knowing
that, on the Monday, I should have to write out, from memory, jottings
of the rambling disconnected extempore sermon, which might have had any
text but its own, and to stand or fall by the result.

“This was followed by a cold dinner at 1 (servants to have no work),
Sunday-School again from 2 to 4, and Evening-Service at 6. The intervals
were perhaps the greatest trial of all, from the efforts I had to make,
to be less than usually sinful, by reading books and sermons as barren
as the Dead Sea. There was but one rosy spot, in the distance, all that
day: and that was 'bed-time,' which never could come too early!”

“Such teaching was well meant, no doubt,” said Arthur; “but it must
have driven many of its victims into deserting the Church-Services
altogether.”

“I'm afraid I was a deserter this morning,” she gravely said. “I had
to write to Eric. Would you--would you mind my telling you something he
said about prayer? It had never struck me in that light before.”

“In what light?” said Arthur.

“Why, that all Nature goes by fixed, regular laws--Science has proved
that. So that asking God to do anything (except of course praying for
spiritual blessings) is to expect a miracle: and we've no right to do
that. I've not put it as well as he did: but that was the outcome of
it, and it has confused me. Please tell me what you can say in answer to
it.”

“I don't propose to discuss Captain Lindon's difficulties,” Arthur
gravely replied; “specially as he is not present. But, if it is your
difficulty,” (his voice unconsciously took a tenderer tone) “then I will
speak.”

“It is my difficulty,” she said anxiously.

“Then I will begin by asking 'Why did you except spiritual blessings?'
Is not your mind a part of Nature?”

“Yes, but Free-Will comes in there--I can choose this or that; and God
can influence my choice.”

“Then you are not a Fatalist?”

“Oh, no!” she earnestly exclaimed.

“Thank God!” Arthur said to himself, but in so low a whisper that only
I heard it. “You grant then that I can, by an act of free choice, move
this cup,” suiting the action to the word, “this way or that way?”

“Yes, I grant it.”

“Well, let us see how far the result is produced by fixed laws. The cup
moves because certain mechanical forces are impressed on it by my hand.
My hand moves because certain forces--electric, magnetic, or whatever
'nerve-force' may prove to be--are impressed on it by my brain. This
nerve-force, stored in the brain, would probably be traceable, if
Science were complete, to chemical forces supplied to the brain by
the blood, and ultimately derived from the food I eat and the air I
breathe.”

“But would not that be Fatalism? Where would Free-Will come in?”

“In choice of nerves,” replied Arthur. “The nerve-force in the brain may
flow just as naturally down one nerve as down another. We need something
more than a fixed Law of Nature to settle which nerve shall carry it.
That 'something' is Free-Will.”

Her eyes sparkled. “I see what you mean!” she exclaimed. “Human
Free-Will is an exception to the system of fixed Law. Eric said
something like that. And then I think he pointed out that God can only
influence Nature by influencing Human Wills. So that we might reasonably
pray 'give us this day our daily bread,' because many of the causes that
produce bread are under Man's control. But to pray for rain, or fine
weather, would be as unreasonable as--” she checked herself, as if
fearful of saying something irreverent.

In a hushed, low tone, that trembled with emotion, and with the
solemnity of one in the presence of death, Arthur slowly replied “Shalt
he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct him? Shall we 'the swarm
that in the noontide beam were born,' feeling in ourselves the power to
direct, this way or that, the forces of Nature--of Nature, of which we
form so trivial a part--shall we, in our boundless arrogance, in our
pitiful conceit, deny that power to the Ancient of Days? Saying, to
our Creator, 'Thus far and no further. Thou madest, but thou canst not
rule!'?”

Lady Muriel had covered her face in her hands, and did not look up. She
only murmured “Thanks, thanks!” again and again.

We rose to go. Arthur said, with evident effort, “One word more. If you
would know the power of Prayer--in anything and everything that Man can
need try it. Ask, and it shall be given you. I--have tried it. I know
that God answers prayer!”

Our walk home was a silent one, till we had nearly reached the
lodgings: then Arthur murmured--and it was almost an echo of my own
thoughts--“What knowest thou, O wife, whether thou shalt save thy
husband?”

The subject was not touched on again. We sat on, talking, while hour
after hour, of this our last night together, glided away unnoticed. He
had much to tell me about India, and the new life he was going to, and
the work he hoped to do. And his great generous soul seemed so filled
with noble ambition as to have no space left for any vain regret or
selfish repining.

“Come, it is nearly morning! Arthur said at last, rising and leading the
way upstairs.

“The sun will be rising in a few minutes: and, though I have basely
defrauded you of your last chance of a night's rest here, I'm sure
you'll forgive me: for I really couldn't bring myself to say 'Good
night' sooner. And God knows whether you'll ever see me again, or hear
of me!”

“Hear of you I am certain I shall!” I warmly responded, and quoted the
concluding lines of that strange poem 'Waring':--


    “Oh, never star
    Was lost here, but it rose afar
    Look East, where whole new thousands are!
    In Vishnu-land what Avatar?”

“Aye, look Eastward!” Arthur eagerly replied, pausing at the stair-case
window, which commanded a fine view of the sea and the eastward horizon.
“The West is the fitting tomb for all the sorrow and the sighing, all
the errors and the follies of the Past: for all its withered Hopes and
all its buried Loves! From the East comes new strength, new ambition,
new Hope, new Life, new Love! Look Eastward! Aye, look Eastward!”

His last words were still ringing in my ears as I entered my room, and
undrew the window-curtains, just in time to see the sun burst in glory
from his ocean-prison, and clothe the world in the light of a new day.

“So may it be for him, and me, and all of us!” I mused. “All that is
evil, and dead, and hopeless, fading with the Night that is past! All
that is good, and living, and hopeful, rising with the dawn of Day!

“Fading, with the Night, the chilly mists, and the noxious vapours,
and the heavy shadows, and the wailing gusts, and the owl's melancholy
hootings: rising, with the Day, the darting shafts of light, and the
wholesome morning breeze, and the warmth of a dawning life, and the mad
music of the lark! Look Eastward!

“Fading, with the Night, the clouds of ignorance, and the deadly blight
of sin, and the silent tears of sorrow: and ever rising, higher, higher,
with the Day, the radiant dawn of knowledge, and the sweet breath of
purity, and the throb of a world's ecstasy! Look Eastward!

{Image...'Look eastward!'}

“Fading, with the Night, the memory of a dead love, and the withered
leaves of a blighted hope, and the sickly repinings and moody regrets
that numb the best energies of the soul: and rising, broadening, rolling
upward like a living flood, the manly resolve, and the dauntless will,
and the heavenward gaze of faith--the substance of things hoped for, the
evidence of things not seen!

“Look Eastward! Aye, look Eastward!”






PREFACE.

One little picture in this book, the Magic Locket, at p. 77, was drawn
by 'Miss Alice Havers.' I did not state this on the title-page, since
it seemed only due, to the artist of all these (to my mind) wonderful
pictures, that his name should stand there alone.

The descriptions, at pp. 386, 387, of Sunday as spent by children of
the last generation, are quoted verbatim from a speech made to me by a
child-friend and a letter written to me by a lady-friend.

The Chapters, headed 'Fairy Sylvie' and 'Bruno's Revenge,' are a
reprint, with a few alterations, of a little fairy-tale which I wrote in
the year 1867, at the request of the late Mrs. Gatty, for 'Aunt Judy's
Magazine,' which she was then editing.

It was in 1874, I believe, that the idea first occurred to me of making
it the nucleus of a longer story. As the years went on, I jotted down,
at odd moments, all sorts of odd ideas, and fragments of dialogue, that
occurred to me--who knows how?--with a transitory suddenness that left
me no choice but either to record them then and there, or to abandon
them to oblivion. Sometimes one could trace to their source these random
flashes of thought--as being suggested by the book one was reading,
or struck out from the 'flint' of one's own mind by the 'steel' of
a friend's chance remark but they had also a way of their own, of
occurring, a propos of nothing--specimens of that hopelessly illogical
phenomenon, 'an effect without a cause.' Such, for example, was the last
line of 'The Hunting of the Snark,' which came into my head (as I have
already related in 'The Theatre' for April, 1887) quite suddenly, during
a solitary walk: and such, again, have been passages which occurred in
dreams, and which I cannot trace to any antecedent cause whatever. There
are at least two instances of such dream-suggestions in this book--one,
my Lady's remark, 'it often runs in families, just as a love for pastry
does', at p. 88; the other, Eric Lindon's badinage about having been
in domestic service, at p. 332. And thus it came to pass that I found
myself at last in possession of a huge unwieldy mass of litterature--if
the reader will kindly excuse the spelling--which only needed stringing
together, upon the thread of a consecutive story, to constitute the book
I hoped to write. Only! The task, at first, seemed absolutely hopeless,
and gave me a far clearer idea, than I ever had before, of the meaning
of the word 'chaos': and I think it must have been ten years, or more,
before I had succeeded in classifying these odds-and-ends sufficiently
to see what sort of a story they indicated: for the story had to grow
out of the incidents, not the incidents out of the story I am telling
all this, in no spirit of egoism, but because I really believe that some
of my readers will be interested in these details of the 'genesis' of
a book, which looks so simple and straight-forward a matter, when
completed, that they might suppose it to have been written straight off,
page by page, as one would write a letter, beginning at the beginning;
and ending at the end.

It is, no doubt, possible to write a story in that way: and, if it be
not vanity to say so, I believe that I could, myself,--if I were in the
unfortunate position (for I do hold it to be a real misfortune) of being
obliged to produce a given amount of fiction in a given time,--that I
could 'fulfil my task,' and produce my 'tale of bricks,' as other slaves
have done. One thing, at any rate, I could guarantee as to the story so
produced--that it should be utterly commonplace, should contain no new
ideas whatever, and should be very very weary reading!

This species of literature has received the very appropriate name of
'padding' which might fitly be defined as 'that which all can write and
none can read.' That the present volume contains no such writing I dare
not avow: sometimes, in order to bring a picture into its proper place,
it has been necessary to eke out a page with two or three extra lines:
but I can honestly say I have put in no more than I was absolutely
compelled to do.

My readers may perhaps like to amuse themselves by trying to detect, in
a given passage, the one piece of 'padding' it contains. While arranging
the 'slips' into pages, I found that the passage, whichnow extends
from the top of p. 35 to the middle of p. 38, was 3 lines too short.
I supplied the deficiency, not by interpolating a word here and a word
there, but by writing in 3 consecutive lines. Now can my readers guess
which they are?

A harder puzzle if a harder be desired would be to determine, as to the
Gardener's Song, in which cases (if any) the stanza was adapted to the
surrounding text, and in which (if any) the text was adapted to the
stanza.

Perhaps the hardest thing in all literature--at least I have found it
so: by no voluntary effort can I accomplish it: I have to take it as it
come's is to write anything original. And perhaps the easiest is, when
once an original line has been struck out, to follow it up, and to write
any amount more to the same tune. I do not know if 'Alice in Wonderland'
was an original story--I was, at least, no conscious imitator in writing
it--but I do know that, since it came out, something like a dozen
story-books have appeared, on identically the same pattern. The path I
timidly explored believing myself to be 'the first that ever burst into
that silent sea'--is now a beaten high-road: all the way-side flowers
have long ago been trampled into the dust: and it would be courting
disaster for me to attempt that style again.

Hence it is that, in 'Sylvie and Bruno,' I have striven with I know not
what success to strike out yet another new path: be it bad or good, it
is the best I can do. It is written, not for money, and not for fame,
but in the hope of supplying, for the children whom I love, some
thoughts that may suit those hours of innocent merriment which are the
very life of Childhood; and also in the hope of suggesting, to them and
to others, some thoughts that may prove, I would fain hope, not wholly
out of harmony with the graver cadences of Life.

If I have not already exhausted the patience of my readers, I would like
to seize this opportunity perhaps the last I shall have of addressing so
many friends at once of putting on record some ideas that have occurred
to me, as to books desirable to be written--which I should much like to
attempt, but may not ever have the time or power to carry through--in
the hope that, if I should fail (and the years are gliding away very
fast) to finish the task I have set myself, other hands may take it up.

First, a Child's Bible. The only real essentials of this would be,
carefully selected passages, suitable for a child's reading and
pictures. One principle of selection, which I would adopt, would be that
Religion should be put before a child as a revelation of love no need to
pain and puzzle the young mind with the history of crime and punishment.
(On such a principle I should, for example, omit the history of the
Flood.) The supplying of the pictures would involve no great difficulty:
no new ones would be needed: hundreds of excellent pictures already
exist, the copyright of which has long ago expired, and which simply
need photo-zincography, or some similar process, for their successful
reproduction. The book should be handy in size with a pretty attractive
looking cover--in a clear legible type--and, above all, with abundance
of pictures, pictures, pictures!

Secondly, a book of pieces selected from the Bible--not single texts,
but passages of from 10 to 20 verses each--to be committed to memory.
Such passages would be found useful, to repeat to one's self and
to ponder over, on many occasions when reading is difficult, if
not impossible: for instance, when lying awake at night--on a
railway-journey--when taking a solitary walk-in old age, when eye-sight
is failing of wholly lost--and, best of all, when illness, while
incapacitating us for reading or any other occupation, condemns us to
lie awake through many weary silent hours: at such a time how keenly
one may realise the truth of David's rapturous cry 'O how sweet are thy
words unto my throat: yea, sweeter than honey unto my mouth!'

I have said 'passages,' rather than single texts, because we have no
means of recalling single texts: memory needs links, and here are none:
one may have a hundred texts stored in the memory, and not be able
to recall, at will, more than half-a-dozen--and those by mere chance:
whereas, once get hold of any portion of a chapter that has been
committed to memory, and the whole can be recovered: all hangs together.

Thirdly, a collection of passages, both prose and verse, from books
other than the Bible. There is not perhaps much, in what is called
'un-inspired' literature (a misnomer, I hold: if Shakespeare was not
inspired, one may well doubt if any man ever was), that will bear the
process of being pondered over, a hundred times: still there are such
passages--enough, I think, to make a goodly store for the memory.

These two books of sacred, and secular, passages for memory--will serve
other good purposes besides merely occupying vacant hours: they
will help to keep at bay many anxious thoughts, worrying thoughts,
uncharitable thoughts, unholy thoughts. Let me say this, in better
words than my own, by copying a passage from that most interesting book,
Robertson's Lectures on the Epistles to the Corinthians, Lecture XLIX.
“If a man finds himself haunted by evil desires and unholy images, which
will generally be at periodical hours, let him commit to memory passages
of Scripture, or passages from the best writers in verse or prose. Let
him store his mind with these, as safeguards to repeat when he lies
awake in some restless night, or when despairing imaginations, or
gloomy, suicidal thoughts, beset him. Let these be to him the sword,
turning everywhere to keep the way of the Garden of Life from the
intrusion of profaner footsteps.”

Fourthly, a “Shakespeare” for girls: that is, an edition in which
everything, not suitable for the perusal of girls of (say) from 10
to 17, should be omitted. Few children under 10 would be likely to
understand or enjoy the greatest of poets: and those, who have passed
out of girlhood, may safely be left to read Shakespeare, in any edition,
'expurgated' or not, that they may prefer: but it seems a pity that
so many children, in the intermediate stage, should be debarred from
a great pleasure for want of an edition suitable to them. Neither
Bowdler's, Chambers's, Brandram's, nor Cundell's 'Boudoir' Shakespeare,
seems to me to meet the want: they are not sufficiently 'expurgated.'
Bowdler's is the most extraordinary of all: looking through it, I am
filled with a deep sense of wonder, considering what he has left in,
that he should have cut anything out! Besides relentlessly erasing all
that is unsuitable on the score of reverence or decency, I should be
inclined to omit also all that seems too difficult, or not likely
to interest young readers. The resulting book might be slightly
fragmentary: but it would be a real treasure to all British maidens who
have any taste for poetry.

If it be needful to apologize to any one for the new departure I have
taken in this story--by introducing, along with what will, I hope, prove
to be acceptable nonsense for children, some of the graver thoughts of
human life--it must be to one who has learned the Art of keeping such
thoughts wholly at a distance in hours of mirth and careless ease. To
him such a mixture will seem, no doubt, ill-judged and repulsive. And
that such an Art exists I do not dispute: with youth, good health, and
sufficient money, it seems quite possible to lead, for years together,
a life of unmixed gaiety--with the exception of one solemn fact, with
which we are liable to be confronted at any moment, even in the midst
of the most brilliant company or the most sparkling entertainment. A
man may fix his own times for admitting serious thought, for attending
public worship, for prayer, for reading the Bible: all such matters he
can defer to that 'convenient season', which is so apt never to occur
at all: but he cannot defer, for one single moment, the necessity of
attending to a message, which may come before he has finished reading
this page,' this night shalt thy soul be required of thee.'

The ever-present sense of this grim possibility has been, in all ages,*


     Note... At the moment, when I had written these words, there
     was a knock at the door, and a telegram was brought me,
     announcing the sudden death of a dear friend.

an incubus that men have striven to shake off. Few more interesting
subjects of enquiry could be found, by a student of history, than the
various weapons that have been used against this shadowy foe. Saddest
of all must have been the thoughts of those who saw indeed an
existence beyond the grave, but an existence far more terrible than
annihilation--an existence as filmy, impalpable, all but invisible
spectres, drifting about, through endless ages, in a world of shadows,
with nothing to do, nothing to hope for, nothing to love! In the midst
of the gay verses of that genial 'bon vivant' Horace, there stands one
dreary word whose utter sadness goes to one's heart. It is the word
'exilium' in the well-known passage


    Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
    Versatur urna serius ocius
    Sors exitura et nos in aeternum
    Exilium impositura cymbae.

Yes, to him this present life--spite of all its weariness and all its
sorrow--was the only life worth having: all else was 'exile'! Does it
not seem almost incredible that one, holding such a creed, should ever
have smiled?

And many in this day, I fear, even though believing in an existence
beyond the grave far more real than Horace ever dreamed of, yet regard
it as a sort of 'exile' from all the joys of life, and so adopt Horace's
theory, and say 'let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.'

We go to entertainments, such as the theatre--I say 'we', for I also
go to the play, whenever I get a chance of seeing a really good one and
keep at arm's length, if possible, the thought that we may not return
alive. Yet how do you know--dear friend, whose patience has carried you
through this garrulous preface that it may not be your lot, when mirth
is fastest and most furious, to feel the sharp pang, or the deadly
faintness, which heralds the final crisis--to see, with vague wonder,
anxious friends bending over you to hear their troubled whispers perhaps
yourself to shape the question, with trembling lips, “Is it serious?”,
and to be told “Yes: the end is near” (and oh, how different all Life
will look when those words are said!)--how do you know, I say, that all
this may not happen to you, this night?

And dare you, knowing this, say to yourself “Well, perhaps it is an
immoral play: perhaps the situations are a little too 'risky', the
dialogue a little too strong, the 'business' a little too suggestive. I
don't say that conscience is quite easy: but the piece is so clever, I
must see it this once! I'll begin a stricter life to-morrow.” To-morrow,
and to-morrow, and tomorrow!


   “Who sins in hope, who, sinning, says,
   'Sorrow for sin God's judgement stays!'
   Against God's Spirit he lies; quite stops
   Mercy with insult; dares, and drops,
   Like a scorch'd fly, that spins in vain
   Upon the axis of its pain,
   Then takes its doom, to limp and crawl,
   Blind and forgot, from fall to fall.”

Let me pause for a moment to say that I believe this thought, of the
possibility of death--if calmly realised, and steadily faced would be
one of the best possible tests as to our going to any scene of amusement
being right or wrong. If the thought of sudden death acquires, for you,
a special horror when imagined as happening in a theatre, then be very
sure the theatre is harmful for you, however harmless it may be for
others; and that you are incurring a deadly peril in going. Be sure the
safest rule is that we should not dare to live in any scene in which we
dare not die.

But, once realise what the true object is in life--that it is not
pleasure, not knowledge, not even fame itself, 'that last infirmity of
noble minds'--but that it is the development of character, the rising
to a higher, nobler, purer standard, the building-up of the perfect
Man--and then, so long as we feel that this is going on, and will (we
trust) go on for evermore, death has for us no terror; it is not a
shadow, but a light; not an end, but a beginning!

One other matter may perhaps seem to call for apology--that I should
have treated with such entire want of sympathy the British passion for
'Sport', which no doubt has been in by-gone days, and is still, in
some forms of it, an excellent school for hardihood and for coolness in
moments of danger. But I am not entirely without sympathy for genuine
'Sport': I can heartily admire the courage of the man who, with severe
bodily toil, and at the risk of his life, hunts down some 'man-eating'
tiger: and I can heartily sympathize with him when he exults in the
glorious excitement of the chase and the hand-to-hand struggle with the
monster brought to bay. But I can but look with deep wonder and sorrow
on the hunter who, at his ease and in safety, can find pleasure in what
involves, for some defenceless creature, wild terror and a death of
agony: deeper, if the hunter be one who has pledged himself to preach
to men the Religion of universal Love: deepest of all, if it be one of
those 'tender and delicate' beings, whose very name serves as a
symbol of Love--'thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of
women'--whose mission here is surely to help and comfort all that are in
pain or sorrow!


   'Farewell, farewell! but this I tell
   To thee, thou Wedding-Guest!
   He prayeth well, who loveth well
   Both man and bird and beast.

   He prayeth best, who loveth best
   All things both great and small;
   For the dear God who loveth us,
   He made and loveth all.'






CANTO I.

The Trystyng.

  One winter night, at half-past nine,
      Cold, tired, and cross, and muddy,
  I had come home, too late to dine,
  And supper, with cigars and wine,
      Was waiting in the study.

  There was a strangeness in the room,
      And Something white and wavy
  Was standing near me in the gloom--
  _I_ took it for the carpet-broom
      Left by that careless slavey.

[Illustration]

  But presently the Thing began
      To shiver and to sneeze:
  On which I said "Come, come, my man!
  That's a most inconsiderate plan.
      Less noise there, if you please!"

  "I've caught a cold," the Thing replies,
      "Out there upon the landing."
  I turned to look in some surprise,
  And there, before my very eyes,
      A little Ghost was standing!

  He trembled when he caught my eye,
      And got behind a chair.
  "How came you here," I said, "and why?
  I never saw a thing so shy.
      Come out! Don't shiver there!"

  He said "I'd gladly tell you how,
      And also tell you why;
  But" (here he gave a little bow)
  "You're in so bad a temper now,
      You'd think it all a lie.

  "And as to being in a fright,
      Allow me to remark
  That Ghosts have just as good a right,
  In every way, to fear the light,
      As Men to fear the dark."

  "No plea," said I, "can well excuse
      Such cowardice in you:
  For Ghosts can visit when they choose,
  Whereas we Humans ca'n't refuse
      To grant the interview."

  He said "A flutter of alarm
      Is not unnatural, is it?
  I really feared you meant some harm:
  But, now I see that you are calm,
      Let me explain my visit.

  "Houses are classed, I beg to state,
      According to the number
  Of Ghosts that they accommodate:
  (The Tenant merely counts as _weight_,
      With Coals and other lumber).

  "This is a 'one-ghost' house, and you
      When you arrived last summer,
  May have remarked a Spectre who
  Was doing all that Ghosts can do
      To welcome the new-comer.

  "In Villas this is always done--
      However cheaply rented:
  For, though of course there's less of fun
  When there is only room for one,
      Ghosts have to be contented.

  "That Spectre left you on the Third--
      Since then you've not been haunted:
  For, as he never sent us word,
  'Twas quite by accident we heard
      That any one was wanted.

  "A Spectre has first choice, by right,
      In filling up a vacancy;
  Then Phantom, Goblin, Elf, and Sprite--
  If all these fail them, they invite
      The nicest Ghoul that they can see.

  "The Spectres said the place was low,
      And that you kept bad wine:
  So, as a Phantom had to go,
  And I was first, of course, you know,
      I couldn't well decline."

  "No doubt," said I, "they settled who
      Was fittest to be sent:
  Yet still to choose a brat like you,
  To haunt a man of forty-two,
      Was no great compliment!"

  "I'm not so young, Sir," he replied,
      "As you might think. The fact is,
  In caverns by the water-side,
  And other places that I've tried,
      I've had a lot of practice:

  "But I have never taken yet
      A strict domestic part,
  And in my flurry I forget
  The Five Good Rules of Etiquette
      We have to know by heart."

  My sympathies were warming fast
      Towards the little fellow:
  He was so utterly aghast
  At having found a Man at last,
      And looked so scared and yellow.

[Illustration: "IN CAVERNS BY THE WATER-SIDE"]

  "At least," I said, "I'm glad to find
      A Ghost is not a _dumb_ thing!
  But pray sit down: you'll feel inclined
  (If, like myself, you have not dined)
      To take a snack of something:

  "Though, certainly, you don't appear
      A thing to offer _food_ to!
  And then I shall be glad to hear--
  If you will say them loud and clear--
      The Rules that you allude to."

  "Thanks! You shall hear them by and by
      This _is_ a piece of luck!"
  "What may I offer you?" said I.
  "Well, since you _are_ so kind, I'll try
      A little bit of duck.

  "_One_ slice! And may I ask you for
      Another drop of gravy?"
  I sat and looked at him in awe,
  For certainly I never saw
      A thing so white and wavy.

[Illustration]

  And still he seemed to grow more white,
      More vapoury, and wavier--
  Seen in the dim and flickering light,
  As he proceeded to recite
      His "Maxims of Behaviour."


CANTO II.

Hys Fyve Rules.

  "My First--but don't suppose," he said,
      "I'm setting you a riddle--
  Is--if your Victim be in bed,
  Don't touch the curtains at his head,
      But take them in the middle,

  "And wave them slowly in and out,
      While drawing them asunder;
  And in a minute's time, no doubt,
  He'll raise his head and look about
      With eyes of wrath and wonder.

  "And here you must on no pretence
      Make the first observation.
  Wait for the Victim to commence:
  No Ghost of any common sense
      Begins a conversation.

[Illustration]

  "If he should say '_How came you here?_'
      (The way that _you_ began, Sir,)
  In such a case your course is clear--
  '_On the bat's back, my little dear!_'
      Is the appropriate answer.

  "If after this he says no more,
      You'd best perhaps curtail your
  Exertions--go and shake the door,
  And then, if he begins to snore,
      You'll know the thing's a failure.

  "By day, if he should be alone--
      At home or on a walk--
  You merely give a hollow groan,
  To indicate the kind of tone
      In which you mean to talk.

  "But if you find him with his friends,
      The thing is rather harder.
  In such a case success depends
  On picking up some candle-ends,
      Or butter, in the larder.

  "With this you make a kind of slide
      (It answers best with suet),
  On which you must contrive to glide,
  And swing yourself from side to side--
      One soon learns how to do it.

  "The Second tells us what is right
      In ceremonious calls:--
  '_First burn a blue or crimson light_'
  (A thing I quite forgot to-night),
      '_Then scratch the door or walls._'"

[Illustration: "AND SWING YOURSELF FROM SIDE TO SIDE"]

  I said "You'll visit _here_ no more,
      If you attempt the Guy.
  I'll have no bonfires on _my_ floor--
  And, as for scratching at the door,
      I'd like to see you try!"

  "The Third was written to protect
      The interests of the Victim,
  And tells us, as I recollect,
  _To treat him with a grave respect,
      And not to contradict him_."

  "That's plain," said I, "as Tare and Tret,
      To any comprehension:
  I only wish _some_ Ghosts I've met
  Would not so _constantly_ forget
      The maxim that you mention!"

  "Perhaps," he said, "_you_ first transgressed
      The laws of hospitality:
  All Ghosts instinctively detest
  The Man that fails to treat his guest
      With proper cordiality.

[Illustration]

  "If you address a Ghost as 'Thing!'
      Or strike him with a hatchet,
  He is permitted by the King
  To drop all _formal_ parleying--
      And then you're _sure_ to catch it!

  "The Fourth prohibits trespassing
      Where other Ghosts are quartered:
  And those convicted of the thing
  (Unless when pardoned by the King)
      Must instantly be slaughtered.

  "That simply means 'be cut up small':
      Ghosts soon unite anew:
  The process scarcely hurts at all--
  Not more than when _you're_ what you call
      'Cut up' by a Review.

  "The Fifth is one you may prefer
      That I should quote entire:--
  _The King must be addressed as 'Sir.'
  This, from a simple courtier,
      Is all the Laws require_:

  "_But, should you wish to do the thing
      With out-and-out politeness,
  Accost him as 'My Goblin King!'
  And always use, in answering,
      The phrase 'Your Royal Whiteness!'_

  "I'm getting rather hoarse, I fear,
      After so much reciting:
  So, if you don't object, my dear,
  We'll try a glass of bitter beer--
      I think it looks inviting."

[Illustration]


CANTO III.

Scarmoges.

  "And did you really walk," said I,
      "On such a wretched night?
  I always fancied Ghosts could fly--
  If not exactly in the sky,
      Yet at a fairish height."

  "It's very well," said he, "for Kings
      To soar above the earth:
  But Phantoms often find that wings--
  Like many other pleasant things--
      Cost more than they are worth.

  "Spectres of course are rich, and so
      Can buy them from the Elves:
  But _we_ prefer to keep below--
  They're stupid company, you know.
      For any but themselves:

[Illustration]

  "For, though they claim to be exempt
      From pride, they treat a Phantom
  As something quite beneath contempt--
  Just as no Turkey ever dreamt
      Of noticing a Bantam."

  "They seem too proud," said I, "to go
      To houses such as mine.
  Pray, how did they contrive to know
  So quickly that 'the place was low,'
      And that I 'kept bad wine'?"

  "Inspector Kobold came to you--"
      The little Ghost began.
  Here I broke in--"Inspector who?
  Inspecting Ghosts is something new!
      Explain yourself my man!"

  "His name is Kobold," said my guest:
      "One of the Spectre order:
  You'll very often see him dressed
  In a yellow gown, a crimson vest,
      And a night-cap with a border.

  "He tried the Brocken business first,
      But caught a sort of chill;
  So came to England to be nursed,
  And here it took the form of _thirst_,
      Which he complains of still.

[Illustration: "AND HERE IT TOOK THE FORM OF _THIRST_"]

  "Port-wine, he says, when rich and sound,
      Warms his old bones like nectar:
  And as the inns, where it is found,
  Are his especial hunting-ground,
      We call him the _Inn-Spectre_."

  I bore it--bore it like a man--
      This agonizing witticism!
  And nothing could be sweeter than
  My temper, till the Ghost began
      Some most provoking criticism.

  "Cooks need not be indulged in waste;
      Yet still you'd better teach them
  Dishes should have _some sort_ of taste.
  Pray, why are all the cruets placed
      Where nobody can reach them?

  "That man of yours will never earn
      His living as a waiter!
  Is that queer _thing_ supposed to burn?
  (It's far too dismal a concern
      To call a Moderator).

  "The duck was tender, but the peas
      Were very much too old:
  And just remember, if you please,
  The _next_ time you have toasted cheese,
      Don't let them send it cold.

  "You'd find the bread improved, I think,
      By getting better flour:
  And have you anything to drink
  That looks a _little_ less like ink,
      And isn't _quite_ so sour?"

  Then, peering round with curious eyes,
      He muttered "Goodness gracious!"
  And so went on to criticise--
  "Your room's an inconvenient size:
      It's neither snug nor spacious.

  "That narrow window, I expect,
      Serves but to let the dusk in--"
  "But please," said I, "to recollect
  'Twas fashioned by an architect
      Who pinned his faith on Ruskin!"

  "I don't care who he was, Sir, or
      On whom he pinned his faith!
  Constructed by whatever law,
  So poor a job I never saw,
      As I'm a living Wraith!

  "What a re-markable cigar!
      How much are they a dozen?"
  I growled "No matter what they are!
  You're getting as familiar
      As if you were my cousin!

  "Now that's a thing _I will not stand_,
      And so I tell you flat."
  "Aha," said he, "we're getting grand!"
  (Taking a bottle in his hand)
      "I'll soon arrange for _that_!"

  And here he took a careful aim,
      And gaily cried "Here goes!"
  I tried to dodge it as it came,
  But somehow caught it, all the same,
      Exactly on my nose.

  And I remember nothing more
      That I can clearly fix,
  Till I was sitting on the floor,
  Repeating "Two and five are four,
      But _five and two_ are six."

  What really passed I never learned,
      Nor guessed: I only know
  That, when at last my sense returned,
  The lamp, neglected, dimly burned--
      The fire was getting low--

  Through driving mists I seemed to see
      A Thing that smirked and smiled:
  And found that he was giving me
  A lesson in Biography,
      As if I were a child.

[Illustration]


CANTO IV.

Hys Nouryture.

  "Oh, when I was a little Ghost,
      A merry time had we!
  Each seated on his favourite post,
  We chumped and chawed the buttered toast
      They gave us for our tea."

  "That story is in print!" I cried.
      "Don't say it's not, because
  It's known as well as Bradshaw's Guide!"
  (The Ghost uneasily replied
      He hardly thought it was).

  "It's not in Nursery Rhymes? And yet
      I almost think it is--
  'Three little Ghosteses' were set
  'On posteses,' you know, and ate
      Their 'buttered toasteses.'

  "I have the book; so, if you doubt it--"
      I turned to search the shelf.
  "Don't stir!" he cried. "We'll do without it;
  I now remember all about it;
      I wrote the thing myself.

  "It came out in a 'Monthly,' or
      At least my agent said it did:
  Some literary swell, who saw
  It, thought it seemed adapted for
      The Magazine he edited.

  "My father was a Brownie, Sir;
      My mother was a Fairy.
  The notion had occurred to her,
  The children would be happier,
      If they were taught to vary.

  "The notion soon became a craze;
      And, when it once began, she
  Brought us all out in different ways--
  One was a Pixy, two were Fays,
      Another was a Banshee;

  "The Fetch and Kelpie went to school,
      And gave a lot of trouble;
  Next came a Poltergeist and Ghoul,
  And then two Trolls (which broke the rule),
      A Goblin, and a Double--

  "(If that's a snuff-box on the shelf,"
      He added with a yawn,
  "I'll take a pinch)--next came an Elf,
  And then a Phantom (that's myself),
      And last, a Leprechaun.

  "One day, some Spectres chanced to call,
      Dressed in the usual white:
  I stood and watched them in the hall,
  And couldn't make them out at all,
      They seemed so strange a sight.

[Illustration]

  "I wondered what on earth they were,
      That looked all head and sack;
  But Mother told me not to stare,
  And then she twitched me by the hair,
      And punched me in the back.

  "Since then I've often wished that I
      Had been a Spectre born.
  But what's the use?" (He heaved a sigh).
  "_They_ are the ghost-nobility,
      And look on _us_ with scorn.

  "My phantom-life was soon begun:
      When I was barely six,
  I went out with an older one--
  And just at first I thought it fun,
      And learned a lot of tricks.

  "I've haunted dungeons, castles, towers--
      Wherever I was sent:
  I've often sat and howled for hours,
  Drenched to the skin with driving showers,
      Upon a battlement.

  "It's quite old-fashioned now to groan
      When you begin to speak:
  This is the newest thing in tone--"
  And here (it chilled me to the bone)
      He gave an _awful_ squeak.

  "Perhaps," he added, "to _your_ ear
      That sounds an easy thing?
  Try it yourself, my little dear!
  It took _me_ something like a year,
      With constant practising.

  "And when you've learned to squeak, my man
      And caught the double sob,
  You're pretty much where you began:
  Just try and gibber if you can!
      That's something _like_ a job!

  "_I've_ tried it, and can only say
      I'm sure you couldn't do it, e-
  ven if you practised night and day,
  Unless you have a turn that way,
      And natural ingenuity.

  "Shakspeare I think it is who treats
      Of Ghosts, in days of old,
  Who 'gibbered in the Roman streets,'
  Dressed, if you recollect, in sheets--
      They must have found it cold.

  "I've often spent ten pounds on stuff,
      In dressing as a Double;
  But, though it answers as a puff,
  It never has effect enough
      To make it worth the trouble.

  "Long bills soon quenched the little thirst
      I had for being funny.
  The setting-up is always worst:
  Such heaps of things you want at first,
      One must be made of money!

[Illustration]

  "For instance, take a Haunted Tower,
      With skull, cross-bones, and sheet;
  Blue lights to burn (say) two an hour,
  Condensing lens of extra power,
      And set of chains complete:

  "What with the things you have to hire--
      The fitting on the robe--
  And testing all the coloured fire--
  The outfit of itself would tire
      The patience of a Job!

  "And then they're so fastidious,
      The Haunted-House Committee:
  I've often known them make a fuss
  Because a Ghost was French, or Russ,
      Or even from the City!

  "Some dialects are objected to--
      For one, the _Irish_ brogue is:
  And then, for all you have to do,
  One pound a week they offer you,
      And find yourself in Bogies!"


CANTO V.

Byckerment.

  "Don't they consult the 'Victims,' though?"
      I said. "They should, by rights,
  Give them a chance--because, you know,
  The tastes of people differ so,
      Especially in Sprites."

  The Phantom shook his head and smiled.
      "Consult them? Not a bit!
  'Twould be a job to drive one wild,
  To satisfy one single child--
      There'd be no end to it!"

  "Of course you can't leave _children_ free,"
      Said I, "to pick and choose:
  But, in the case of men like me,
  I think 'Mine Host' might fairly be
      Allowed to state his views."

  He said "It really wouldn't pay--
      Folk are so full of fancies.
  We visit for a single day,
  And whether then we go, or stay,
      Depends on circumstances.

  "And, though we don't consult 'Mine Host'
      Before the thing's arranged,
  Still, if he often quits his post,
  Or is not a well-mannered Ghost,
      Then you can have him changed.

  "But if the host's a man like you--
      I mean a man of sense;
  And if the house is not too new--"
  "Why, what has _that_," said I, "to do
      With Ghost's convenience?"

  "A new house does not suit, you know--
      It's such a job to trim it:
  But, after twenty years or so,
  The wainscotings begin to go,
      So twenty is the limit."

  "To trim" was not a phrase I could
      Remember having heard:
  "Perhaps," I said, "you'll be so good
  As tell me what is understood
      Exactly by that word?"

[Illustration]

  "It means the loosening all the doors,"
      The Ghost replied, and laughed:
  "It means the drilling holes by scores
  In all the skirting-boards and floors,
      To make a thorough draught.

  "You'll sometimes find that one or two
      Are all you really need
  To let the wind come whistling through--
  But _here_ there'll be a lot to do!"
      I faintly gasped "Indeed!

  "If I'd been rather later, I'll
      Be bound," I added, trying
  (Most unsuccessfully) to smile,
  "You'd have been busy all this while,
      Trimming and beautifying?"

  "Why, no," said he; "perhaps I should
      Have stayed another minute--
  But still no Ghost, that's any good,
  Without an introduction would
      Have ventured to begin it.

  "The proper thing, as you were late,
      Was certainly to go:
  But, with the roads in such a state,
  I got the Knight-Mayor's leave to wait
      For half an hour or so."

  "Who's the Knight-Mayor?" I cried. Instead
      Of answering my question,
  "Well! If you don't know _that_," he said,
  "Either you never go to bed,
      Or you've a grand digestion!

  "He goes about and sits on folk
      That eat too much at night:
  His duties are to pinch, and poke,
  And squeeze them till they nearly choke."
      (I said "It serves them right!")

  "And folk that sup on things like these--"
      He muttered, "eggs and bacon--
  Lobster--and duck--and toasted cheese--
  If they don't get an awful squeeze,
      I'm very much mistaken!

  "He is immensely fat, and so
      Well suits the occupation:
  In point of fact, if you must know,
  We used to call him, years ago,
      _The Mayor and Corporation_!

[Illustration: "HE GOES ABOUT AND SITS ON FOLK"]

  "The day he was elected Mayor
      I _know_ that every Sprite meant
  To vote for _me_, but did not dare--
  He was so frantic with despair
      And furious with excitement.

[Illustration]

  "When it was over, for a whim,
      He ran to tell the King;
  And being the reverse of slim,
  A two-mile trot was not for him
      A very easy thing.

  "So, to reward him for his run
      (As it was baking hot,
  And he was over twenty stone),
  The King proceeded, half in fun,
      To knight him on the spot."

  "'Twas a great liberty to take!"
      (I fired up like a rocket).
  "He did it just for punning's sake:
  'The man,' says Johnson, 'that would make
      A pun, would pick a pocket!'"

  "A man," said he, "is not a King."
      I argued for a while,
  And did my best to prove the thing--
  The Phantom merely listening
      With a contemptuous smile.

  At last, when, breath and patience spent,
      I had recourse to smoking--
  "Your _aim_," he said, "is excellent:
  But--when you call it _argument_--
      Of course you're only joking?"

[Illustration]

  Stung by his cold and snaky eye,
      I roused myself at length
  To say "At least I do defy
  The veriest sceptic to deny
      That union is strength!"

  "That's true enough," said he, "yet stay--"
      I listened in all meekness--
  "_Union_ is strength, I'm bound to say;
  In fact, the thing's as clear as day;
      But _onions_--are a weakness."


CANTO VI.

Dyscomfyture.

  As one who strives a hill to climb,
      Who never climbed before:
  Who finds it, in a little time,
  Grow every moment less sublime,
      And votes the thing a bore:

  Yet, having once begun to try,
      Dares not desert his quest,
  But, climbing, ever keeps his eye
  On one small hut against the sky,
      Wherein he hopes to rest:

  Who climbs till nerve and force are spent,
      With many a puff and pant:
  Who still, as rises the ascent,
  In language grows more violent,
      Although in breath more scant:

[Illustration]

  Who, climbing, gains at length the place
      That crowns the upward track;
  And, entering with unsteady pace,
  Receives a buffet in the face
      That lands him on his back:

  And feels himself, like one in sleep,
      Glide swiftly down again,
  A helpless weight, from steep to steep,
  Till, with a headlong giddy sweep,
      He drops upon the plain--

  So I, that had resolved to bring
      Conviction to a ghost,
  And found it quite a different thing
  From any human arguing,
      Yet dared not quit my post

  But, keeping still the end in view
      To which I hoped to come,
  I strove to prove the matter true
  By putting everything I knew
      Into an axiom:

  Commencing every single phrase
      With 'therefore' or 'because,'
  I blindly reeled, a hundred ways,
  About the syllogistic maze,
      Unconscious where I was.

  Quoth he "That's regular clap-trap:
      Don't bluster any more.
  Now _do_ be cool and take a nap!
  Such a ridiculous old chap
      Was never seen before!

  "You're like a man I used to meet,
      Who got one day so furious
  In arguing, the simple heat
  Scorched both his slippers off his feet!"
      I said "_That's very curious!_"

[Illustration: "SCORCHED BOTH HIS SLIPPERS OFF HIS FEET"]

  "Well, it _is_ curious, I agree,
      And sounds perhaps like fibs:
  But still it's true as true can be--
  As sure as your name's Tibbs," said he.
      I said "My name's _not_ Tibbs."

  "_Not_ Tibbs!" he cried--his tone became
      A shade or two less hearty--
  "Why, no," said I. "My proper name
  Is Tibbets--" "Tibbets?" "Aye, the same."
      "Why, then YOU'RE NOT THE PARTY!"

  With that he struck the board a blow
      That shivered half the glasses.
  "Why couldn't you have told me so
  Three quarters of an hour ago,
      You prince of all the asses?

  "To walk four miles through mud and rain,
      To spend the night in smoking,
  And then to find that it's in vain--
  And I've to do it all again--
      It's really _too_ provoking!

[Illustration]

  "Don't talk!" he cried, as I began
      To mutter some excuse.
  "Who can have patience with a man
  That's got no more discretion than
      An idiotic goose?

  "To keep me waiting here, instead
      Of telling me at once
  That this was not the house!" he said.
  "There, that'll do--be off to bed!
      Don't gape like that, you dunce!"

  "It's very fine to throw the blame
      On _me_ in such a fashion!
  Why didn't you enquire my name
  The very minute that you came?"
      I answered in a passion.

  "Of course it worries you a bit
      To come so far on foot--
  But how was _I_ to blame for it?"
  "Well, well!" said he. "I must admit
      That isn't badly put.

  "And certainly you've given me
      The best of wine and victual--
  Excuse my violence," said he,
  "But accidents like this, you see,
      They put one out a little.

  "'Twas _my_ fault after all, I find--
      Shake hands, old Turnip-top!"
  The name was hardly to my mind,
  But, as no doubt he meant it kind,
      I let the matter drop.

  "Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!
      When I am gone, perhaps
  They'll send you some inferior Sprite,
  Who'll keep you in a constant fright
      And spoil your soundest naps.

  "Tell him you'll stand no sort of trick;
      Then, if he leers and chuckles,
  You just be handy with a stick
  (Mind that it's pretty hard and thick)
      And rap him on the knuckles!

  "Then carelessly remark 'Old coon!
      Perhaps you're not aware
  That, if you don't behave, you'll soon
  Be chuckling to another tune--
      And so you'd best take care!'

  "That's the right way to cure a Sprite
      Of such-like goings-on--
  But gracious me! It's getting light!
  Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!"
      A nod, and he was gone.

[Illustration]


CANTO VII.

Sad Souvenaunce.

[Illustration]

  "What's this?" I pondered. "Have I slept?
      Or can I have been drinking?"
  But soon a gentler feeling crept
  Upon me, and I sat and wept
      An hour or so, like winking.

  "No need for Bones to hurry so!"
      I sobbed. "In fact, I doubt
  If it was worth his while to go--
  And who is Tibbs, I'd like to know,
      To make such work about?

  "If Tibbs is anything like me,
      It's _possible_," I said,
  "He won't be over-pleased to be
  Dropped in upon at half-past three,
      After he's snug in bed.

  "And if Bones plagues him anyhow--
      Squeaking and all the rest of it,
  As he was doing here just now--
  _I_ prophesy there'll be a row,
      And Tibbs will have the best of it!"

  Then, as my tears could never bring
      The friendly Phantom back,
  It seemed to me the proper thing
  To mix another glass, and sing
      The following Coronach.

[Illustration: "AND TIBBS WILL HAVE THE BEST OF IT"]

  '_And art thou gone, beloved Ghost?
      Best of Familiars!
  Nay then, farewell, my duckling roast,
  Farewell, farewell, my tea and toast,
      My meerschaum and cigars!_

  '_The hues of life are dull and gray,
      The sweets of life insipid,
  When thou, my charmer, art away--
  Old Brick, or rather, let me say,
      Old Parallelepiped!_'

  Instead of singing Verse the Third,
      I ceased--abruptly, rather:
  But, after such a splendid word,
  I felt that it would be absurd
      To try it any farther.

  So with a yawn I went my way
      To seek the welcome downy,
  And slept, and dreamed till break of day
  Of Poltergeist and Fetch and Fay
      And Leprechaun and Brownie!

  For years I've not been visited
      By any kind of Sprite;
  Yet still they echo in my head,
  Those parting words, so kindly said,
      "Old Turnip-top, good-night!"

[Illustration]




ECHOES.


          Lady Clara Vere de Vere
          Was eight years old, she said:
  Every ringlet, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden thread.

          She took her little porringer:
          Of me she shall not win renown:
  For the baseness of its nature shall have strength to drag her down.

          "Sisters and brothers, little Maid?
          There stands the Inspector at thy door:
  Like a dog, he hunts for boys who know not two and two are four."

          "Kind words are more than coronets,"
          She said, and wondering looked at me:
  "It is the dead unhappy night, and I must hurry home to tea."




A SEA DIRGE.

[Illustration]


  There are certain things--as, a spider, a ghost,
    The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three--
  That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
        Is a thing they call the Sea.

  Pour some salt water over the floor--
    Ugly I'm sure you'll allow it to be:
  Suppose it extended a mile or more,
        _That's_ very like the Sea.

  Beat a dog till it howls outright--
    Cruel, but all very well for a spree:
  Suppose that he did so day and night,
        _That_ would be like the Sea.

  I had a vision of nursery-maids;
    Tens of thousands passed by me--
  All leading children with wooden spades,
        And this was by the Sea.

  Who invented those spades of wood?
    Who was it cut them out of the tree?
  None, I think, but an idiot could--
        Or one that loved the Sea.

  It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float
    With 'thoughts as boundless, and souls as free':
  But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat,
        How do you like the Sea?

[Illustration: "AND THIS WAS BY THE SEA"]

  There is an insect that people avoid
    (Whence is derived the verb 'to flee').
  Where have you been by it most annoyed?
        In lodgings by the Sea.

  If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
    A decided hint of salt in your tea,
  And a fishy taste in the very eggs--
        By all means choose the Sea.

  And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
    You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
  And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
      Then--I recommend the Sea.

  For _I_ have friends who dwell by the coast--
    Pleasant friends they are to me!
  It is when I am with them I wonder most
        That any one likes the Sea.

  They take me a walk: though tired and stiff,
    To climb the heights I madly agree;
  And, after a tumble or so from the cliff,
        They kindly suggest the Sea.

  I try the rocks, and I think it cool
    That they laugh with such an excess of glee,
  As I heavily slip into every pool
        That skirts the cold cold Sea.

[Illustration]




Y{e} Carpette Knyghte.


  I have a horse--a ryghte goode horse--
      Ne doe I envye those
  Who scoure y{e} playne yn headye course
      Tyll soddayne on theyre nose
  They lyghte wyth unexpected force--
      Yt ys--a horse of clothes.

  I have a saddel--"Say'st thou soe?
      Wyth styrruppes, Knyghte, to boote?"
  I sayde not that--I answere "Noe"--
      Yt lacketh such, I woote:
  Yt ys a mutton-saddel, loe!
      Parte of y{e} fleecye brute.

  I have a bytte--a ryghte good bytte--
      As shall bee seene yn tyme.
  Y{e} jawe of horse yt wyll not fytte;
      Yts use ys more sublyme.
  Fayre Syr, how deemest thou of yt?
      Yt ys--thys bytte of rhyme.

[Illustration: "I HAVE A HORSE"]




HIAWATHA'S PHOTOGRAPHING.

[In an age of imitation, I can claim no special merit for this slight
attempt at doing what is known to be so easy. Any fairly practised writer,
with the slightest ear for rhythm, could compose, for hours together, in
the easy running metre of 'The Song of Hiawatha.' Having, then, distinctly
stated that I challenge no attention in the following little poem to its
merely verbal jingle, I must beg the candid reader to confine his
criticism to its treatment of the subject.]


  From his shoulder Hiawatha
  Took the camera of rosewood,
  Made of sliding, folding rosewood;
  Neatly put it all together.
  In its case it lay compactly,
  Folded into nearly nothing;
  But he opened out the hinges,
  Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges,
  Till it looked all squares and oblongs,
  Like a complicated figure
  In the Second Book of Euclid.

[Illustration]

    This he perched upon a tripod--
  Crouched beneath its dusky cover--
  Stretched his hand, enforcing silence--
  Said "Be motionless, I beg you!"
  Mystic, awful was the process.
    All the family in order
  Sat before him for their pictures:
  Each in turn, as he was taken,
  Volunteered his own suggestions,
  His ingenious suggestions.
    First the Governor, the Father:
  He suggested velvet curtains
  Looped about a massy pillar;
  And the corner of a table,
  Of a rosewood dining-table.
  He would hold a scroll of something,
  Hold it firmly in his left-hand;
  He would keep his right-hand buried
  (Like Napoleon) in his waistcoat;
  He would contemplate the distance
  With a look of pensive meaning,
  As of ducks that die in tempests.
    Grand, heroic was the notion:
  Yet the picture failed entirely:
  Failed, because he moved a little,
  Moved, because he couldn't help it.
    Next, his better half took courage;
  She would have her picture taken.
  _She_ came dressed beyond description,
  Dressed in jewels and in satin
  Far too gorgeous for an empress.

[Illustration: "FIRST THE GOVERNOR, THE FATHER"]

  Gracefully she sat down sideways,
  With a simper scarcely human,
  Holding in her hand a bouquet
  Rather larger than a cabbage.
  All the while that she was sitting,
  Still the lady chattered, chattered,
  Like a monkey in the forest.
  "Am I sitting still?" she asked him.
  "Is my face enough in profile?
  Shall I hold the bouquet higher?
  Will it come into the picture?"
  And the picture failed completely.
    Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab:
  He suggested curves of beauty,
  Curves pervading all his figure,
  Which the eye might follow onward,
  Till they centered in the breast-pin,
  Centered in the golden breast-pin.
  He had learnt it all from Ruskin
  (Author of 'The Stones of Venice,'
  'Seven Lamps of Architecture,'
  'Modern Painters,' and some others);
  And perhaps he had not fully
  Understood his author's meaning;
  But, whatever was the reason,
  All was fruitless, as the picture
  Ended in an utter failure.

[Illustration: "NEXT THE SON, THE STUNNING-CANTAB"]

    Next to him the eldest daughter:
  She suggested very little,
  Only asked if he would take her
  With her look of 'passive beauty.'
    Her idea of passive beauty
  Was a squinting of the left-eye,
  Was a drooping of the right-eye,
  Was a smile that went up sideways
  To the corner of the nostrils.
    Hiawatha, when she asked him,
  Took no notice of the question,
  Looked as if he hadn't heard it;
  But, when pointedly appealed to,
  Smiled in his peculiar manner,
  Coughed and said it 'didn't matter,'
  Bit his lip and changed the subject.
    Nor in this was he mistaken,
  As the picture failed completely.
    So in turn the other sisters.

[Illustration: "NEXT TO HIM THE ELDEST DAUGHTER"]

    Last, the youngest son was taken:
  Very rough and thick his hair was,
  Very round and red his face was,
  Very dusty was his jacket,
  Very fidgety his manner.
  And his overbearing sisters
  Called him names he disapproved of:
  Called him Johnny, 'Daddy's Darling,'
  Called him Jacky, 'Scrubby School-boy.'
  And, so awful was the picture,
  In comparison the others
  Seemed, to one's bewildered fancy,
  To have partially succeeded.
    Finally my Hiawatha
  Tumbled all the tribe together,
  ('Grouped' is not the right expression),
  And, as happy chance would have it,
  Did at last obtain a picture
  Where the faces all succeeded:
  Each came out a perfect likeness.

[Illustration: "LAST, THE YOUNGEST SON WAS TAKEN"]

    Then they joined and all abused it,
  Unrestrainedly abused it,
  As the worst and ugliest picture
  They could possibly have dreamed of.
  Giving one such strange expressions--
  Sullen, stupid, pert expressions.
  Really any one would take us
  (Any one that did not know us)
  For the most unpleasant people!'
  (Hiawatha seemed to think so,
  Seemed to think it not unlikely).
  All together rang their voices,
  Angry, loud, discordant voices,
  As of dogs that howl in concert,
  As of cats that wail in chorus.
    But my Hiawatha's patience,
  His politeness and his patience,
  Unaccountably had vanished,
  And he left that happy party.
  Neither did he leave them slowly,
  With the calm deliberation,
  The intense deliberation
  Of a photographic artist:
  But he left them in a hurry,
  Left them in a mighty hurry,
  Stating that he would not stand it,
  Stating in emphatic language
  What he'd be before he'd stand it.
  Hurriedly he packed his boxes:
  Hurriedly the porter trundled
  On a barrow all his boxes:
  Hurriedly he took his ticket:
  Hurriedly the train received him:
  Thus departed Hiawatha.

[Illustration]




MELANCHOLETTA.


  With saddest music all day long
    She soothed her secret sorrow:
  At night she sighed "I fear 'twas wrong
    Such cheerful words to borrow.
  Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song
    I'll sing to thee to-morrow."

  I thanked her, but I could not say
    That I was glad to hear it:
  I left the house at break of day,
    And did not venture near it
  Till time, I hoped, had worn away
    Her grief, for nought could cheer it!

[Illustration: "AT NIGHT SHE SIGHED"]

  My dismal sister! Couldst thou know
    The wretched home thou keepest!
  Thy brother, drowned in daily woe,
    Is thankful when thou sleepest;
  For if I laugh, however low,
    When thou'rt awake, thou weepest!

  I took my sister t'other day
    (Excuse the slang expression)
  To Sadler's Wells to see the play,
    In hopes the new impression
  Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay
    Effect some slight digression.

  I asked three gay young dogs from town
    To join us in our folly,
  Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown
    My sister's melancholy:
  The lively Jones, the sportive Brown,
    And Robinson the jolly.

  The maid announced the meal in tones
    That I myself had taught her,
  Meant to allay my sister's moans
    Like oil on troubled water:
  I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones,
    And begged him to escort her.

  Vainly he strove, with ready wit,
    To joke about the weather--
  To ventilate the last '_on dit_'--
    To quote the price of leather--
  She groaned "Here I and Sorrow sit:
    Let us lament together!"

  I urged "You're wasting time, you know:
    Delay will spoil the venison."
  "My heart is wasted with my woe!
    There is no rest--in Venice, on
  The Bridge of Sighs!" she quoted low
    From Byron and from Tennyson.

  I need not tell of soup and fish
    In solemn silence swallowed,
  The sobs that ushered in each dish,
    And its departure followed,
  Nor yet my suicidal wish
    To _be_ the cheese I hollowed.

  Some desperate attempts were made
    To start a conversation;
  "Madam," the sportive Brown essayed,
    "Which kind of recreation,
  Hunting or fishing, have you made
    Your special occupation?"

  Her lips curved downwards instantly,
    As if of india-rubber.
  "Hounds _in full cry_ I like," said she:
    (Oh how I longed to snub her!)
  "Of fish, a whale's the one for me,
    _It is so full of blubber_!"

  The night's performance was "King John."
    "It's dull," she wept, "and so-so!"
  A while I let her tears flow on,
    She said they soothed her woe so!
  At length the curtain rose upon
    'Bombastes Furioso.'

  In vain we roared; in vain we tried
    To rouse her into laughter:
  Her pensive glances wandered wide
    From orchestra to rafter--
  "_Tier upon tier!_" she said, and sighed;
    And silence followed after.

[Illustration]




A VALENTINE.

[Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad enough to see him
when he came, but didn't seem to miss him if he stayed away.]


  And cannot pleasures, while they last,
  Be actual unless, when past,
  They leave us shuddering and aghast,
          With anguish smarting?
  And cannot friends be firm and fast,
          And yet bear parting?

  And must I then, at Friendship's call,
  Calmly resign the little all
  (Trifling, I grant, it is and small)
          I have of gladness,
  And lend my being to the thrall
          Of gloom and sadness?

  And think you that I should be dumb,
  And full _dolorum omnium_,
  Excepting when _you_ choose to come
          And share my dinner?
  At other times be sour and glum
          And daily thinner?

  Must he then only live to weep,
  Who'd prove his friendship true and deep?
  By day a lonely shadow creep,
          At night-time languish,
  Oft raising in his broken sleep
          The moan of anguish?

  The lover, if for certain days
  His fair one be denied his gaze,
  Sinks not in grief and wild amaze,
          But, wiser wooer,
  He spends the time in writing lays,
          And posts them to her.

  And if the verse flow free and fast,
  Till even the poet is aghast,
  A touching Valentine at last
          The post shall carry,
  When thirteen days are gone and past
          Of February.

  Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet,
  In desert waste or crowded street,
          Perhaps before this week shall fleet,
  Perhaps to-morrow,
  I trust to find _your_ heart the seat
          Of wasting sorrow.




THE THREE VOICES.


The First Voice.

[Illustration]

  He trilled a carol fresh and free:
  He laughed aloud for very glee:
  There came a breeze from off the sea:

  It passed athwart the glooming flat--
  It fanned his forehead as he sat--
  It lightly bore away his hat,

  All to the feet of one who stood
  Like maid enchanted in a wood,
  Frowning as darkly as she could.

  With huge umbrella, lank and brown,
  Unerringly she pinned it down,
  Right through the centre of the crown.

  Then, with an aspect cold and grim,
  Regardless of its battered rim,
  She took it up and gave it him.

  A while like one in dreams he stood,
  Then faltered forth his gratitude
  In words just short of being rude:

  For it had lost its shape and shine,
  And it had cost him four-and-nine,
  And he was going out to dine.

[Illustration: "UNERRINGLY SHE PINNED IT DOWN."]

  "To dine!" she sneered in acid tone.
  "To bend thy being to a bone
  Clothed in a radiance not its own!"

  The tear-drop trickled to his chin:
  There was a meaning in her grin
  That made him feel on fire within.

  "Term it not 'radiance,'" said he:
  "'Tis solid nutriment to me.
  Dinner is Dinner: Tea is Tea."

  And she "Yea so? Yet wherefore cease?
  Let thy scant knowledge find increase.
  Say 'Men are Men, and Geese are Geese.'"

  He moaned: he knew not what to say.
  The thought "That I could get away!"
  Strove with the thought "But I must stay."

  "To dine!" she shrieked in dragon-wrath.
  "To swallow wines all foam and froth!
  To simper at a table-cloth!

  "Say, can thy noble spirit stoop
  To join the gormandising troop
  Who find a solace in the soup?

  "Canst thou desire or pie or puff?
  Thy well-bred manners were enough,
  Without such gross material stuff."

  "Yet well-bred men," he faintly said,
  "Are not unwilling to be fed:
  Nor are they well without the bread."

  Her visage scorched him ere she spoke:
  "There are," she said, "a kind of folk
  Who have no horror of a joke.

  "Such wretches live: they take their share
  Of common earth and common air:
  We come across them here and there:

  "We grant them--there is no escape--
  A sort of semi-human shape
  Suggestive of the man-like Ape."

  "In all such theories," said he,
  "One fixed exception there must be.
  That is, the Present Company."

  Baffled, she gave a wolfish bark:
  He, aiming blindly in the dark,
  With random shaft had pierced the mark.

  She felt that her defeat was plain,
  Yet madly strove with might and main
  To get the upper hand again.

  Fixing her eyes upon the beach,
  As though unconscious of his speech,
  She said "Each gives to more than each."

  He could not answer yea or nay:
  He faltered "Gifts may pass away."
  Yet knew not what he meant to say.

  "If that be so," she straight replied,
  "Each heart with each doth coincide.
  What boots it? For the world is wide."

[Illustration: "HE FALTERED 'GIFTS MAY PASS AWAY.'"]

  "The world is but a Thought," said he:
  "The vast unfathomable sea
  Is but a Notion--unto me."

  And darkly fell her answer dread
  Upon his unresisting head,
  Like half a hundredweight of lead.

  "The Good and Great must ever shun
  That reckless and abandoned one
  Who stoops to perpetrate a pun.

  "The man that smokes--that reads the _Times_--
  That goes to Christmas Pantomimes--
  Is capable of _any_ crimes!"

  He felt it was his turn to speak,
  And, with a shamed and crimson cheek,
  Moaned "This is harder than Bezique!"

  But when she asked him "Wherefore so?"
  He felt his very whiskers glow,
  And frankly owned "I do not know."

[Illustration: "THIS IS HARDER THAN BEZIQUE!"]

  While, like broad waves of golden grain,
  Or sunlit hues on cloistered pane,
  His colour came and went again.

  Pitying his obvious distress,
  Yet with a tinge of bitterness,
  She said "The More exceeds the Less."

  "A truth of such undoubted weight,"
  He urged, "and so extreme in date,
  It were superfluous to state."

  Roused into sudden passion, she
  In tone of cold malignity:
  "To others, yea: but not to thee."

  But when she saw him quail and quake,
  And when he urged "For pity's sake!"
  Once more in gentle tone she spake.

  "Thought in the mind doth still abide:
  That is by Intellect supplied,
  And within that Idea doth hide:

  "And he, that yearns the truth to know,
  Still further inwardly may go,
  And find Idea from Notion flow:

  "And thus the chain, that sages sought,
  Is to a glorious circle wrought,
  For Notion hath its source in Thought."

  So passed they on with even pace:
  Yet gradually one might trace
  A shadow growing on his face.

[Illustration]


The Second Voice.

[Illustration]

  They walked beside the wave-worn beach;
  Her tongue was very apt to teach,
  And now and then he did beseech

  She would abate her dulcet tone,
  Because the talk was all her own,
  And he was dull as any drone.

  She urged "No cheese is made of chalk":
  And ceaseless flowed her dreary talk,
  Tuned to the footfall of a walk.

  Her voice was very full and rich,
  And, when at length she asked him "Which?"
  It mounted to its highest pitch.

  He a bewildered answer gave,
  Drowned in the sullen moaning wave,
  Lost in the echoes of the cave.

  He answered her he knew not what:
  Like shaft from bow at random shot,
  He spoke, but she regarded not.

  She waited not for his reply,
  But with a downward leaden eye
  Went on as if he were not by:

  Sound argument and grave defence,
  Strange questions raised on "Why?" and "Whence?"
  And wildly tangled evidence.

  When he, with racked and whirling brain,
  Feebly implored her to explain,
  She simply said it all again.

  Wrenched with an agony intense,
  He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense,
  And careless of all consequence:

  "Mind--I believe--is Essence--Ent--
  Abstract--that is--an Accident--
  Which we--that is to say--I meant--"

  When, with quick breath and cheeks all flushed,
  At length his speech was somewhat hushed,
  She looked at him, and he was crushed.

  It needed not her calm reply:
  She fixed him with a stony eye,
  And he could neither fight nor fly,

  While she dissected, word by word,
  His speech, half guessed at and half heard,
  As might a cat a little bird.

[Illustration: "HE SPAKE, NEGLECTING SOUND AND SENSE."]

  Then, having wholly overthrown
  His views, and stripped them to the bone,
  Proceeded to unfold her own.

  "Shall Man be Man? And shall he miss
  Of other thoughts no thought but this,
  Harmonious dews of sober bliss?

  "What boots it? Shall his fevered eye
  Through towering nothingness descry
  The grisly phantom hurry by?

  "And hear dumb shrieks that fill the air;
  See mouths that gape, and eyes that stare
  And redden in the dusky glare?

  "The meadows breathing amber light,
  The darkness toppling from the height,
  The feathery train of granite Night?

  "Shall he, grown gray among his peers,
  Through the thick curtain of his tears
  Catch glimpses of his earlier years,

[Illustration: "SHALL MAN BE MAN?"]

  "And hear the sounds he knew of yore,
  Old shufflings on the sanded floor,
  Old knuckles tapping at the door?

  "Yet still before him as he flies
  One pallid form shall ever rise,
  And, bodying forth in glassy eyes

  "The vision of a vanished good,
  Low peering through the tangled wood,
  Shall freeze the current of his blood."

  Still from each fact, with skill uncouth
  And savage rapture, like a tooth
  She wrenched some slow reluctant truth.

  Till, like a silent water-mill,
  When summer suns have dried the rill,
  She reached a full stop, and was still.

  Dead calm succeeded to the fuss,
  As when the loaded omnibus
  Has reached the railway terminus:

  When, for the tumult of the street,
  Is heard the engine's stifled beat,
  The velvet tread of porters' feet.

  With glance that ever sought the ground,
  She moved her lips without a sound,
  And every now and then she frowned.

  He gazed upon the sleeping sea,
  And joyed in its tranquillity,
  And in that silence dead, but she

  To muse a little space did seem,
  Then, like the echo of a dream,
  Harped back upon her threadbare theme.

  Still an attentive ear he lent
  But could not fathom what she meant:
  She was not deep, nor eloquent.

  He marked the ripple on the sand:
  The even swaying of her hand
  Was all that he could understand.

  He saw in dreams a drawing-room,
  Where thirteen wretches sat in gloom,
  Waiting--he thought he knew for whom:

  He saw them drooping here and there,
  Each feebly huddled on a chair,
  In attitudes of blank despair:

  Oysters were not more mute than they,
  For all their brains were pumped away,
  And they had nothing more to say--

  Save one, who groaned "Three hours are gone!"
  Who shrieked "We'll wait no longer, John!
  Tell them to set the dinner on!"

  The vision passed: the ghosts were fled:
  He saw once more that woman dread:
  He heard once more the words she said.

  He left her, and he turned aside:
  He sat and watched the coming tide
  Across the shores so newly dried.

[Illustration: "HE SAT AND WATCHED THE COMING TIDE"]

  He wondered at the waters clear,
  The breeze that whispered in his ear,
  The billows heaving far and near,

  And why he had so long preferred
  To hang upon her every word:
  "In truth," he said, "it was absurd."

[Illustration]


The Third Voice.

[Illustration]

  Not long this transport held its place:
  Within a little moment's space
  Quick tears were raining down his face.

  His heart stood still, aghast with fear;
  A wordless voice, nor far nor near,
  He seemed to hear and not to hear.

  "Tears kindle not the doubtful spark.
  If so, why not? Of this remark
  The bearings are profoundly dark."

  "Her speech," he said, "hath caused this pain.
  Easier I count it to explain
  The jargon of the howling main,

  "Or, stretched beside some babbling brook,
  To con, with inexpressive look,
  An unintelligible book."

  Low spake the voice within his head,
  In words imagined more than said,
  Soundless as ghost's intended tread:

  "If thou art duller than before,
  Why quittedst thou the voice of lore?
  Why not endure, expecting more?"

  "Rather than that," he groaned aghast,
  "I'd writhe in depths of cavern vast,
  Some loathly vampire's rich repast."

[Illustration: "HE GROANED AGHAST"]

  "'Twere hard," it answered, "themes immense
  To coop within the narrow fence
  That rings _thy_ scant intelligence."

  "Not so," he urged, "nor once alone:
  But there was something in her tone
  That chilled me to the very bone.

  "Her style was anything but clear,
  And most unpleasantly severe;
  Her epithets were very queer.

  "And yet, so grand were her replies,
  I could not choose but deem her wise;
  I did not dare to criticise;

  "Nor did I leave her, till she went
  So deep in tangled argument
  That all my powers of thought were spent."

  A little whisper inly slid,
  "Yet truth is truth: you know you did."
  A little wink beneath the lid.

  And, sickened with excess of dread,
  Prone to the dust he bent his head,
  And lay like one three-quarters dead.

  The whisper left him--like a breeze
  Lost in the depths of leafy trees--
  Left him by no means at his ease.

  Once more he weltered in despair,
  With hands, through denser-matted hair,
  More tightly clenched than then they were.

  When, bathed in Dawn of living red,
  Majestic frowned the mountain head,
  "Tell me my fault," was all he said.

  When, at high Noon, the blazing sky
  Scorched in his head each haggard eye,
  Then keenest rose his weary cry.

  And when at Eve the unpitying sun
  Smiled grimly on the solemn fun,
  "Alack," he sighed, "what _have_ I done?"

[Illustration: "TORTURED, UNAIDED, AND ALONE"]

  But saddest, darkest was the sight,
  When the cold grasp of leaden Night
  Dashed him to earth, and held him tight.

  Tortured, unaided, and alone,
  Thunders were silence to his groan,
  Bagpipes sweet music to its tone:

  "What? Ever thus, in dismal round,
  Shall Pain and Mystery profound
  Pursue me like a sleepless hound,

  "With crimson-dashed and eager jaws,
  Me, still in ignorance of the cause,
  Unknowing what I broke of laws?"

  The whisper to his ear did seem
  Like echoed flow of silent stream,
  Or shadow of forgotten dream,

  The whisper trembling in the wind:
  "Her fate with thine was intertwined,"
  So spake it in his inner mind:

[Illustration: "A SCARED DULLARD, GIBBERING LOW"]

  "Each orbed on each a baleful star:
  Each proved the other's blight and bar:
  Each unto each were best, most far:

  "Yea, each to each was worse than foe:
  Thou, a scared dullard, gibbering low,
  AND SHE, AN AVALANCHE OF WOE!"




TÈMA CON VARIAZIÓNI.

[Why is it that Poetry has never yet been subjected to that process of
Dilution which has proved so advantageous to her sister-art Music? The
Diluter gives us first a few notes of some well-known Air, then a dozen
bars of his own, then a few more notes of the Air, and so on alternately:
thus saving the listener, if not from all risk of recognising the melody
at all, at least from the too-exciting transports which it might produce
in a more concentrated form. The process is termed "setting" by Composers,
and any one, that has ever experienced the emotion of being unexpectedly
set down in a heap of mortar, will recognise the truthfulness of this
happy phrase.

For truly, just as the genuine Epicure lingers lovingly over a morsel of
supreme Venison--whose every fibre seems to murmur "Excelsior!"--yet
swallows, ere returning to the toothsome dainty, great mouthfuls of
oatmeal-porridge and winkles: and just as the perfect Connoisseur in
Claret permits himself but one delicate sip, and then tosses off a pint or
more of boarding-school beer: so also----


  I never loved a dear Gazelle--
    _Nor anything that cost me much:
  High prices profit those who sell,
    But why should I be fond of such?_

  To glad me with his soft black eye
    _My son comes trotting home from school;
  He's had a fight, but can't tell why--
    He always was a little fool!_

  But, when he came to know me well,
    _He kicked me out, her testy Sire:
  And when I stained my hair, that Belle,
    Might note the change, and thus admire_

  And love me, it was sure to dye
    _A muddy green or staring blue:
  Whilst one might trace, with half an eye,
    The still triumphant carrot through_.




A GAME OF FIVES.

[Illustration]


  Five little girls, of Five, Four, Three, Two, One:
  Rolling on the hearthrug, full of tricks and fun.

  Five rosy girls, in years from Ten to Six:
  Sitting down to lessons--no more time for tricks.

  Five growing girls, from Fifteen to Eleven:
  Music, Drawing, Languages, and food enough for seven!

  Five winsome girls, from Twenty to Sixteen:
  Each young man that calls, I say "Now tell me which you _mean_!"

[Illustration: "NOW TELL ME WHICH YOU _MEAN_!"]

  Five dashing girls, the youngest Twenty-one:
  But, if nobody proposes, what is there to be done?

  Five showy girls--but Thirty is an age
  When girls may be _engaging_, but they somehow don't _engage_.

  Five dressy girls, of Thirty-one or more:
  So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so much before!

         *       *       *       *       *

  Five _passé_ girls--Their age? Well, never mind!
  We jog along together, like the rest of human kind:
  But the quondam "careless bachelor" begins to think he knows
  The answer to that ancient problem "how the money goes"!




POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR.

[Illustration]


  "How shall I be a poet?
    How shall I write in rhyme?
  You told me once 'the very wish
    Partook of the sublime.'
  Then tell me how! Don't put me off
    With your 'another time'!"

  The old man smiled to see him,
    To hear his sudden sally;
  He liked the lad to speak his mind
    Enthusiastically;
  And thought "There's no hum-drum in him,
    Nor any shilly-shally."

  "And would you be a poet
    Before you've been to school?
  Ah, well! I hardly thought you
    So absolute a fool.
  First learn to be spasmodic--
    A very simple rule.

  "For first you write a sentence,
    And then you chop it small;
  Then mix the bits, and sort them out
    Just as they chance to fall:
  The order of the phrases makes
    No difference at all.

  "Then, if you'd be impressive,
    Remember what I say,
  That abstract qualities begin
    With capitals alway:
  The True, the Good, the Beautiful--
    Those are the things that pay!

  "Next, when you are describing
    A shape, or sound, or tint;
  Don't state the matter plainly,
    But put it in a hint;
  And learn to look at all things
    With a sort of mental squint."

  "For instance, if I wished, Sir,
    Of mutton-pies to tell,
  Should I say 'dreams of fleecy flocks
    Pent in a wheaten cell'?"
  "Why, yes," the old man said: "that phrase
    Would answer very well.

  "Then fourthly, there are epithets
    That suit with any word--
  As well as Harvey's Reading Sauce
    With fish, or flesh, or bird--
  Of these, 'wild,' 'lonely,' 'weary,' 'strange,'
    Are much to be preferred."

  "And will it do, O will it do
    To take them in a lump--
  As 'the wild man went his weary way
    To a strange and lonely pump'?"
  "Nay, nay! You must not hastily
    To such conclusions jump.

  "Such epithets, like pepper,
    Give zest to what you write;
  And, if you strew them sparely,
    They whet the appetite:
  But if you lay them on too thick,
    You spoil the matter quite!

[Illustration: "THE WILD MAN WENT HIS WEARY WAY"]

  "Last, as to the arrangement:
    Your reader, you should show him,
  Must take what information he
    Can get, and look for no im-
  mature disclosure of the drift
    And purpose of your poem.

  "Therefore, to test his patience--
    How much he can endure--
  Mention no places, names, or dates,
    And evermore be sure
  Throughout the poem to be found
    Consistently obscure.

  "First fix upon the limit
    To which it shall extend:
  Then fill it up with 'Padding'
    (Beg some of any friend):
  Your great SENSATION-STANZA
    You place towards the end."

  "And what is a Sensation,
    Grandfather, tell me, pray?
  I think I never heard the word
    So used before to-day:
  Be kind enough to mention one
    '_Exempli gratiâ_.'"

  And the old man, looking sadly
    Across the garden-lawn,
  Where here and there a dew-drop
    Yet glittered in the dawn,
  Said "Go to the Adelphi,
    And see the 'Colleen Bawn.'

  "The word is due to Boucicault--
    The theory is his,
  Where Life becomes a Spasm,
    And History a Whiz:
  If that is not Sensation,
    I don't know what it is.

  "Now try your hand, ere Fancy
    Have lost its present glow--"
  "And then," his grandson added,
    "We'll publish it, you know:
  Green cloth--gold-lettered at the back--
    In duodecimo!"

  Then proudly smiled that old man
    To see the eager lad
  Rush madly for his pen and ink
    And for his blotting-pad--
  But, when he thought of _publishing_,
    His face grew stern and sad.

[Illustration]




THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK,

An Agony in Eight Fits.


PREFACE.

If--and the thing is wildly possible--the charge of writing nonsense were
ever brought against the author of this brief but instructive poem, it
would be based, I feel convinced, on the line (in p. 144)

  "Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:"

In view of this painful possibility, I will not (as I might) appeal
indignantly to my other writings as a proof that I am incapable of such a
deed: I will not (as I might) point to the strong moral purpose of this
poem itself, to the arithmetical principles so cautiously inculcated in
it, or to its noble teachings in Natural History--I will take the more
prosaic course of simply explaining how it happened.

The Bellman, who was almost morbidly sensitive about appearances, used to
have the bowsprit unshipped once or twice a week to be revarnished; and it
more than once happened, when the time came for replacing it, that no one
on board could remember which end of the ship it belonged to. They knew it
was not of the slightest use to appeal to the Bellman about it--he would
only refer to his Naval Code, and read out in pathetic tones Admiralty
Instructions which none of them had ever been able to understand--so it
generally ended in its being fastened on, anyhow, across the rudder. The
helmsman[1] used to stand by with tears in his eyes: _he_ knew it was all
wrong, but alas! Rule 42 of the Code, "_No one shall speak to the Man at
the Helm_," had been completed by the Bellman himself with the words "_and
the Man at the Helm shall speak to no one_." So remonstrance was
impossible, and no steering could be done till the next varnishing day.
During these bewildering intervals the ship usually sailed backwards.

As this poem is to some extent connected with the lay of the Jabberwock,
let me take this opportunity of answering a question that has often been
asked me, how to pronounce "slithy toves." The "i" in "slithy" is long, as
in "writhe"; and "toves" is pronounced so as to rhyme with "groves."
Again, the first "o" in "borogoves" is pronounced like the "o" in
"borrow." I have heard people try to give it the sound of the "o" in
"worry." Such is Human Perversity.

     [1] This office was usually undertaken by the Boots, who found in it
     a refuge from the Baker's constant complaints about the insufficient
     blacking of his three pair of boots.

This also seems a fitting occasion to notice the other hard words in that
poem. Humpty-Dumpty's theory, of two meanings packed into one word like a
portmanteau, seems to me the right explanation for all.

For instance, take the two words "fuming" and "furious." Make up your mind
that you will say both words, but leave it unsettled which you will say
first. Now open your mouth and speak. If your thoughts incline ever so
little towards "fuming," you will say "fuming-furious"; if they turn, by
even a hair's breadth towards "furious," you will say "furious-fuming";
but if you have that rarest of gifts, a perfectly balanced mind, you will
say "frumious."

Supposing that, when Pistol uttered the well-known words--

  "Under which king, Bezonian? Speak or die!"

Justice Shallow had felt certain that it was either William or Richard,
but had not been able to settle which, so that he could not possibly say
either name before the other, can it be doubted that, rather than die, he
would have gasped out "Rilchiam!"


Fit the First.

_THE LANDING._

  "Just the place for a Snark!" the Bellman cried,
    As he landed his crew with care;
  Supporting each man on the top of the tide
    By a finger entwined in his hair.

  "Just the place for a Snark! I have said it twice:
    That alone should encourage the crew.
  Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice:
    What I tell you three times is true."

  The crew was complete: it included a Boots--
    A maker of Bonnets and Hoods--
  A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes--
    And a Broker, to value their goods.

[Illustration: "SUPPORTING EACH MAN ON THE TOP OF THE TIDE"]

  A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense,
    Might perhaps have won more than his share--
  But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense,
    Had the whole of their cash in his care.

  There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck,
    Or would sit making lace in the bow:
  And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck,
    Though none of the sailors knew how.

  There was one who was famed for the number of things
    He forgot when he entered the ship:
  His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings,
    And the clothes he had bought for the trip.

  He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
    With his name painted clearly on each:
  But since he omitted to mention the fact,
    They were all left behind on the beach.

  The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
    He had seven coats on when he came,
  With three pair of boots--but the worst of it was
    He had wholly forgotten his name.

[Illustration: "HE HAD WHOLLY FORGOTTEN HIS NAME"]

  He would answer to "Hi!" or to any loud cry,
    Such as "Fry me!" or "Fritter my wig!"
  To "What-you-may-call-um!" or "What-was-his-name!"
    But especially "Thing-um-a jig!"

  While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
    He had different names from these:
  His intimate friends called him "Candle-ends,"
    And his enemies "Toasted-cheese."

  "His form is ungainly--his intellect small--"
    (So the Bellman would often remark)--
  "But his courage is perfect! And that, after all,
    Is the thing that one needs with a Snark."

  He would joke with hyænas, returning their stare
    With an impudent wag of the head:
  And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear,
    "Just to keep up its spirits," he said.

  He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late--
    And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad--
  He could only bake Bride-cake--for which, I may state,
    No materials were to be had.

  The last of the crew needs especial remark,
    Though he looked an incredible dunce:
  He had just one idea--but, that one being "Snark,"
    The good Bellman engaged him at once.

  He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared,
    When the ship had been sailing a week,
  He could only kill Beavers. The Bellman looked scared,
    And was almost too frightened to speak:

  But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone,
    There was only one Beaver on board;
  And that was a tame one he had of his own,
    Whose death would be deeply deplored.

  The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark,
    Protested, with tears in its eyes,
  That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark
    Could atone for that dismal surprise!

  It strongly advised that the Butcher should be
    Conveyed in a separate ship:
  But the Bellman declared that would never agree
    With the plans he had made for the trip:

[Illustration: "THE BEAVER KEPT LOOKING THE OPPOSITE WAY"]

  Navigation was always a difficult art,
    Though with only one ship and one bell:
  And he feared he must really decline, for his part,
    Undertaking another as well.

  The Beaver's best course was, no doubt, to procure
    A second-hand dagger-proof coat--
  So the Baker advised it--and next, to insure
    Its life in some Office of note:

  This the Banker suggested, and offered for hire
    (On moderate terms), or for sale,
  Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire,
    And one Against Damage From Hail.

  Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day,
    Whenever the Butcher was by,
  The Beaver kept looking the opposite way,
    And appeared unaccountably shy.


Fit the Second.

_THE BELLMAN'S SPEECH._

  The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies--
    Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
  Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise,
    The moment one looked in his face!

  He had bought a large map representing the sea,
    Without the least vestige of land:
  And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
    A map they could all understand.

  "What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and Equators,
    Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?"
  So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
    "They are merely conventional signs!

[Illustration: OCEAN-CHART.]

  "Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
    But we've got our brave Captain to thank"
  (So the crew would protest) "that he's bought _us_ the best--
    A perfect and absolute blank!"

  This was charming, no doubt: but they shortly found out
    That the Captain they trusted so well
  Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
    And that was to tingle his bell.

  He was thoughtful and grave--but the orders he gave
    Were enough to bewilder a crew.
  When he cried "Steer to starboard, but keep her head larboard!"
    What on earth was the helmsman to do?

  Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:
    A thing, as the Bellman remarked,
  That frequently happens in tropical climes,
    When a vessel is, so to speak, "snarked."

  But the principal failing occurred in the sailing,
    And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed,
  Said he _had_ hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East,
    That the ship would _not_ travel due West!

  But the danger was past--they had landed at last,
    With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
  Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view
    Which consisted of chasms and crags.

  The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low,
    And repeated in musical tone
  Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe--
    But the crew would do nothing but groan.

  He served out some grog with a liberal hand,
    And bade them sit down on the beach:
  And they could not but own that their Captain looked grand,
    As he stood and delivered his speech.

  "Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!
    (They were all of them fond of quotations:
  So they drank to his health, and they gave him three cheers
    While he served out additional rations).

  "We have sailed many months, we have sailed many weeks,
    (Four weeks to the month you may mark),
  But never as yet ('tis your Captain who speaks)
    Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark!

  "We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days,
    (Seven days to the week I allow),
  But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze,
    We have never beheld till now!

  "Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
    The five unmistakable marks
  By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
    The warranted genuine Snarks.

  "Let us take them in order. The first is the taste,
    Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
  Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
    With a flavour of Will-o-the wisp.

  "Its habit of getting up late you'll agree
    That it carries too far, when I say
  That it frequently breakfasts at five o'clock tea,
    And dines on the following day.

  "The third is its slowness in taking a jest.
    Should you happen to venture on one,
  It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:
    And it always looks grave at a pun.

  "The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
    Which it constantly carries about,
  And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes--
    A sentiment open to doubt.

  "The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
    To describe each particular batch:
  Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
    From those that have whiskers, and scratch.

  "For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
    Yet I feel it my duty to say
  Some are Boojums--" The Bellman broke off in alarm,
    For the Baker had fainted away.


Fit the Third.

_THE BAKER'S TALE._

  They roused him with muffins--they roused him with ice--
    They roused him with mustard and cress--
  They roused him with jam and judicious advice--
    They set him conundrums to guess.

  When at length he sat up and was able to speak,
    His sad story he offered to tell;
  And the Bellman cried "Silence! Not even a shriek!"
    And excitedly tingled his bell.

  There was silence supreme! Not a shriek, not a scream;
    Scarcely even a howl or a groan,
  As the man they called "Ho!" told his story of woe
    In an antediluvian tone.

  "My father and mother were honest, though poor--"
    "Skip all that!" cried the Bellman in haste.
  "If it once becomes dark, there's no chance of a Snark--
    We have hardly a minute to waste!"

  "I skip forty years," said the Baker, in tears,
    "And proceed without further remark
  To the day when you took me aboard of your ship
    To help you in hunting the Snark.

  "A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named)
    Remarked, when I bade him farewell--"
  "Oh, skip your dear uncle!" the Bellman exclaimed,
    As he angrily tingled his bell.

  "He remarked to me then," said that mildest of men,
    "'If your Snark be a Snark, that is right:
  Fetch it home by all means--you may serve it with greens
    And it's handy for striking a light.

  "'You may seek it with thimbles--and seek it with care;
    You may hunt it with forks and hope;
  You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
    You may charm it with smiles and soap--'"

  ("That's exactly the method," the Bellman bold
    In a hasty parenthesis cried,
  "That's exactly the way I have always been told
    That the capture of Snarks should be tried!")

  "'But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
    If your Snark be a Boojum! For then
  You will softly and suddenly vanish away,
    And never be met with again!'

  "It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul,
    When I think of my uncle's last words:
  And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl
    Brimming over with quivering curds!

  "It is this, it is this--" "We have had that before!"
    The Bellman indignantly said.
  And the Baker replied "Let me say it once more.
    It is this, it is this that I dread!

  "I engage with the Snark--every night after dark--
    In a dreamy delirious fight:
  I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes,
    And I use it for striking a light:

[Illustration: "BUT OH, BEAMISH NEPHEW, BEWARE OF THE DAY"]

  "But if ever I meet with a Boojum, that day,
    In a moment (of this I am sure),
  I shall softly and suddenly vanish away--
    And the notion I cannot endure!"


Fit the Fourth.

_THE HUNTING._

  The Bellman looked uffish, and wrinkled his brow.
    "If only you'd spoken before!
  It's excessively awkward to mention it now,
    With the Snark, so to speak, at the door!

  "We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe,
    If you never were met with again--
  But surely, my man, when the voyage began,
    You might have suggested it then?

  "It's excessively awkward to mention it now--
    As I think I've already remarked."
  And the man they called "Hi!" replied, with a sigh,
    "I informed you the day we embarked.

  "You may charge me with murder--or want of sense--
    (We are all of us weak at times):
  But the slightest approach to a false pretence
    Was never among my crimes!

  "I said it in Hebrew--I said it in Dutch--
    I said it in German and Greek:
  But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much)
    That English is what you speak!"

  "'Tis a pitiful tale," said the Bellman, whose face
    Had grown longer at every word:
  "But, now that you've stated the whole of your case,
    More debate would be simply absurd.

  "The rest of my speech" (he explained to his men)
    "You shall hear when I've leisure to speak it.
  But the Snark is at hand, let me tell you again!
    'Tis your glorious duty to seek it!

  "To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care;
    To pursue it with forks and hope;
  To threaten its life with a railway-share;
    To charm it with smiles and soap!

[Illustration: "TO PURSUE IT WITH FORKS AND HOPE."]

  "For the Snark's a peculiar creature, that won't
    Be caught in a commonplace way.
  Do all that you know, and try all that you don't:
    Not a chance must be wasted to-day!

  "For England expects--I forbear to proceed:
    'Tis a maxim tremendous, but trite:
  And you'd best be unpacking the things that you need
    To rig yourselves out for the fight."

  Then the Banker endorsed a blank cheque (which he crossed),
    And changed his loose silver for notes:
  The Baker with care combed his whiskers and hair,
    And shook the dust out of his coats:

  The Boots and the Broker were sharpening a spade--
    Each working the grindstone in turn:
  But the Beaver went on making lace, and displayed
    No interest in the concern:

  Though the Barrister tried to appeal to its pride,
    And vainly proceeded to cite
  A number of cases, in which making laces
    Had been proved an infringement of right.

  The maker of Bonnets ferociously planned
    A novel arrangement of bows:
  While the Billiard-marker with quivering hand
    Was chalking the tip of his nose.

  But the Butcher turned nervous, and dressed himself fine,
    With yellow kid gloves and a ruff--
  Said he felt it exactly like going to dine,
    Which the Bellman declared was all "stuff."

  "Introduce me, now there's a good fellow," he said,
    "If we happen to meet it together!"
  And the Bellman, sagaciously nodding his head,
    Said "That must depend on the weather."

  The Beaver went simply galumphing about,
    At seeing the Butcher so shy:
  And even the Baker, though stupid and stout,
    Made an effort to wink with one eye.

  "Be a man!" cried the Bellman in wrath, as he heard
    The Butcher beginning to sob.
  "Should we meet with a Jubjub, that desperate bird,
    We shall need all our strength for the job!"


Fit the Fifth.

_THE BEAVER'S LESSON._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  Then the Butcher contrived an ingenious plan
    For making a separate sally;
  And had fixed on a spot unfrequented by man,
    A dismal and desolate valley.

  But the very same plan to the Beaver occurred:
    It had chosen the very same place:
  Yet neither betrayed, by a sign or a word,
    The disgust that appeared in his face.

  Each thought he was thinking of nothing but "Snark"
    And the glorious work of the day;
  And each tried to pretend that he did not remark
    That the other was going that way.

  But the valley grew narrow and narrower still,
    And the evening got darker and colder,
  Till (merely from nervousness, not from good will)
    They marched along shoulder to shoulder.

  Then a scream, shrill and high, rent the shuddering sky,
    And they knew that some danger was near:
  The Beaver turned pale to the tip of its tail,
    And even the Butcher felt queer.

  He thought of his childhood, left far far behind--
    That blissful and innocent state--
  The sound so exactly recalled to his mind
    A pencil that squeaks on a slate!

  "'Tis the voice of the Jubjub!" he suddenly cried.
    (This man, that they used to call "Dunce.")
  "As the Bellman would tell you," he added with pride,
    "I have uttered that sentiment once."

  "'Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat;
    You will find I have told it you twice.
  'Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete,
    If only I've stated it thrice."

  The Beaver had counted with scrupulous care,
    Attending to every word:
  But it fairly lost heart, and outgrabe in despair,
    When the third repetition occurred.

  It felt that, in spite of all possible pains,
    It had somehow contrived to lose count,
  And the only thing now was to rack its poor brains
    By reckoning up the amount.

  "Two added to one--if that could but be done,"
    It said, "with one's fingers and thumbs!"
  Recollecting with tears how, in earlier years,
    It had taken no pains with its sums.

  "The thing can be done," said the Butcher, "I think.
    The thing must be done, I am sure.
  The thing shall be done! Bring me paper and ink,
    The best there is time to procure."

  The Beaver brought paper, portfolio, pens,
    And ink in unfailing supplies:
  While strange creepy creatures came out of their dens,
    And watched them with wondering eyes.

  So engrossed was the Butcher, he heeded them not,
    As he wrote with a pen in each hand,
  And explained all the while in a popular style
    Which the Beaver could well understand.

  "Taking Three as the subject to reason about--
    A convenient number to state--
  We add Seven, and Ten, and then multiply out
    By One Thousand diminished by Eight.

  "The result we proceed to divide, as you see,
    By Nine-Hundred-and-Ninety-and-Two:
  Then subtract Seventeen, and the answer must be
    Exactly and perfectly true.

  "The method employed I would gladly explain,
    While I have it so clear in my head,
  If I had but the time and you had but the brain--
    But much yet remains to be said.

[Illustration: "THE BEAVER BROUGHT PAPER, PORTFOLIO, PENS"]

  "In one moment I've seen what has hitherto been
    Enveloped in absolute mystery,
  And without extra charge I will give you at large
    A Lesson in Natural History."

  In his genial way he proceeded to say
    (Forgetting all laws of propriety,
  And that giving instruction, without introduction,
    Would have caused quite a thrill in Society),

  "As to temper the Jubjub's a desperate bird,
    Since it lives in perpetual passion:
  Its taste in costume is entirely absurd--
    It is ages ahead of the fashion:

  "But it knows any friend it has met once before:
    It never will look at a bribe:
  And in charity-meetings it stands at the door,
    And collects--though it does not subscribe.

  "Its flavour when cooked is more exquisite far
    Than mutton, or oysters, or eggs:
  (Some think it keeps best in an ivory jar,
    And some, in mahogany kegs:)

  "You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue:
    You condense it with locusts and tape:
  Still keeping one principal object in view--
    To preserve its symmetrical shape."

  The Butcher would gladly have talked till next day,
    But he felt that the Lesson must end,
  And he wept with delight in attempting to say
    He considered the Beaver his friend:

  While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks
    More eloquent even than tears,
  It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books
    Would have taught it in seventy years.

  They returned hand-in-hand, and the Bellman, unmanned
    (For a moment) with noble emotion,
  Said "This amply repays all the wearisome days
    We have spent on the billowy ocean!"

  Such friends, as the Beaver and Butcher became,
    Have seldom if ever been known;
  In winter or summer, 'twas always the same--
    You could never meet either alone.

  And when quarrels arose--as one frequently finds
    Quarrels will, spite of every endeavour--
  The song of the Jubjub recurred to their minds,
    And cemented their friendship for ever!


Fit the Sixth.

_THE BARRISTER'S DREAM._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  But the Barrister, weary of proving in vain
    That the Beaver's lace-making was wrong,
  Fell asleep, and in dreams saw the creature quite plain
    That his fancy had dwelt on so long.

  He dreamed that he stood in a shadowy Court,
    Where the Snark, with a glass in its eye,
  Dressed in gown, bands, and wig, was defending a pig
    On the charge of deserting its sty.

[Illustration: "'YOU MUST KNOW--' SAID THE JUDGE: BUT THE SNARK EXCLAIMED
'FUDGE!'"]

  The Witnesses proved, without error or flaw,
    That the sty was deserted when found:
  And the Judge kept explaining the state of the law
    In a soft under-current of sound.

  The indictment had never been clearly expressed,
    And it seemed that the Snark had begun,
  And had spoken three hours, before any one guessed
    What the pig was supposed to have done.

  The Jury had each formed a different view
    (Long before the indictment was read),
  And they all spoke at once, so that none of them knew
    One word that the others had said.

  "You must know--" said the Judge: but the Snark exclaimed "Fudge!
    That statute is obsolete quite!
  Let me tell you, my friends, the whole question depends
    On an ancient manorial right.

  "In the matter of Treason the pig would appear
    To have aided, but scarcely abetted:
  While the charge of Insolvency fails, it is clear,
    If you grant the plea 'never indebted.'

  "The fact of Desertion I will not dispute:
    But its guilt, as I trust, is removed
  (So far as relates to the costs of this suit)
    By the Alibi which has been proved.

  "My poor client's fate now depends on your votes."
    Here the speaker sat down in his place,
  And directed the Judge to refer to his notes
    And briefly to sum up the case.

  But the Judge said he never had summed up before;
    So the Snark undertook it instead,
  And summed it so well that it came to far more
    Than the Witnesses ever had said!

  When the verdict was called for, the Jury declined,
    As the word was so puzzling to spell;
  But they ventured to hope that the Snark wouldn't mind
    Undertaking that duty as well.

  So the Snark found the verdict, although, as it owned,
    It was spent with the toils of the day:
  When it said the word "GUILTY!" the Jury all groaned
    And some of them fainted away.

  Then the Snark pronounced sentence, the Judge being quite
    Too nervous to utter a word:
  When it rose to its feet, there was silence like night,
    And the fall of a pin might be heard.

  "Transportation for life" was the sentence it gave,
    "And _then_ to be fined forty pound."
  The Jury all cheered, though the Judge said he feared
    That the phrase was not legally sound.

  But their wild exultation was suddenly checked
    When the jailer informed them, with tears,
  Such a sentence would have not the slightest effect,
    As the pig had been dead for some years.

  The Judge left the Court, looking deeply disgusted:
    But the Snark, though a little aghast,
  As the lawyer to whom the defence was intrusted,
    Went bellowing on to the last.

  Thus the Barrister dreamed, while the bellowing seemed
    To grow every moment more clear:
  Till he woke to the knell of a furious bell,
    Which the Bellman rang close at his ear.


Fit the Seventh.

_THE BANKER'S FATE._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  And the Banker, inspired with a courage so new
    It was matter for general remark,
  Rushed madly ahead and was lost to their view
    In his zeal to discover the Snark.

  But while he was seeking with thimbles and care,
    A Bandersnatch swiftly drew nigh
  And grabbed at the Banker, who shrieked in despair,
    For he knew it was useless to fly.

  He offered large discount--he offered a cheque
    (Drawn "to bearer") for seven-pounds-ten:
  But the Bandersnatch merely extended its neck
    And grabbed at the Banker again.

  Without rest or pause--while those frumious jaws
    Went savagely snapping around--
  He skipped and he hopped, and he floundered and flopped,
    Till fainting he fell to the ground.

  The Bandersnatch fled as the others appeared
    Led on by that fear-stricken yell:
  And the Bellman remarked "It is just as I feared!"
    And solemnly tolled on his bell.

  He was black in the face, and they scarcely could trace
    The least likeness to what he had been:
  While so great was his fright that his waistcoat turned white--
    A wonderful thing to be seen!

[Illustration: "SO GREAT WAS HIS FRIGHT THAT HIS WAISTCOAT TURNED WHITE."]

  To the horror of all who were present that day,
    He uprose in full evening dress,
  And with senseless grimaces endeavoured to say
    What his tongue could no longer express.

  Down he sank in a chair--ran his hands through his hair--
    And chanted in mimsiest tones
  Words whose utter inanity proved his insanity,
    While he rattled a couple of bones.

  "Leave him here to his fate--it is getting so late!"
    The Bellman exclaimed in a fright.
  "We have lost half the day. Any further delay,
    And we sha'n't catch a Snark before night!"


Fit the Eighth.

_THE VANISHING._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  They shuddered to think that the chase might fail,
    And the Beaver, excited at last,
  Went bounding along on the tip of its tail,
    For the daylight was nearly past.

  "There is Thingumbob shouting!" the Bellman said.
    "He is shouting like mad, only hark!
  He is waving his hands, he is wagging his head,
    He has certainly found a Snark!"

  They gazed in delight, while the Butcher exclaimed
    "He was always a desperate wag!"
  They beheld him--their Baker--their hero unnamed--
    On the top of a neighbouring crag,

  Erect and sublime, for one moment of time.
    In the next, that wild figure they saw
  (As if stung by a spasm) plunge into a chasm,
    While they waited and listened in awe.

  "It's a Snark!" was the sound that first came to their ears,
    And seemed almost too good to be true.
  Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers:
    Then the ominous words "It's a Boo--"

  Then, silence. Some fancied they heard in the air
    A weary and wandering sigh
  That sounded like "--jum!" but the others declare
    It was only a breeze that went by.

[Illustration: "THEN, SILENCE"]

  They hunted till darkness came on, but they found
    Not a button, or feather, or mark,
  By which they could tell that they stood on the ground
    Where the Baker had met with the Snark.

  In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
    In the midst of his laughter and glee,
  He had softly and suddenly vanished away--
    For the Snark _was_ a Boojum, you see.




SIZE AND TEARS.

[Illustration]


  When on the sandy shore I sit,
    Beside the salt sea-wave,
  And fall into a weeping fit
    Because I dare not shave--
  A little whisper at my ear
  Enquires the reason of my fear.

  I answer "If that ruffian Jones
    Should recognise me here,
  He'd bellow out my name in tones
    Offensive to the ear:
  He chaffs me so on being stout
  (A thing that always puts me out)."

  Ah me! I see him on the cliff!
    Farewell, farewell to hope,
  If he should look this way, and if
    He's got his telescope!
  To whatsoever place I flee,
  My odious rival follows me!

  For every night, and everywhere,
    I meet him out at dinner;
  And when I've found some charming fair,
    And vowed to die or win her,
  The wretch (he's thin and I am stout)
  Is sure to come and cut me out!

[Illustration: "HE'S THIN AND I AM STOUT"]

  The girls (just like them!) all agree
    To praise J. Jones, Esquire:
  I ask them what on earth they see
    About him to admire?
  They cry "He is so sleek and slim,
  It's quite a treat to look at him!"

  They vanish in tobacco smoke,
    Those visionary maids--
  I feel a sharp and sudden poke
    Between the shoulder-blades--
  "Why, Brown, my boy! You're growing stout!"
  (I told you he would find me out!)

  "My growth is not _your_ business, Sir!"
    "No more it is, my boy!
  But if it's _yours_, as I infer,
    Why, Brown, I give you joy!
  A man, whose business prospers so,
  Is just the sort of man to know!

  "It's hardly safe, though, talking here--
    I'd best get out of reach:
  For such a weight as yours, I fear,
    Must shortly sink the beach!"--

  Insult me thus because I'm stout!
  I vow I'll go and call him out!

[Illustration]




ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN.


            Ay, 'twas here, on this spot,
              In that summer of yore,
            Atalanta did not
              Vote my presence a bore,
  Nor reply to my tenderest talk "She had heard all that nonsense before."

            She'd the brooch I had bought
              And the necklace and sash on,
            And her heart, as I thought,
              Was alive to my passion;
  And she'd done up her hair in the style that the Empress had brought
    into fashion.

[Illustration]

            I had been to the play
              With my pearl of a Peri--
            But, for all I could say,
              She declared she was weary,
  That "the place was so crowded and hot, and she couldn't abide that
    Dundreary."

            Then I thought "'Tis for me
              That she whines and she whimpers!"
            And it soothed me to see
              Those sensational simpers,
  And I said "This is scrumptious!"--a phrase I had learned from the
    Devonshire shrimpers.

            And I vowed "'Twill be said
              I'm a fortunate fellow,
            When the breakfast is spread,
              When the topers are mellow,
  When the foam of the bride-cake is white, and the fierce orange-blossoms
    are yellow!"

            O that languishing yawn!
              O those eloquent eyes!
            I was drunk with the dawn
              Of a splendid surmise--
  I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear, by a tempest of sighs.

            And I whispered "'Tis time!
              Is not Love at its deepest?
            Shall we squander Life's prime,
              While thou waitest and weepest?
  Let us settle it, License or Banns?--though undoubtedly Banns are the
    cheapest."

            "Ah, my Hero," said I,
              "Let me be thy Leander!"
            But I lost her reply--
              Something ending with "gander"--
  For the omnibus rattled so loud that no mortal could quite understand
    her.




THE LANG COORTIN'.


  The ladye she stood at her lattice high,
      Wi' her doggie at her feet;
  Thorough the lattice she can spy
      The passers in the street.

  "There's one that standeth at the door,
      And tirleth at the pin:
  Now speak and say, my popinjay,
      If I sall let him in."

  Then up and spake the popinjay
      That flew abune her head:
  "Gae let him in that tirls the pin:
      He cometh thee to wed."

  O when he cam' the parlour in,
      A woeful man was he!
  "And dinna ye ken your lover agen,
      Sae well that loveth thee?"

[Illustration]

  "And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir,
      That have been sae lang away?
  And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir?
      Ye never telled me sae."

  Said--"Ladye dear," and the salt, salt tear
      Cam' rinnin' doon his cheek,
  "I have sent thee tokens of my love
      This many and many a week.

  "O didna ye get the rings, Ladye,
      The rings o' the gowd sae fine?
  I wot that I have sent to thee
      Four score, four score and nine."

  "They cam' to me," said that fair ladye.
      "Wow, they were flimsie things!"
  Said--"that chain o' gowd, my doggie to howd,
      It is made o' thae self-same rings."

  "And didna ye get the locks, the locks,
      The locks o' my ain black hair,
  Whilk I sent by post, whilk I sent by box,
      Whilk I sent by the carrier?"

  "They cam' to me," said that fair ladye;
      "And I prithee send nae mair!"
  Said--"that cushion sae red, for my doggie's head,
      It is stuffed wi' thae locks o' hair."

  "And didna ye get the letter, Ladye,
      Tied wi' a silken string,
  Whilk I sent to thee frae the far countrie,
      A message of love to bring?"

  "It cam' to me frae the far countrie
      Wi' its silken string and a';
  But it wasna prepaid," said that high-born maid,
      "Sae I gar'd them tak' it awa'."

  "O ever alack that ye sent it back,
      It was written sae clerkly and well!
  Now the message it brought, and the boon that it sought,
      I must even say it mysel'."

  Then up and spake the popinjay,
      Sae wisely counselled he.
  "Now say it in the proper way:
      Gae doon upon thy knee!"

  The lover he turned baith red and pale,
      Went doon upon his knee:
  "O Ladye, hear the waesome tale
      That must be told to thee!

  "For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I coorted thee by looks;
  By nods and winks, by smiles and tears,
      As I had read in books.

  "For ten lang years, O weary hours!
      I coorted thee by signs;
  By sending game, by sending flowers,
      By sending Valentines.

  "For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I have dwelt in the far countrie,
  Till that thy mind should be inclined
      Mair tenderly to me.

  "Now thirty years are gane and past,
      I am come frae a foreign land:
  I am come to tell thee my love at last--
      O Ladye, gie me thy hand!"

  The ladye she turned not pale nor red,
      But she smiled a pitiful smile:
  "Sic' a coortin' as yours, my man," she said
      "Takes a lang and a weary while!"

  And out and laughed the popinjay,
      A laugh of bitter scorn:
  "A coortin' done in sic' a way,
      It ought not to be borne!"

[Illustration: "AND OUT AND LAUGHED THE POPINJAY"]

  Wi' that the doggie barked aloud,
      And up and doon he ran,
  And tugged and strained his chain o' gowd,
      All for to bite the man.

  "O hush thee, gentle popinjay!
      O hush thee, doggie dear!
  There is a word I fain wad say,
      It needeth he should hear!"

  Aye louder screamed that ladye fair
      To drown her doggie's bark:
  Ever the lover shouted mair
      To make that ladye hark:

  Shrill and more shrill the popinjay
      Upraised his angry squall:
  I trow the doggie's voice that day
      Was louder than them all!

  The serving-men and serving-maids
      Sat by the kitchen fire:
  They heard sic' a din the parlour within
      As made them much admire.

[Illustration: "O HUSH THEE, GENTLE POPINJAY!"]

  Out spake the boy in buttons
      (I ween he wasna thin),
  "Now wha will tae the parlour gae,
      And stay this deadlie din?"

  And they have taen a kerchief,
      Casted their kevils in,
  For wha should tae the parlour gae,
      And stay that deadlie din.

  When on that boy the kevil fell
      To stay the fearsome noise,
  "Gae in," they cried, "whate'er betide,
      Thou prince of button-boys!"

  Syne, he has taen a supple cane
      To swinge that dog sae fat:
  The doggie yowled, the doggie howled
      The louder aye for that.

  Syne, he has taen a mutton-bane--
      The doggie ceased his noise,
  And followed doon the kitchen stair
      That prince of button-boys!

[Illustration: "THE DOGGIE CEASED HIS NOISE"]

  Then sadly spake that ladye fair,
      Wi' a frown upon her brow:
  "O dearer to me is my sma' doggie
      Than a dozen sic' as thou!

  "Nae use, nae use for sighs and tears:
      Nae use at all to fret:
  Sin' ye've bided sae well for thirty years,
      Ye may bide a wee langer yet!"

  Sadly, sadly he crossed the floor
      And tirlëd at the pin:
  Sadly went he through the door
      Where sadly he cam' in.

  "O gin I had a popinjay
      To fly abune my head,
  To tell me what I ought to say,
      I had by this been wed.

  "O gin I find anither ladye,"
      He said wi' sighs and tears,
  "I wot my coortin' sall not be
      Anither thirty years:

  "For gin I find a ladye gay,
      Exactly to my taste,
  I'll pop the question, aye or nay,
      In twenty years at maist."

[Illustration]




FOUR RIDDLES.

[These consist of two Double Acrostics and two Charades.

No. I. was written at the request of some young friends, who had gone to a
ball at an Oxford Commemoration--and also as a specimen of what might be
done by making the Double Acrostic _a connected poem_ instead of what it
has hitherto been, a string of disjointed stanzas, on every conceivable
subject, and about as interesting to read straight through as a page of a
Cyclopædia. The first two stanzas describe the two main words, and each
subsequent stanza one of the cross "lights."

No. II. was written after seeing Miss Ellen Terry perform in the play of
"Hamlet." In this case the first stanza describes the two main words.

No. III. was written after seeing Miss Marion Terry perform in Mr.
Gilbert's play of "Pygmalion and Galatea." The three stanzas respectively
describe "My First," "My Second," and "My Whole."]


I.

  There was an ancient City, stricken down
    With a strange frenzy, and for many a day
  They paced from morn to eve the crowded town,
              And danced the night away.

  I asked the cause: the aged man grew sad:
    They pointed to a building gray and tall,
  And hoarsely answered "Step inside, my lad,
              And then you'll see it all."

         *       *       *       *       *

  Yet what are all such gaieties to me
    Whose thoughts are full of indices and surds?
  x{2} + 7x + 53
              = 11/3.

  But something whispered "It will soon be done:
    Bands cannot always play, nor ladies smile:
  Endure with patience the distasteful fun
              For just a little while!"

  A change came o'er my Vision--it was night:
    We clove a pathway through a frantic throng:
  The steeds, wild-plunging, filled us with affright:
              The chariots whirled along.

  Within a marble hall a river ran--
    A living tide, half muslin and half cloth:
  And here one mourned a broken wreath or fan,
              Yet swallowed down her wrath;

  And here one offered to a thirsty fair
    (His words half-drowned amid those thunders tuneful)
  Some frozen viand (there were many there),
              A tooth-ache in each spoonful.

  There comes a happy pause, for human strength
    Will not endure to dance without cessation;
  And every one must reach the point at length
              Of absolute prostration.

  At such a moment ladies learn to give,
    To partners who would urge them over-much,
  A flat and yet decided negative--
              Photographers love such.

  There comes a welcome summons--hope revives,
    And fading eyes grow bright, and pulses quicken:
  Incessant pop the corks, and busy knives
              Dispense the tongue and chicken.

  Flushed with new life, the crowd flows back again:
    And all is tangled talk and mazy motion--
  Much like a waving field of golden grain,
              Or a tempestuous ocean.

  And thus they give the time, that Nature meant
    For peaceful sleep and meditative snores,
  To ceaseless din and mindless merriment
              And waste of shoes and floors.

  And One (we name him not) that flies the flowers,
    That dreads the dances, and that shuns the salads,
  They doom to pass in solitude the hours,
              Writing acrostic-ballads.

  How late it grows! The hour is surely past
    That should have warned us with its double-knock?
  The twilight wanes, and morning comes at last--
              "Oh, Uncle, what's o'clock?"

  The Uncle gravely nods, and wisely winks.
    It _may_ mean much, but how is one to know?
  He opes his mouth--yet out of it, methinks,
              No words of wisdom flow.


II.

  Empress of Art, for thee I twine
    This wreath with all too slender skill.
  Forgive my Muse each halting line,
    And for the deed accept the will!

         *       *       *       *       *

  O day of tears! Whence comes this spectre grim,
    Parting, like Death's cold river, souls that love?
  Is not he bound to thee, as thou to him,
    By vows, unwhispered here, yet heard above?

  And still it lives, that keen and heavenward flame,
    Lives in his eye, and trembles in his tone:
  And these wild words of fury but proclaim
    A heart that beats for thee, for thee alone!

  But all is lost: that mighty mind o'erthrown,
    Like sweet bells jangled, piteous sight to see!
  "Doubt that the stars are fire," so runs his moan,
    "Doubt Truth herself, but not my love for thee!"

  A sadder vision yet: thine aged sire
    Shaming his hoary locks with treacherous wile!
  And dost thou now doubt Truth to be a liar?
    And wilt thou die, that hast forgot to smile?

  Nay, get thee hence! Leave all thy winsome ways
    And the faint fragrance of thy scattered flowers:
  In holy silence wait the appointed days,
    And weep away the leaden-footed hours.


III.

  The air is bright with hues of light
    And rich with laughter and with singing:
  Young hearts beat high in ecstasy,
    And banners wave, and bells are ringing:
  But silence falls with fading day,
  And there's an end to mirth and play.
            Ah, well-a-day!

  Rest your old bones, ye wrinkled crones!
    The kettle sings, the firelight dances.
  Deep be it quaffed, the magic draught
    That fills the soul with golden fancies!
  For Youth and Pleasance will not stay,
  And ye are withered, worn, and gray.
            Ah, well-a-day!

  O fair cold face! O form of grace,
    For human passion madly yearning!
  O weary air of dumb despair,
    From marble won, to marble turning!
  "Leave us not thus!" we fondly pray.
  "We cannot let thee pass away!"
            Ah, well-a-day!


IV.

  My First is singular at best:
      More plural is my Second:
  My Third is far the pluralest--
  So plural-plural, I protest
      It scarcely can be reckoned!

  My First is followed by a bird:
      My Second by believers
  In magic art: my simple Third
  Follows, too often, hopes absurd
      And plausible deceivers.

  My First to get at wisdom tries--
      A failure melancholy!
  My Second men revered as wise:
  My Third from heights of wisdom flies
      To depths of frantic folly.

  My First is ageing day by day:
      My Second's age is ended:
  My Third enjoys an age, they say,
  That never seems to fade away,
      Through centuries extended.

  My Whole? I need a poet's pen
      To paint her myriad phases:
  The monarch, and the slave, of men--
  A mountain-summit, and a den
      Of dark and deadly mazes--

  A flashing light--a fleeting shade--
      Beginning, end, and middle
  Of all that human art hath made
  Or wit devised! Go, seek _her_ aid,
      If you would read my riddle!




FAME'S PENNY-TRUMPET.

[Affectionately dedicated to all "original researchers" who pant for
"endowment."]


  Blow, blow your trumpets till they crack,
    Ye little men of little souls!
  And bid them huddle at your back--
    Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals!

  Fill all the air with hungry wails--
    "Reward us, ere we think or write!
  Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails
    To sate the swinish appetite!"

  And, where great Plato paced serene,
    Or Newton paused with wistful eye,
  Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean
    And Babel-clamour of the sty!

  Be yours the pay: be theirs the praise:
    We will not rob them of their due,
  Nor vex the ghosts of other days
    By naming them along with you.

  They sought and found undying fame:
    They toiled not for reward nor thanks:
  Their cheeks are hot with honest shame
    For you, the modern mountebanks!

  Who preach of Justice--plead with tears
    That Love and Mercy should abound--
  While marking with complacent ears
    The moaning of some tortured hound:

  Who prate of Wisdom--nay, forbear,
    Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath,
  Trampling, with heel that will not spare,
    The vermin that beset her path!

  Go, throng each other's drawing-rooms,
    Ye idols of a petty clique:
  Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes,
    And make your penny-trumpets squeak:

[Illustration: "GO, THRONG EACH OTHER'S DRAWING-ROOMS"]

  Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds
    Of learning from a nobler time,
  And oil each other's little heads
    With mutual Flattery's golden slime:

  And when the topmost height ye gain,
    And stand in Glory's ether clear,
  And grasp the prize of all your pain--
    So many hundred pounds a year--

  Then let Fame's banner be unfurled!
    Sing Pæans for a victory won!
  Ye tapers, that would light the world,
    And cast a shadow on the Sun--

  Who still shall pour His rays sublime,
    One crystal flood, from East to West,
  When ye have burned your little time
    And feebly flickered into rest!

The Trystyng


   ONE winter night, at half-past nine,
         Cold, tired, and cross, and muddy,
   I had come home, too late to dine,
   And supper, with cigars and wine,
         Was waiting in the study.

   There was a strangeness in the room,
         And Something white and wavy
   Was standing near me in the gloom—
   _I_ took it for the carpet-broom
         Left by that careless slavey.

   But presently the Thing began
         To shiver and to sneeze:
   On which I said “Come, come, my man!
   That’s a most inconsiderate plan.
         Less noise there, if you please!”

                  [Picture: The Thing standing by chair]

   “I’ve caught a cold,” the Thing replies,
         “Out there upon the landing.”
   I turned to look in some surprise,
   And there, before my very eyes,
         A little Ghost was standing!

   He trembled when he caught my eye,
         And got behind a chair.
   “How came you here,” I said, “and why?
   I never saw a thing so shy.
         Come out!  Don’t shiver there!”

   He said “I’d gladly tell you how,
         And also tell you why;
   But” (here he gave a little bow)
   “You’re in so bad a temper now,
         You’d think it all a lie.

   “And as to being in a fright,
         Allow me to remark
   That Ghosts have just as good a right
   In every way, to fear the light,
         As Men to fear the dark.”

   “No plea,” said I, “can well excuse
         Such cowardice in you:
   For Ghosts can visit when they choose,
   Whereas we Humans ca’n’t refuse
         To grant the interview.”

   He said “A flutter of alarm
         Is not unnatural, is it?
   I really feared you meant some harm:
   But, now I see that you are calm,
         Let me explain my visit.

   “Houses are classed, I beg to state,
         According to the number
   Of Ghosts that they accommodate:
   (The Tenant merely counts as _weight_,
         With Coals and other lumber).

   “This is a ‘one-ghost’ house, and you
         When you arrived last summer,
   May have remarked a Spectre who
   Was doing all that Ghosts can do
         To welcome the new-comer.

   “In Villas this is always done—
         However cheaply rented:
   For, though of course there’s less of fun
   When there is only room for one,
         Ghosts have to be contented.

   “That Spectre left you on the Third—
         Since then you’ve not been haunted:
   For, as he never sent us word,
   ’Twas quite by accident we heard
         That any one was wanted.

   “A Spectre has first choice, by right,
         In filling up a vacancy;
   Then Phantom, Goblin, Elf, and Sprite—
   If all these fail them, they invite
         The nicest Ghoul that they can see.

   “The Spectres said the place was low,
         And that you kept bad wine:
   So, as a Phantom had to go,
   And I was first, of course, you know,
         I couldn’t well decline.”

   “No doubt,” said I, “they settled who
         Was fittest to be sent
   Yet still to choose a brat like you,
   To haunt a man of forty-two,
         Was no great compliment!”

   “I’m not so young, Sir,” he replied,
         “As you might think.  The fact is,
   In caverns by the water-side,
   And other places that I’ve tried,
         I’ve had a lot of practice:

   “But I have never taken yet
         A strict domestic part,
   And in my flurry I forget
   The Five Good Rules of Etiquette
         We have to know by heart.”

   My sympathies were warming fast
         Towards the little fellow:
   He was so utterly aghast
   At having found a Man at last,
         And looked so scared and yellow.

                 [Picture: In caverns by the water-side]

   “At least,” I said, “I’m glad to find
         A Ghost is not a _dumb_ thing!
   But pray sit down: you’ll feel inclined
   (If, like myself, you have not dined)
         To take a snack of something:

   “Though, certainly, you don’t appear
         A thing to offer _food_ to!
   And then I shall be glad to hear—
   If you will say them loud and clear—
         The Rules that you allude to.”

   “Thanks!  You shall hear them by and by.
         This _is_ a piece of luck!”
   “What may I offer you?” said I.
   “Well, since you _are_ so kind, I’ll try
         A little bit of duck.

   “_One_ slice!  And may I ask you for
         Another drop of gravy?”
   I sat and looked at him in awe,
   For certainly I never saw
         A thing so white and wavy.

   And still he seemed to grow more white,
         More vapoury, and wavier—
   Seen in the dim and flickering light,
   As he proceeded to recite
         His “Maxims of Behaviour.”

                       [Picture: The Phantom dines]



CANTO II
Hys Fyve Rules


   “MY First—but don’t suppose,” he said,
         “I’m setting you a riddle—
   Is—if your Victim be in bed,
   Don’t touch the curtains at his head,
         But take them in the middle,

   “And wave them slowly in and out,
         While drawing them asunder;
   And in a minute’s time, no doubt,
   He’ll raise his head and look about
         With eyes of wrath and wonder.

   “And here you must on no pretence
         Make the first observation.
   Wait for the Victim to commence:
   No Ghost of any common sense
         Begins a conversation.

   [Picture: Ghostly border] “If he should say ‘_How came you here_?’
         (The way that _you_ began, Sir,)
   In such a case your course is clear—
   ‘_On the bat’s back_, _my little dear_!’
         Is the appropriate answer.

   “If after this he says no more,
         You’d best perhaps curtail your
   Exertions—go and shake the door,
   And then, if he begins to snore,
         You’ll know the thing’s a failure.

   “By day, if he should be alone—
         At home or on a walk—
   You merely give a hollow groan,
   To indicate the kind of tone
         In which you mean to talk.

   “But if you find him with his friends,
         The thing is rather harder.
   In such a case success depends
   On picking up some candle-ends,
         Or butter, in the larder.

   “With this you make a kind of slide
         (It answers best with suet),
   On which you must contrive to glide,
   And swing yourself from side to side—
         One soon learns how to do it.

             [Picture: And swing yourself from side to side]

   “The Second tells us what is right
         In ceremonious calls:—
   ‘_First burn a blue or crimson light_’
   (A thing I quite forgot to-night),
         ‘_Then scratch the door or walls_.’”

   I said “You’ll visit _here_ no more,
         If you attempt the Guy.
   I’ll have no bonfires on _my_ floor—
   And, as for scratching at the door,
         I’d like to see you try!”

   “The Third was written to protect
         The interests of the Victim,
   And tells us, as I recollect,
   _To treat him with a grave respect_,
         _And not to contradict him_.”

   “That’s plain,” said I, “as Tare and Tret,
         To any comprehension:
   I only wish _some_ Ghosts I’ve met
   Would not so _constantly_ forget
         The maxim that you mention!”

   “Perhaps,” he said, “_you_ first transgressed
         The laws of hospitality:
   All Ghosts instinctively detest
   The Man that fails to treat his guest
         With proper cordiality.

            [Picture: And then you’re sure to catch it . . .]

   “If you address a Ghost as ‘Thing!’
         Or strike him with a hatchet,
   He is permitted by the King
   To drop all _formal_ parleying—
         And then you’re _sure_ to catch it!

   “The Fourth prohibits trespassing
         Where other Ghosts are quartered:
   And those convicted of the thing
   (Unless when pardoned by the King)
         Must instantly be slaughtered.

   “That simply means ‘be cut up small’:
         Ghosts soon unite anew.
   The process scarcely hurts at all—
   Not more than when _you_ ’re what you call
         ‘Cut up’ by a Review.

   “The Fifth is one you may prefer
         That I should quote entire:—
   _The King must be addressed as_ ‘_Sir_.’
   _This_, _from a simple courtier_,
         _Is all the Laws require_:

   “_But_, _should you wish to do the thing_
         _With out-and-out politeness_,
   _Accost him as_ ‘_My Goblin King_!
   _And always use_, _in answering_,
         _The phrase_ ‘_Your Royal Whiteness_!’

   “I’m getting rather hoarse, I fear,
         After so much reciting:
   So, if you don’t object, my dear,
   We’ll try a glass of bitter beer—
         I think it looks inviting.”

               [Picture: We’ll try a glass of bitter beer]



CANTO III
Scarmoges


   “AND did you really walk,” said I,
         “On such a wretched night?
   I always fancied Ghosts could fly—
   If not exactly in the sky,
         Yet at a fairish height.”

   “It’s very well,” said he, “for Kings
         To soar above the earth:
   But Phantoms often find that wings—
   Like many other pleasant things—
         Cost more than they are worth.

   “Spectres of course are rich, and so
         Can buy them from the Elves:
   But _we_ prefer to keep below—
   They’re stupid company, you know,
         For any but themselves:

   “For, though they claim to be exempt
         From pride, they treat a Phantom
   As something quite beneath contempt—
   Just as no Turkey ever dreamt
         Of noticing a Bantam.”

                          [Picture: The phantom]

   “They seem too proud,” said I, “to go
         To houses such as mine.
   Pray, how did they contrive to know
   So quickly that ‘the place was low,’
         And that I ‘kept bad wine’?”

   “Inspector Kobold came to you—”
         The little Ghost began.
   Here I broke in—“Inspector who?
   Inspecting Ghosts is something new!
         Explain yourself, my man!”

   “His name is Kobold,” said my guest:
         “One of the Spectre order:
   You’ll very often see him dressed
   In a yellow gown, a crimson vest,
         And a night-cap with a border.

   “He tried the Brocken business first,
         But caught a sort of chill;
   So came to England to be nursed,
   And here it took the form of _thirst_,
         Which he complains of still.

              [Picture: And here it took the form of thirst]

   “Port-wine, he says, when rich and sound,
         Warms his old bones like nectar:
   And as the inns, where it is found,
   Are his especial hunting-ground,
         We call him the _Inn-Spectre_.”

   I bore it—bore it like a man—
         This agonizing witticism!
   And nothing could be sweeter than
   My temper, till the Ghost began
         Some most provoking criticism.

   “Cooks need not be indulged in waste;
         Yet still you’d better teach them
   Dishes should have _some sort_ of taste.
   Pray, why are all the cruets placed
         Where nobody can reach them?

   “That man of yours will never earn
         His living as a waiter!
   Is that queer _thing_ supposed to burn?
   (It’s far too dismal a concern
         To call a Moderator).

   “The duck was tender, but the peas
         Were very much too old:
   And just remember, if you please,
   The _next_ time you have toasted cheese,
         Don’t let them send it cold.

   “You’d find the bread improved, I think,
         By getting better flour:
   And have you anything to drink
   That looks a _little_ less like ink,
         And isn’t _quite_ so sour?”

   Then, peering round with curious eyes,
         He muttered “Goodness gracious!”
   And so went on to criticise—
   “Your room’s an inconvenient size:
         It’s neither snug nor spacious.

   “That narrow window, I expect,
         Serves but to let the dusk in—”
   “But please,” said I, “to recollect
   ’Twas fashioned by an architect
         Who pinned his faith on Ruskin!”

   “I don’t care who he was, Sir, or
         On whom he pinned his faith!
   Constructed by whatever law,
   So poor a job I never saw,
         As I’m a living Wraith!

   “What a re-markable cigar!
         How much are they a dozen?”
   I growled “No matter what they are!
   You’re getting as familiar
         As if you were my cousin!

   “Now that’s a thing _I will not stand_,
         And so I tell you flat.”
   “Aha,” said he, “we’re getting grand!”
   (Taking a bottle in his hand)
         “I’ll soon arrange for _that_!”

   And here he took a careful aim,
         And gaily cried “Here goes!”
   I tried to dodge it as it came,
   But somehow caught it, all the same,
         Exactly on my nose.

   And I remember nothing more
         That I can clearly fix,
   Till I was sitting on the floor,
   Repeating “Two and five are four,
         But _five and two_ are six.”

   What really passed I never learned,
         Nor guessed: I only know
   That, when at last my sense returned,
   The lamp, neglected, dimly burned—
         The fire was getting low—

   Through driving mists I seemed to see
         A Thing that smirked and smiled:
   And found that he was giving me
   A lesson in Biography,
         As if I were a child.



CANTO IV
Hys Nouryture


   “OH, when I was a little Ghost,
         A merry time had we!
   Each seated on his favourite post,
   We chumped and chawed the buttered toast
         They gave us for our tea.”

           [Picture: We chumped and chawed the buttered toast]

   “That story is in print!” I cried.
         “Don’t say it’s not, because
   It’s known as well as Bradshaw’s Guide!”
   (The Ghost uneasily replied
         He hardly thought it was).

   “It’s not in Nursery Rhymes?  And yet
         I almost think it is—
   ‘Three little Ghosteses’ were set
   ‘On posteses,’ you know, and ate
         Their ‘buttered toasteses.’

   “I have the book; so if you doubt it—”
         I turned to search the shelf.
   “Don’t stir!” he cried.  “We’ll do without it:
   I now remember all about it;
         I wrote the thing myself.

   “It came out in a ‘Monthly,’ or
         At least my agent said it did:
   Some literary swell, who saw
   It, thought it seemed adapted for
         The Magazine he edited.

   “My father was a Brownie, Sir;
         My mother was a Fairy.
   The notion had occurred to her,
   The children would be happier,
         If they were taught to vary.

   “The notion soon became a craze;
         And, when it once began, she
   Brought us all out in different ways—
   One was a Pixy, two were Fays,
         Another was a Banshee;

   “The Fetch and Kelpie went to school
         And gave a lot of trouble;
   Next came a Poltergeist and Ghoul,
   And then two Trolls (which broke the rule),
         A Goblin, and a Double—

   “(If that’s a snuff-box on the shelf,”
         He added with a yawn,
   “I’ll take a pinch)—next came an Elf,
   And then a Phantom (that’s myself),
         And last, a Leprechaun.

   [Picture: I stood and watched them in the hall] “One day, some
   Spectres chanced to call,
         Dressed in the usual white:
   I stood and watched them in the hall,
   And couldn’t make them out at all,
         They seemed so strange a sight.

   “I wondered what on earth they were,
         That looked all head and sack;
   But Mother told me not to stare,
   And then she twitched me by the hair,
         And punched me in the back.

   “Since then I’ve often wished that I
         Had been a Spectre born.
   But what’s the use?”  (He heaved a sigh.)
   “_They_ are the ghost-nobility,
         And look on _us_ with scorn.

   “My phantom-life was soon begun:
         When I was barely six,
   I went out with an older one—
   And just at first I thought it fun,
         And learned a lot of tricks.

   “I’ve haunted dungeons, castles, towers—
         Wherever I was sent:
   I’ve often sat and howled for hours,
   Drenched to the skin with driving showers,
         Upon a battlement.

   “It’s quite old-fashioned now to groan
         When you begin to speak:
   This is the newest thing in tone—”
   And here (it chilled me to the bone)
         He gave an _awful_ squeak.

   “Perhaps,” he added, “to _your_ ear
         That sounds an easy thing?
   Try it yourself, my little dear!
   It took _me_ something like a year,
         With constant practising.

   “And when you’ve learned to squeak, my man,
         And caught the double sob,
   You’re pretty much where you began:
   Just try and gibber if you can!
         That’s something _like_ a job!

   “_I’ve_ tried it, and can only say
         I’m sure you couldn’t do it, e-
   ven if you practised night and day,
   Unless you have a turn that way,
         And natural ingenuity.

   “Shakspeare I think it is who treats
         Of Ghosts, in days of old,
   Who ‘gibbered in the Roman streets,’
   Dressed, if you recollect, in sheets—
         They must have found it cold.

   “I’ve often spent ten pounds on stuff,
         In dressing as a Double;
   But, though it answers as a puff,
   It never has effect enough
         To make it worth the trouble.

                    [Picture: In dressing as a Double]

   “Long bills soon quenched the little thirst
         I had for being funny.
   The setting-up is always worst:
   Such heaps of things you want at first,
         One must be made of money!

   “For instance, take a Haunted Tower,
         With skull, cross-bones, and sheet;
   Blue lights to burn (say) two an hour,
   Condensing lens of extra power,
         And set of chains complete:

   “What with the things you have to hire—
         The fitting on the robe—
   And testing all the coloured fire—
   The outfit of itself would tire
         The patience of a Job!

   “And then they’re so fastidious,
         The Haunted-House Committee:
   I’ve often known them make a fuss
   Because a Ghost was French, or Russ,
         Or even from the City!

   “Some dialects are objected to—
         For one, the _Irish_ brogue is:
   And then, for all you have to do,
   One pound a week they offer you,
         And find yourself in Bogies!”



CANTO V
Byckerment


   “DON’T they consult the ‘Victims,’ though?”
         I said.  “They should, by rights,
   Give them a chance—because, you know,
   The tastes of people differ so,
         Especially in Sprites.”

   The Phantom shook his head and smiled.
         “Consult them?  Not a bit!
   ’Twould be a job to drive one wild,
   To satisfy one single child—
         There’d be no end to it!”

   “Of course you can’t leave _children_ free,”
         Said I, “to pick and choose:
   But, in the case of men like me,
   I think ‘Mine Host’ might fairly be
         Allowed to state his views.”

   He said “It really wouldn’t pay—
         Folk are so full of fancies.
   We visit for a single day,
   And whether then we go, or stay,
         Depends on circumstances.

   “And, though we don’t consult ‘Mine Host’
         Before the thing’s arranged,
   Still, if he often quits his post,
   Or is not a well-mannered Ghost,
         Then you can have him changed.

   “But if the host’s a man like you—
         I mean a man of sense;
   And if the house is not too new—”
   “Why, what has _that_,” said I, “to do
         With Ghost’s convenience?”

   “A new house does not suit, you know—
         It’s such a job to trim it:
   But, after twenty years or so,
   The wainscotings begin to go,
         So twenty is the limit.”

   “To trim” was not a phrase I could
         Remember having heard:
   “Perhaps,” I said, “you’ll be so good
   As tell me what is understood
         Exactly by that word?”

                 [Picture: The wainscotings begin to go]

   “It means the loosening all the doors,”
         The Ghost replied, and laughed:
   “It means the drilling holes by scores
   In all the skirting-boards and floors,
         To make a thorough draught.

   “You’ll sometimes find that one or two
         Are all you really need
   To let the wind come whistling through—
   But _here_ there’ll be a lot to do!”
         I faintly gasped “Indeed!

   “If I’d been rather later, I’ll
         Be bound,” I added, trying
   (Most unsuccessfully) to smile,
   “You’d have been busy all this while,
         Trimming and beautifying?”

   “Why, no,” said he; “perhaps I should
         Have stayed another minute—
   But still no Ghost, that’s any good,
   Without an introduction would
         Have ventured to begin it.

   “The proper thing, as you were late,
         Was certainly to go:
   But, with the roads in such a state,
   I got the Knight-Mayor’s leave to wait
         For half an hour or so.”

   “Who’s the Knight-Mayor?” I cried.  Instead
         Of answering my question,
   “Well, if you don’t know _that_,” he said,
   “Either you never go to bed,
         Or you’ve a grand digestion!

   “He goes about and sits on folk
         That eat too much at night:
   His duties are to pinch, and poke,
   And squeeze them till they nearly choke.”
         (I said “It serves them right!”)

   “And folk who sup on things like these—”
         He muttered, “eggs and bacon—
   Lobster—and duck—and toasted cheese—
   If they don’t get an awful squeeze,
         I’m very much mistaken!

   “He is immensely fat, and so
         Well suits the occupation:
   In point of fact, if you must know,
   We used to call him years ago,
         _The Mayor and Corporation_!

                [Picture: He goes about and sits on folk]

   “The day he was elected Mayor
         I _know_ that every Sprite meant
   To vote for _me_, but did not dare—
   He was so frantic with despair
         And furious with excitement.

                    [Picture: He ran to tell the King]

   “When it was over, for a whim,
         He ran to tell the King;
   And being the reverse of slim,
   A two-mile trot was not for him
         A very easy thing.

   “So, to reward him for his run
         (As it was baking hot,
   And he was over twenty stone),
   The King proceeded, half in fun,
         To knight him on the spot.”

   “’Twas a great liberty to take!”
         (I fired up like a rocket).
   “He did it just for punning’s sake:
   ‘The man,’ says Johnson, ‘that would make
         A pun, would pick a pocket!’”

   “A man,” said he, “is not a King.”
         I argued for a while,
   And did my best to prove the thing—
   The Phantom merely listening
         With a contemptuous smile.

   At last, when, breath and patience spent,
         I had recourse to smoking—
   “Your _aim_,” he said, “is excellent:
   But—when you call it _argument_—
         Of course you’re only joking?”

                 [Picture: The phantom sitting on chair]

   Stung by his cold and snaky eye,
         I roused myself at length
   To say “At least I do defy
   The veriest sceptic to deny
         That union is strength!”

   “That’s true enough,” said he, “yet stay—”
         I listened in all meekness—
   “_Union_ is strength, I’m bound to say;
   In fact, the thing’s as clear as day;
         But _onions_ are a weakness.”



CANTO VI
Dyscomfyture


   AS one who strives a hill to climb,
         Who never climbed before:
   Who finds it, in a little time,
   Grow every moment less sublime,
         And votes the thing a bore:

   Yet, having once begun to try,
         Dares not desert his quest,
   But, climbing, ever keeps his eye
   On one small hut against the sky
         Wherein he hopes to rest:

   Who climbs till nerve and force are spent,
         With many a puff and pant:
   Who still, as rises the ascent,
   In language grows more violent,
         Although in breath more scant:

   Who, climbing, gains at length the place
         That crowns the upward track.
   And, entering with unsteady pace,
   Receives a buffet in the face
         That lands him on his back:

   [Picture: Decorative border of man climbing hall] And feels himself,
   like one in sleep,
         Glide swiftly down again,
   A helpless weight, from steep to steep,
   Till, with a headlong giddy sweep,
         He drops upon the plain—

   So I, that had resolved to bring
         Conviction to a ghost,
   And found it quite a different thing
   From any human arguing,
         Yet dared not quit my post

   But, keeping still the end in view
         To which I hoped to come,
   I strove to prove the matter true
   By putting everything I knew
         Into an axiom:

   Commencing every single phrase
         With ‘therefore’ or ‘because,’
   I blindly reeled, a hundred ways,
   About the syllogistic maze,
         Unconscious where I was.

   Quoth he “That’s regular clap-trap:
         Don’t bluster any more.
   Now _do_ be cool and take a nap!
   Such a ridiculous old chap
         Was never seen before!

   “You’re like a man I used to meet,
         Who got one day so furious
   In arguing, the simple heat
   Scorched both his slippers off his feet!”
         I said “_That’s very curious_!”

            [Picture: Scorched both his slippers off his feet]

   “Well, it _is_ curious, I agree,
         And sounds perhaps like fibs:
   But still it’s true as true can be—
   As sure as your name’s Tibbs,” said he.
         I said “My name’s _not_ Tibbs.”

   “_Not_ Tibbs!” he cried—his tone became
         A shade or two less hearty—
   “Why, no,” said I.  “My proper name
   Is Tibbets—”  “Tibbets?”  “Aye, the same.”
         “Why, then YOU’RE NOT THE PARTY!”

   With that he struck the board a blow
         That shivered half the glasses.
   “Why couldn’t you have told me so
   Three quarters of an hour ago,
         You prince of all the asses?

   “To walk four miles through mud and rain,
         To spend the night in smoking,
   And then to find that it’s in vain—
   And I’ve to do it all again—
         It’s really _too_ provoking!

   “Don’t talk!” he cried, as I began
         To mutter some excuse.
   “Who can have patience with a man
   That’s got no more discretion than
         An idiotic goose?

            [Picture: To walk four miles through mud and rain]

   “To keep me waiting here, instead
         Of telling me at once
   That this was not the house!” he said.
   “There, that’ll do—be off to bed!
         Don’t gape like that, you dunce!”

   “It’s very fine to throw the blame
         On _me_ in such a fashion!
   Why didn’t you enquire my name
   The very minute that you came?”
         I answered in a passion.

   “Of course it worries you a bit
         To come so far on foot—
   But how was _I_ to blame for it?”
   “Well, well!” said he.  “I must admit
         That isn’t badly put.

   “And certainly you’ve given me
         The best of wine and victual—
   Excuse my violence,” said he,
   “But accidents like this, you see,
         They put one out a little.

   “’Twas _my_ fault after all, I find—
         Shake hands, old Turnip-top!”
   The name was hardly to my mind,
   But, as no doubt he meant it kind,
         I let the matter drop.

   “Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!
         When I am gone, perhaps
   They’ll send you some inferior Sprite,
   Who’ll keep you in a constant fright
         And spoil your soundest naps.

   “Tell him you’ll stand no sort of trick;
         Then, if he leers and chuckles,
   You just be handy with a stick
   (Mind that it’s pretty hard and thick)
         And rap him on the knuckles!

   “Then carelessly remark ‘Old coon!
         Perhaps you’re not aware
   That, if you don’t behave, you’ll soon
   Be chuckling to another tune—
         And so you’d best take care!’

   “That’s the right way to cure a Sprite
         Of such like goings-on—
   But gracious me!  It’s getting light!
   Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!”
         A nod, and he was gone.

                           [Picture: The ghost]



CANTO VII
Sad Souvenaunce


                  [Picture: Or can I have been drinking]

   “WHAT’S this?” I pondered.  “Have I slept?
         Or can I have been drinking?”
   But soon a gentler feeling crept
   Upon me, and I sat and wept
         An hour or so, like winking.

   “No need for Bones to hurry so!”
         I sobbed.  “In fact, I doubt
   If it was worth his while to go—
   And who is Tibbs, I’d like to know,
         To make such work about?

   “If Tibbs is anything like me,
         It’s _possible_,” I said,
   “He won’t be over-pleased to be
   Dropped in upon at half-past three,
         After he’s snug in bed.

   “And if Bones plagues him anyhow—
         Squeaking and all the rest of it,
   As he was doing here just now—
   _I_ prophesy there’ll be a row,
         And Tibbs will have the best of it!”

              [Picture: And Tibbs will have the best of it]

   Then, as my tears could never bring
         The friendly Phantom back,
   It seemed to me the proper thing
   To mix another glass, and sing
         The following Coronach.

   ‘_And art thou gone_, _beloved Ghost_?
         _Best of Familiars_!
   _Nay then_, _farewell_, _my duckling roast_,
   _Farewell_, _farewell_, _my tea and toast_,
         _My meerschaum and cigars_!

   _The hues of life are dull and gray_,
         _The sweets of life insipid_,
   _When_ thou, _my charmer_, _art away_—
   _Old Brick_, _or rather_, _let me say_,
         _Old Parallelepiped_!’

   Instead of singing Verse the Third,
         I ceased—abruptly, rather:
   But, after such a splendid word
   I felt that it would be absurd
         To try it any farther.

   So with a yawn I went my way
         To seek the welcome downy,
   And slept, and dreamed till break of day
   Of Poltergeist and Fetch and Fay
         And Leprechaun and Brownie!

   For years I’ve not been visited
         By any kind of Sprite;
   Yet still they echo in my head,
   Those parting words, so kindly said,
         “Old Turnip-top, good-night!”

                           [Picture: The ghost]




ECHOES


         LADY Clara Vere de Vere
         Was eight years old, she said:
   Every ringlet, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden thread.

         She took her little porringer:
         Of me she shall not win renown:
   For the baseness of its nature shall have strength to drag her down.

         “Sisters and brothers, little Maid?
         There stands the Inspector at thy door:
   Like a dog, he hunts for boys who know not two and two are four.”

         “Kind words are more than coronets,”
         She said, and wondering looked at me:
   “It is the dead unhappy night, and I must hurry home to tea.”




A SEA DIRGE


                  [Picture: The sea, beach and children]

   THERE are certain things—as, a spider, a ghost,
      The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three—
   That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
      Is a thing they call the Sea.

   Pour some salt water over the floor—
      Ugly I’m sure you’ll allow it to be:
   Suppose it extended a mile or more,
      _That’s_ very like the Sea.

   Beat a dog till it howls outright—
      Cruel, but all very well for a spree:
   Suppose that he did so day and night,
      _That_ would be like the Sea.

   I had a vision of nursery-maids;
      Tens of thousands passed by me—
   All leading children with wooden spades,
      And this was by the Sea.

   Who invented those spades of wood?
      Who was it cut them out of the tree?
   None, I think, but an idiot could—
      Or one that loved the Sea.

   It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float
      With ‘thoughts as boundless, and souls as free’:
   But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat,
      How do you like the Sea?

                    [Picture: And this was by the sea]

   There is an insect that people avoid
      (Whence is derived the verb ‘to flee’).
   Where have you been by it most annoyed?
      In lodgings by the Sea.

   If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
      A decided hint of salt in your tea,
   And a fishy taste in the very eggs—
      By all means choose the Sea.

   And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
      You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
   And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
      Then—I recommend the Sea.

   For _I_ have friends who dwell by the coast—
      Pleasant friends they are to me!
   It is when I am with them I wonder most
      That anyone likes the Sea.

   They take me a walk: though tired and stiff,
      To climb the heights I madly agree;
   And, after a tumble or so from the cliff,
      They kindly suggest the Sea.

   I try the rocks, and I think it cool
      That they laugh with such an excess of glee,
   As I heavily slip into every pool
      That skirts the cold cold Sea.

                [Picture: As I heavily slip into every pool]




Ye Carpette Knyghte


   I have a horse—a ryghte good horse—
      Ne doe Y envye those
   Who scoure ye playne yn headye course
      Tyll soddayne on theyre nose
   They lyghte wyth unexpected force
      Yt ys—a horse of clothes.

   I have a saddel—“Say’st thou soe?
      Wyth styrruppes, Knyghte, to boote?”
   I sayde not that—I answere “Noe”—
      Yt lacketh such, I woote:
   Yt ys a mutton-saddel, loe!
      Parte of ye fleecye brute.

   I have a bytte—a ryghte good bytte—
      As shall bee seene yn tyme.
   Ye jawe of horse yt wyll not fytte;
      Yts use ys more sublyme.
   Fayre Syr, how deemest thou of yt?
      Yt ys—thys bytte of rhyme.

                        [Picture: I have a horse]




HIAWATHA’S PHOTOGRAPHING


[In an age of imitation, I can claim no special merit for this slight
attempt at doing what is known to be so easy.  Any fairly practised
writer, with the slightest ear for rhythm, could compose, for hours
together, in the easy running metre of ‘The Song of Hiawatha.’  Having,
then, distinctly stated that I challenge no attention in the following
little poem to its merely verbal jingle, I must beg the candid reader to
confine his criticism to its treatment of the subject.]

   FROM his shoulder Hiawatha
   Took the camera of rosewood,
   Made of sliding, folding rosewood;
   Neatly put it all together.
   In its case it lay compactly,
   Folded into nearly nothing;
   But he opened out the hinges,
   Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges,
   Till it looked all squares and oblongs,
   Like a complicated figure
   In the Second Book of Euclid.

                          [Picture: The camera]

      This he perched upon a tripod—
   Crouched beneath its dusky cover—
   Stretched his hand, enforcing silence—
   Said, “Be motionless, I beg you!”
   Mystic, awful was the process.
      All the family in order
   Sat before him for their pictures:
   Each in turn, as he was taken,
   Volunteered his own suggestions,
   His ingenious suggestions.
      First the Governor, the Father:
   He suggested velvet curtains
   Looped about a massy pillar;
   And the corner of a table,
   Of a rosewood dining-table.
   He would hold a scroll of something,
   Hold it firmly in his left-hand;
   He would keep his right-hand buried
   (Like Napoleon) in his waistcoat;
   He would contemplate the distance
   With a look of pensive meaning,
   As of ducks that die ill tempests.
      Grand, heroic was the notion:
   Yet the picture failed entirely:
   Failed, because he moved a little,
   Moved, because he couldn’t help it.

                [Picture: First the Governor, the Father]

      Next, his better half took courage;
   _She_ would have her picture taken.
   She came dressed beyond description,
   Dressed in jewels and in satin
   Far too gorgeous for an empress.
   Gracefully she sat down sideways,
   With a simper scarcely human,
   Holding in her hand a bouquet
   Rather larger than a cabbage.
   All the while that she was sitting,
   Still the lady chattered, chattered,
   Like a monkey in the forest.
   “Am I sitting still?” she asked him.
   “Is my face enough in profile?
   Shall I hold the bouquet higher?
   Will it came into the picture?”
   And the picture failed completely.

               [Picture: Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab]

      Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab:
   He suggested curves of beauty,
   Curves pervading all his figure,
   Which the eye might follow onward,
   Till they centered in the breast-pin,
   Centered in the golden breast-pin.
   He had learnt it all from Ruskin
   (Author of ‘The Stones of Venice,’
   ‘Seven Lamps of Architecture,’
   ‘Modern Painters,’ and some others);
   And perhaps he had not fully
   Understood his author’s meaning;
   But, whatever was the reason,
   All was fruitless, as the picture
   Ended in an utter failure.

                [Picture: Next to him the eldest daughter]

      Next to him the eldest daughter:
   She suggested very little,
   Only asked if he would take her
   With her look of ‘passive beauty.’
      Her idea of passive beauty
   Was a squinting of the left-eye,
   Was a drooping of the right-eye,
   Was a smile that went up sideways
   To the corner of the nostrils.
      Hiawatha, when she asked him,
   Took no notice of the question,
   Looked as if he hadn’t heard it;
   But, when pointedly appealed to,
   Smiled in his peculiar manner,
   Coughed and said it ‘didn’t matter,’
   Bit his lip and changed the subject.
      Nor in this was he mistaken,
   As the picture failed completely.
      So in turn the other sisters.

               [Picture: Last, the youngest son was taken]

      Last, the youngest son was taken:
   Very rough and thick his hair was,
   Very round and red his face was,
   Very dusty was his jacket,
   Very fidgety his manner.
   And his overbearing sisters
   Called him names he disapproved of:
   Called him Johnny, ‘Daddy’s Darling,’
   Called him Jacky, ‘Scrubby School-boy.’
   And, so awful was the picture,
   In comparison the others
   Seemed, to one’s bewildered fancy,
   To have partially succeeded.
      Finally my Hiawatha
   Tumbled all the tribe together,
   (‘Grouped’ is not the right expression),
   And, as happy chance would have it
   Did at last obtain a picture
   Where the faces all succeeded:
   Each came out a perfect likeness.
      Then they joined and all abused it,
   Unrestrainedly abused it,
   As the worst and ugliest picture
   They could possibly have dreamed of.
   ‘Giving one such strange expressions—
   Sullen, stupid, pert expressions.
   Really any one would take us
   (Any one that did not know us)
   For the most unpleasant people!’
   (Hiawatha seemed to think so,
   Seemed to think it not unlikely).
   All together rang their voices,
   Angry, loud, discordant voices,
   As of dogs that howl in concert,
   As of cats that wail in chorus.
      But my Hiawatha’s patience,
   His politeness and his patience,
   Unaccountably had vanished,
   And he left that happy party.
   Neither did he leave them slowly,
   With the calm deliberation,
   The intense deliberation
   Of a photographic artist:
   But he left them in a hurry,
   Left them in a mighty hurry,
   Stating that he would not stand it,
   Stating in emphatic language
   What he’d be before he’d stand it.
   Hurriedly he packed his boxes:
   Hurriedly the porter trundled
   On a barrow all his boxes:
   Hurriedly he took his ticket:
   Hurriedly the train received him:
   Thus departed Hiawatha.

                    [Picture: Thus departed Hiawatha]




MELANCHOLETTA


   WITH saddest music all day long
      She soothed her secret sorrow:
   At night she sighed “I fear ’twas wrong
      Such cheerful words to borrow.
   Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song
      I’ll sing to thee to-morrow.”

   I thanked her, but I could not say
      That I was glad to hear it:
   I left the house at break of day,
      And did not venture near it
   Till time, I hoped, had worn away
      Her grief, for nought could cheer it!

                      [Picture: At night she signed]

   My dismal sister!  Couldst thou know
      The wretched home thou keepest!
   Thy brother, drowned in daily woe,
      Is thankful when thou sleepest;
   For if I laugh, however low,
      When thou’rt awake, thou weepest!

   I took my sister t’other day
      (Excuse the slang expression)
   To Sadler’s Wells to see the play
      In hopes the new impression
   Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay
      Effect some slight digression.

   I asked three gay young dogs from town
      To join us in our folly,
   Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown
      My sister’s melancholy:
   The lively Jones, the sportive Brown,
      And Robinson the jolly.

   The maid announced the meal in tones
      That I myself had taught her,
   Meant to allay my sister’s moans
      Like oil on troubled water:
   I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones,
      And begged him to escort her.

   Vainly he strove, with ready wit,
      To joke about the weather—
   To ventilate the last ‘_on dit_’—
      To quote the price of leather—
   She groaned “Here I and Sorrow sit:
      Let us lament together!”

   I urged “You’re wasting time, you know:
      Delay will spoil the venison.”
   “My heart is wasted with my woe!
      There is no rest—in Venice, on
   The Bridge of Sighs!” she quoted low
      From Byron and from Tennyson.

   I need not tell of soup and fish
      In solemn silence swallowed,
   The sobs that ushered in each dish,
      And its departure followed,
   Nor yet my suicidal wish
      To _be_ the cheese I hollowed.

   Some desperate attempts were made
      To start a conversation;
   “Madam,” the sportive Brown essayed,
      “Which kind of recreation,
   Hunting or fishing, have you made
      Your special occupation?”

   Her lips curved downwards instantly,
      As if of india-rubber.
   “Hounds _in full cry_ I like,” said she:
      (Oh how I longed to snub her!)
   “Of fish, a whale’s the one for me,
      _It is so full of blubber_!”

   The night’s performance was “King John.”
      “It’s dull,” she wept, “and so-so!”
   Awhile I let her tears flow on,
      She said they soothed her woe so!
   At length the curtain rose upon
      ‘Bombastes Furioso.’

   In vain we roared; in vain we tried
      To rouse her into laughter:
   Her pensive glances wandered wide
      From orchestra to rafter—
   “_Tier upon tier_!” she said, and sighed;
      And silence followed after.

                     [Picture: Sighing at the table]




A VALENTINE


[Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad enough to see him
when he came, but didn’t seem to miss him if he stayed away.]

   And cannot pleasures, while they last,
   Be actual unless, when past,
   They leave us shuddering and aghast,
         With anguish smarting?
   And cannot friends be firm and fast,
         And yet bear parting?

   And must I then, at Friendship’s call,
   Calmly resign the little all
   (Trifling, I grant, it is and small)
         I have of gladness,
   And lend my being to the thrall
         Of gloom and sadness?

   And think you that I should be dumb,
   And full _dolorum omnium_,
   Excepting when _you_ choose to come
         And share my dinner?
   At other times be sour and glum
         And daily thinner?

   Must he then only live to weep,
   Who’d prove his friendship true and deep
   By day a lonely shadow creep,
         At night-time languish,
   Oft raising in his broken sleep
         The moan of anguish?

   The lover, if for certain days
   His fair one be denied his gaze,
   Sinks not in grief and wild amaze,
         But, wiser wooer,
   He spends the time in writing lays,
         And posts them to her.

   And if the verse flow free and fast,
   Till even the poet is aghast,
   A touching Valentine at last
         The post shall carry,
   When thirteen days are gone and past
         Of February.

   Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet,
   In desert waste or crowded street,
   Perhaps before this week shall fleet,
         Perhaps to-morrow.
   I trust to find _your_ heart the seat
         Of wasting sorrow.




THE THREE VOICES


The First Voice


   HE trilled a carol fresh and free,
   He laughed aloud for very glee:
   There came a breeze from off the sea:

             [Picture: There came a breeze from off the sea]

   It passed athwart the glooming flat—
   It fanned his forehead as he sat—
   It lightly bore away his hat,

   All to the feet of one who stood
   Like maid enchanted in a wood,
   Frowning as darkly as she could.

   With huge umbrella, lank and brown,
   Unerringly she pinned it down,
   Right through the centre of the crown.

   Then, with an aspect cold and grim,
   Regardless of its battered rim,
   She took it up and gave it him.

   A while like one in dreams he stood,
   Then faltered forth his gratitude
   In words just short of being rude:

   For it had lost its shape and shine,
   And it had cost him four-and-nine,
   And he was going out to dine.

                 [Picture: Unerringly she pinned it down]

   “To dine!” she sneered in acid tone.
   “To bend thy being to a bone
   Clothed in a radiance not its own!”

   The tear-drop trickled to his chin:
   There was a meaning in her grin
   That made him feel on fire within.

   “Term it not ‘radiance,’” said he:
   “’Tis solid nutriment to me.
   Dinner is Dinner: Tea is Tea.”

   And she “Yea so?  Yet wherefore cease?
   Let thy scant knowledge find increase.
   Say ‘Men are Men, and Geese are Geese.’”

   He moaned: he knew not what to say.
   The thought “That I could get away!”
   Strove with the thought “But I must stay.

   “To dine!” she shrieked in dragon-wrath.
   “To swallow wines all foam and froth!
   To simper at a table-cloth!

   “Say, can thy noble spirit stoop
   To join the gormandising troup
   Who find a solace in the soup?

   “Canst thou desire or pie or puff?
   Thy well-bred manners were enough,
   Without such gross material stuff.”

   “Yet well-bred men,” he faintly said,
   “Are not willing to be fed:
   Nor are they well without the bread.”

   Her visage scorched him ere she spoke:
   “There are,” she said, “a kind of folk
   Who have no horror of a joke.

   “Such wretches live: they take their share
   Of common earth and common air:
   We come across them here and there:

   “We grant them—there is no escape—
   A sort of semi-human shape
   Suggestive of the man-like Ape.”

   “In all such theories,” said he,
   “One fixed exception there must be.
   That is, the Present Company.”

   Baffled, she gave a wolfish bark:
   He, aiming blindly in the dark,
   With random shaft had pierced the mark.

   She felt that her defeat was plain,
   Yet madly strove with might and main
   To get the upper hand again.

   Fixing her eyes upon the beach,
   As though unconscious of his speech,
   She said “Each gives to more than each.”

   He could not answer yea or nay:
   He faltered “Gifts may pass away.”
   Yet knew not what he meant to say.

   “If that be so,” she straight replied,
   “Each heart with each doth coincide.
   What boots it?  For the world is wide.”

               [Picture: He faltered “Gifts may pass away”]

   “The world is but a Thought,” said he:
   “The vast unfathomable sea
   Is but a Notion—unto me.”

   And darkly fell her answer dread
   Upon his unresisting head,
   Like half a hundredweight of lead.

   “The Good and Great must ever shun
   That reckless and abandoned one
   Who stoops to perpetrate a pun.

   “The man that smokes—that reads the _Times_—
   That goes to Christmas Pantomimes—
   Is capable of _any_ crimes!”

   He felt it was his turn to speak,
   And, with a shamed and crimson cheek,
   Moaned “This is harder than Bezique!”

   But when she asked him “Wherefore so?”
   He felt his very whiskers glow,
   And frankly owned “I do not know.”

                 [Picture: This is harder than Bezique!]

   While, like broad waves of golden grain,
   Or sunlit hues on cloistered pane,
   His colour came and went again.

   Pitying his obvious distress,
   Yet with a tinge of bitterness,
   She said “The More exceeds the Less.”

   “A truth of such undoubted weight,”
   He urged, “and so extreme in date,
   It were superfluous to state.”

   Roused into sudden passion, she
   In tone of cold malignity:
   “To others, yea: but not to thee.”

   But when she saw him quail and quake,
   And when he urged “For pity’s sake!”
   Once more in gentle tones she spake.

   “Thought in the mind doth still abide
   That is by Intellect supplied,
   And within that Idea doth hide:

   “And he, that yearns the truth to know,
   Still further inwardly may go,
   And find Idea from Notion flow:

   “And thus the chain, that sages sought,
   Is to a glorious circle wrought,
   For Notion hath its source in Thought.”

   So passed they on with even pace:
   Yet gradually one might trace
   A shadow growing on his face.

                 [Picture: A shadow growing on his face]



The Second Voice


            [Picture: They walked beside the wave-worn beach]

   They walked beside the wave-worn beach;
   Her tongue was very apt to teach,
   And now and then he did beseech

   She would abate her dulcet tone,
   Because the talk was all her own,
   And he was dull as any drone.

   She urged “No cheese is made of chalk”:
   And ceaseless flowed her dreary talk,
   Tuned to the footfall of a walk.

   Her voice was very full and rich,
   And, when at length she asked him “Which?”
   It mounted to its highest pitch.

   He a bewildered answer gave,
   Drowned in the sullen moaning wave,
   Lost in the echoes of the cave.

   He answered her he knew not what:
   Like shaft from bow at random shot,
   He spoke, but she regarded not.

   She waited not for his reply,
   But with a downward leaden eye
   Went on as if he were not by

   Sound argument and grave defence,
   Strange questions raised on “Why?” and “Whence?”
   And wildly tangled evidence.

   When he, with racked and whirling brain,
   Feebly implored her to explain,
   She simply said it all again.

   Wrenched with an agony intense,
   He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense,
   And careless of all consequence:

   “Mind—I believe—is Essence—Ent—
   Abstract—that is—an Accident—
   Which we—that is to say—I meant—”

   When, with quick breath and cheeks all flushed,
   At length his speech was somewhat hushed,
   She looked at him, and he was crushed.

   It needed not her calm reply:
   She fixed him with a stony eye,
   And he could neither fight nor fly.

   While she dissected, word by word,
   His speech, half guessed at and half heard,
   As might a cat a little bird.

             [Picture: He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense]

   Then, having wholly overthrown
   His views, and stripped them to the bone,
   Proceeded to unfold her own.

   “Shall Man be Man?  And shall he miss
   Of other thoughts no thought but this,
   Harmonious dews of sober bliss?

   “What boots it?  Shall his fevered eye
   Through towering nothingness descry
   The grisly phantom hurry by?

   “And hear dumb shrieks that fill the air;
   See mouths that gape, and eyes that stare
   And redden in the dusky glare?

   “The meadows breathing amber light,
   The darkness toppling from the height,
   The feathery train of granite Night?

   “Shall he, grown gray among his peers,
   Through the thick curtain of his tears
   Catch glimpses of his earlier years,

                       [Picture: Shall Man be Man?]

   “And hear the sounds he knew of yore,
   Old shufflings on the sanded floor,
   Old knuckles tapping at the door?

   “Yet still before him as he flies
   One pallid form shall ever rise,
   And, bodying forth in glassy eyes

   “The vision of a vanished good,
   Low peering through the tangled wood,
   Shall freeze the current of his blood.”

   Still from each fact, with skill uncouth
   And savage rapture, like a tooth
   She wrenched some slow reluctant truth.

   Till, like a silent water-mill,
   When summer suns have dried the rill,
   She reached a full stop, and was still.

   Dead calm succeeded to the fuss,
   As when the loaded omnibus
   Has reached the railway terminus:

   When, for the tumult of the street,
   Is heard the engine’s stifled beat,
   The velvet tread of porters’ feet.

   With glance that ever sought the ground,
   She moved her lips without a sound,
   And every now and then she frowned.

   He gazed upon the sleeping sea,
   And joyed in its tranquillity,
   And in that silence dead, but she

   To muse a little space did seem,
   Then, like the echo of a dream,
   Harked back upon her threadbare theme.

   Still an attentive ear he lent
   But could not fathom what she meant:
   She was not deep, nor eloquent.

   He marked the ripple on the sand:
   The even swaying of her hand
   Was all that he could understand.

   He saw in dreams a drawing-room,
   Where thirteen wretches sat in gloom,
   Waiting—he thought he knew for whom:

   He saw them drooping here and there,
   Each feebly huddled on a chair,
   In attitudes of blank despair:

   Oysters were not more mute than they,
   For all their brains were pumped away,
   And they had nothing more to say—

   Save one, who groaned “Three hours are gone!”
   Who shrieked “We’ll wait no longer, John!
   Tell them to set the dinner on!”

   The vision passed: the ghosts were fled:
   He saw once more that woman dread:
   He heard once more the words she said.

   He left her, and he turned aside:
   He sat and watched the coming tide
   Across the shores so newly dried.

              [Picture: He sat and watched the coming tide]

   He wondered at the waters clear,
   The breeze that whispered in his ear,
   The billows heaving far and near,

   And why he had so long preferred
   To hang upon her every word:
   “In truth,” he said, “it was absurd.”

                            [Picture: He sits]



The Third Voice


            [Picture: Quick tears were raining down his face]

   Not long this transport held its place:
   Within a little moment’s space
   Quick tears were raining down his face

   His heart stood still, aghast with fear;
   A wordless voice, nor far nor near,
   He seemed to hear and not to hear.

   “Tears kindle not the doubtful spark.
   If so, why not?  Of this remark
   The bearings are profoundly dark.”

   “Her speech,” he said, “hath caused this pain.
   Easier I count it to explain
   The jargon of the howling main,

   “Or, stretched beside some babbling brook,
   To con, with inexpressive look,
   An unintelligible book.”

   Low spake the voice within his head,
   In words imagined more than said,
   Soundless as ghost’s intended tread:

   “If thou art duller than before,
   Why quittedst thou the voice of lore?
   Why not endure, expecting more?”

   “Rather than that,” he groaned aghast,
   “I’d writhe in depths of cavern vast,
   Some loathly vampire’s rich repast.”

                       [Picture: He groaned aghast]

   “’Twere hard,” it answered, “themes immense
   To coop within the narrow fence
   That rings _thy_ scant intelligence.”

   “Not so,” he urged, “nor once alone:
   But there was something in her tone
   That chilled me to the very bone.

   “Her style was anything but clear,
   And most unpleasantly severe;
   Her epithets were very queer.

   “And yet, so grand were her replies,
   I could not choose but deem her wise;
   I did not dare to criticise;

   “Nor did I leave her, till she went
   So deep in tangled argument
   That all my powers of thought were spent.”

   A little whisper inly slid,
   “Yet truth is truth: you know you did.”
   A little wink beneath the lid.

   And, sickened with excess of dread,
   Prone to the dust he bent his head,
   And lay like one three-quarters dead

   The whisper left him—like a breeze
   Lost in the depths of leafy trees—
   Left him by no means at his ease.

   Once more he weltered in despair,
   With hands, through denser-matted hair,
   More tightly clenched than then they were.

   When, bathed in Dawn of living red,
   Majestic frowned the mountain head,
   “Tell me my fault,” was all he said.

   When, at high Noon, the blazing sky
   Scorched in his head each haggard eye,
   Then keenest rose his weary cry.

   And when at Eve the unpitying sun
   Smiled grimly on the solemn fun,
   “Alack,” he sighed, “what _have_ I done?”

                 [Picture: Tortured, unaided, and alone]

   But saddest, darkest was the sight,
   When the cold grasp of leaden Night
   Dashed him to earth, and held him tight.

   Tortured, unaided, and alone,
   Thunders were silence to his groan,
   Bagpipes sweet music to its tone:

   “What?  Ever thus, in dismal round,
   Shall Pain and Mystery profound
   Pursue me like a sleepless hound,

   “With crimson-dashed and eager jaws,
   Me, still in ignorance of the cause,
   Unknowing what I broke of laws?”

   The whisper to his ear did seem
   Like echoed flow of silent stream,
   Or shadow of forgotten dream,

   The whisper trembling in the wind:
   “Her fate with thine was intertwined,”
   So spake it in his inner mind:

                [Picture: a scared dullard, gibbering low]

   “Each orbed on each a baleful star:
   Each proved the other’s blight and bar:
   Each unto each were best, most far:

   “Yea, each to each was worse than foe:
   Thou, a scared dullard, gibbering low,
   AND SHE, AN AVALANCHE OF WOE!”




TÈMA CON VARIAZIÒNI


[Why is it that Poetry has never yet been subjected to that process of
Dilution which has proved so advantageous to her sister-art Music?  The
Diluter gives us first a few notes of some well-known Air, then a dozen
bars of his own, then a few more notes of the Air, and so on alternately:
thus saving the listener, if not from all risk of recognising the melody
at all, at least from the too-exciting transports which it might produce
in a more concentrated form.  The process is termed “setting” by
Composers, and any one, that has ever experienced the emotion of being
unexpectedly set down in a heap of mortar, will recognise the
truthfulness of this happy phrase.

For truly, just as the genuine Epicure lingers lovingly over a morsel of
supreme Venison—whose every fibre seems to murmur “Excelsior!”—yet
swallows, ere returning to the toothsome dainty, great mouthfuls of
oatmeal-porridge and winkles: and just as the perfect Connoisseur in
Claret permits himself but one delicate sip, and then tosses off a pint
or more of boarding-school beer: so also—

   I NEVER loved a dear Gazelle—
      _Nor anything that cost me much_:
   _High prices profit those who sell_,
      _But why should I be fond of such_?

   To glad me with his soft black eye
      _My son comes trotting home from school_;
   _He’s had a fight but can’t tell why_—
      _He always was a little fool_!

   But, when he came to know me well,
      _He kicked me out_, _her testy Sire_:
   _And when I stained my hair_, _that Belle_
      _Might note the change_, _and thus admire_

   And love me, it was sure to dye
      _A muddy green or staring blue_:
   _Whilst one might trace_, _with half an eye_,
      _The still triumphant carrot through_.




A GAME OF FIVES


                       [Picture: Five little girls]

   FIVE little girls, of Five, Four, Three, Two, One:
   Rolling on the hearthrug, full of tricks and fun.

   Five rosy girls, in years from Ten to Six:
   Sitting down to lessons—no more time for tricks.

   Five growing girls, from Fifteen to Eleven:
   Music, Drawing, Languages, and food enough for seven!

                  [Picture: Now tell me which you mean]

   Five winsome girls, from Twenty to Sixteen:
   Each young man that calls, I say “Now tell me which you _mean_!”

   Five dashing girls, the youngest Twenty-one:
   But, if nobody proposes, what is there to be done?

   Five showy girls—but Thirty is an age
   When girls may be _engaging_, but they somehow don’t _engage_.

   Five dressy girls, of Thirty-one or more:
   So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so much before!

                                   * * * *

   Five _passé_ girls—Their age?  Well, never mind!
   We jog along together, like the rest of human kind:
   But the quondam “careless bachelor” begins to think he knows
   The answer to that ancient problem “how the money goes”!




POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR


                    [Picture: Child on old man’s knee]

   “How shall I be a poet?
      How shall I write in rhyme?
   You told me once ‘the very wish
      Partook of the sublime.’
   Then tell me how!  Don’t put me off
      With your ‘another time’!”

   The old man smiled to see him,
      To hear his sudden sally;
   He liked the lad to speak his mind
      Enthusiastically;
   And thought “There’s no hum-drum in him,
      Nor any shilly-shally.”

   “And would you be a poet
      Before you’ve been to school?
   Ah, well!  I hardly thought you
      So absolute a fool.
   First learn to be spasmodic—
      A very simple rule.

   “For first you write a sentence,
      And then you chop it small;
   Then mix the bits, and sort them out
      Just as they chance to fall:
   The order of the phrases makes
      No difference at all.

   “Then, if you’d be impressive,
      Remember what I say,
   That abstract qualities begin
      With capitals alway:
   The True, the Good, the Beautiful—
      Those are the things that pay!

   “Next, when you are describing
      A shape, or sound, or tint;
   Don’t state the matter plainly,
      But put it in a hint;
   And learn to look at all things
      With a sort of mental squint.”

   “For instance, if I wished, Sir,
      Of mutton-pies to tell,
   Should I say ‘dreams of fleecy flocks
      Pent in a wheaten cell’?”
   “Why, yes,” the old man said: “that phrase
      Would answer very well.

   “Then fourthly, there are epithets
      That suit with any word—
   As well as Harvey’s Reading Sauce
      With fish, or flesh, or bird—
   Of these, ‘wild,’ ‘lonely,’ ‘weary,’ ‘strange,’
      Are much to be preferred.”

   “And will it do, O will it do
      To take them in a lump—
   As ‘the wild man went his weary way
      To a strange and lonely pump’?”
   “Nay, nay!  You must not hastily
      To such conclusions jump.

                [Picture: The wild man went his weary way]

   “Such epithets, like pepper,
      Give zest to what you write;
   And, if you strew them sparely,
      They whet the appetite:
   But if you lay them on too thick,
      You spoil the matter quite!

   “Last, as to the arrangement:
      Your reader, you should show him,
   Must take what information he
      Can get, and look for no im-
   mature disclosure of the drift
      And purpose of your poem.

   “Therefore, to test his patience—
      How much he can endure—
   Mention no places, names, or dates,
      And evermore be sure
   Throughout the poem to be found
      Consistently obscure.

   “First fix upon the limit
      To which it shall extend:
   Then fill it up with ‘Padding’
      (Beg some of any friend):
   Your great SENSATION-STANZA
      You place towards the end.”

   “And what is a Sensation,
      Grandfather, tell me, pray?
   I think I never heard the word
      So used before to-day:
   Be kind enough to mention one
      ‘_Exempli gratiâ_.’”

   And the old man, looking sadly
      Across the garden-lawn,
   Where here and there a dew-drop
      Yet glittered in the dawn,
   Said “Go to the Adelphi,
      And see the ‘Colleen Bawn.’

   “The word is due to Boucicault—
      The theory is his,
   Where Life becomes a Spasm,
      And History a Whiz:
   If that is not Sensation,
      I don’t know what it is.

   “Now try your hand, ere Fancy
      Have lost its present glow—”
   “And then,” his grandson added,
      “We’ll publish it, you know:
   Green cloth—gold-lettered at the back—
      In duodecimo!”

   Then proudly smiled that old man
      To see the eager lad
   Rush madly for his pen and ink
      And for his blotting-pad—
   But, when he thought of _publishing_,
      His face grew stern and sad.

                  [Picture: His face grew stern and sad]




SIZE AND TEARS


                 [Picture: When on the sandy shore I sit]

   WHEN on the sandy shore I sit,
      Beside the salt sea-wave,
   And fall into a weeping fit
      Because I dare not shave—
   A little whisper at my ear
   Enquires the reason of my fear.

   I answer “If that ruffian Jones
      Should recognise me here,
   He’d bellow out my name in tones
      Offensive to the ear:
   He chaffs me so on being stout
   (A thing that always puts me out).”

   Ah me!  I see him on the cliff!
      Farewell, farewell to hope,
   If he should look this way, and if
      He’s got his telescope!
   To whatsoever place I flee,
   My odious rival follows me!

   For every night, and everywhere,
      I meet him out at dinner;
   And when I’ve found some charming fair,
      And vowed to die or win her,
   The wretch (he’s thin and I am stout)
   Is sure to come and cut me out!

                   [Picture: He’s thin and I am stout]

   The girls (just like them!) all agree
      To praise J. Jones, Esquire:
   I ask them what on earth they see
      About him to admire?
   They cry “He is so sleek and slim,
   It’s quite a treat to look at him!”

   They vanish in tobacco smoke,
      Those visionary maids—
   I feel a sharp and sudden poke
      Between the shoulder-blades—
   “Why, Brown, my boy!  Your growing stout!”
   (I told you he would find me out!)

   “My growth is not _your_ business, Sir!”
      “No more it is, my boy!
   But if it’s _yours_, as I infer,
      Why, Brown, I give you joy!
   A man, whose business prospers so,
   Is just the sort of man to know!

   “It’s hardly safe, though, talking here—
      I’d best get out of reach:
   For such a weight as yours, I fear,
      Must shortly sink the beach!”—
   Insult me thus because I’m stout!
   I vow I’ll go and call him out!

               [Picture: For such a weight as yours . . .]




ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN


            Ay, ’twas here, on this spot,
               In that summer of yore,
            Atalanta did not
               Vote my presence a bore,
   Nor reply to my tenderest talk “She had
         heard all that nonsense before.”

            She’d the brooch I had bought
               And the necklace and sash on,
            And her heart, as I thought,
               Was alive to my passion;
   And she’d done up her hair in the style that
         the Empress had brought into fashion.

            I had been to the play
               With my pearl of a Peri—
            But, for all I could say,
               She declared she was weary,
   That “the place was so crowded and hot, and
         she couldn’t abide that Dundreary.”

                      [Picture: On this spot . . .]

            Then I thought “Lucky boy!
               ’Tis for _you_ that she whimpers!”
            And I noted with joy
               Those sensational simpers:
   And I said “This is scrumptious!”—a
         phrase I had learned from the Devonshire shrimpers.

            And I vowed “’Twill be said
               I’m a fortunate fellow,
            When the breakfast is spread,
               When the topers are mellow,
   When the foam of the bride-cake is white,
         and the fierce orange-blossoms are yellow!”

            O that languishing yawn!
               O those eloquent eyes!
            I was drunk with the dawn
               Of a splendid surmise—
   I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear,
         by a tempest of sighs.

            Then I whispered “I see
               The sweet secret thou keepest.
            And the yearning for _ME_
               That thou wistfully weepest!
   And the question is ‘License or Banns?’,
         though undoubtedly Banns are the cheapest.”

            “Be my Hero,” said I,
               “And let _me_ be Leander!”
            But I lost her reply—
               Something ending with “gander”—
   For the omnibus rattled so loud that no
         mortal could quite understand her.




THE LANG COORTIN’


   The ladye she stood at her lattice high,
      Wi’ her doggie at her feet;
   Thorough the lattice she can spy
      The passers in the street,

   “There’s one that standeth at the door,
      And tirleth at the pin:
   Now speak and say, my popinjay,
      If I sall let him in.”

   Then up and spake the popinjay
      That flew abune her head:
   “Gae let him in that tirls the pin:
      He cometh thee to wed.”

   O when he cam’ the parlour in,
      A woeful man was he!
   “And dinna ye ken your lover agen,
      Sae well that loveth thee?”

                         [Picture: The popinjay]

   “And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir,
      That have been sae lang away?
   And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir?
      Ye never telled me sae.”

   Said—“Ladye dear,” and the salt, salt tear
      Cam’ rinnin’ doon his cheek,
   “I have sent the tokens of my love
      This many and many a week.

   “O didna ye get the rings, Ladye,
      The rings o’ the gowd sae fine?
   I wot that I have sent to thee
      Four score, four score and nine.”

   “They cam’ to me,” said that fair ladye.
      “Wow, they were flimsie things!”
   Said—“that chain o’ gowd, my doggie to howd,
      It is made o’ thae self-same rings.”

   “And didna ye get the locks, the locks,
      The locks o’ my ain black hair,
   Whilk I sent by post, whilk I sent by box,
      Whilk I sent by the carrier?”

   “They cam’ to me,” said that fair ladye;
      “And I prithee send nae mair!”
   Said—“that cushion sae red, for my doggie’s head,
      It is stuffed wi’ thae locks o’ hair.”

   “And didna ye get the letter, Ladye,
      Tied wi’ a silken string,
   Whilk I sent to thee frae the far countrie,
      A message of love to bring?”

   “It cam’ to me frae the far countrie
      Wi’ its silken string and a’;
   But it wasna prepaid,” said that high-born maid,
      “Sae I gar’d them tak’ it awa’.”

   “O ever alack that ye sent it back,
      It was written sae clerkly and well!
   Now the message it brought, and the boon that it sought,
      I must even say it mysel’.”

   Then up and spake the popinjay,
      Sae wisely counselled he.
   “Now say it in the proper way:
      Gae doon upon thy knee!”

   The lover he turned baith red and pale,
      Went doon upon his knee:
   “O Ladye, hear the waesome tale
      That must be told to thee!

   “For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I coorted thee by looks;
   By nods and winks, by smiles and tears,
      As I had read in books.

   “For ten lang years, O weary hours!
      I coorted thee by signs;
   By sending game, by sending flowers,
      By sending Valentines.

   “For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I have dwelt in the far countrie,
   Till that thy mind should be inclined
      Mair tenderly to me.

   “Now thirty years are gane and past,
      I am come frae a foreign land:
   I am come to tell thee my love at last—
      O Ladye, gie me thy hand!”

   The ladye she turned not pale nor red,
      But she smiled a pitiful smile:
   “Sic’ a coortin’ as yours, my man,” she said
      “Takes a lang and a weary while!”

               [Picture: And out and laughed the popinjay]

   And out and laughed the popinjay,
      A laugh of bitter scorn:
   “A coortin’ done in sic’ a way,
      It ought not to be borne!”

   Wi’ that the doggie barked aloud,
      And up and doon he ran,
   And tugged and strained his chain o’ gowd,
      All for to bite the man.

   “O hush thee, gentle popinjay!
      O hush thee, doggie dear!
   There is a word I fain wad say,
      It needeth he should hear!”

   Aye louder screamed that ladye fair
      To drown her doggie’s bark:
   Ever the lover shouted mair
      To make that ladye hark:

   Shrill and more shrill the popinjay
      Upraised his angry squall:
   I trow the doggie’s voice that day
      Was louder than them all!

             [Picture: O hush thee, gentle gentle popinjay!]

   The serving-men and serving-maids
      Sat by the kitchen fire:
   They heard sic’ a din the parlour within
      As made them much admire.

   Out spake the boy in buttons
      (I ween he wasna thin),
   “Now wha will tae the parlour gae,
      And stay this deadlie din?”

   And they have taen a kerchief,
      Casted their kevils in,
   For wha will tae the parlour gae,
      And stay that deadlie din.

   When on that boy the kevil fell
      To stay the fearsome noise,
   “Gae in,” they cried, “whate’er betide,
      Thou prince of button-boys!”

   Syne, he has taen a supple cane
      To swinge that dog sae fat:
   The doggie yowled, the doggie howled
      The louder aye for that.

                  [Picture: The doggie ceased his noise]

   Syne, he has taen a mutton-bane—
      The doggie ceased his noise,
   And followed doon the kitchen stair
      That prince of button-boys!

   Then sadly spake that ladye fair,
      Wi’ a frown upon her brow:
   “O dearer to me is my sma’ doggie
      Than a dozen sic’ as thou!

   “Nae use, nae use for sighs and tears:
      Nae use at all to fret:
   Sin’ ye’ve bided sae well for thirty years,
      Ye may bide a wee langer yet!”

   Sadly, sadly he crossed the floor
      And tirlëd at the pin:
   Sadly went he through the door
      Where sadly he cam’ in.

   “O gin I had a popinjay
      To fly abune my head,
   To tell me what I ought to say,
      I had by this been wed.

   “O gin I find anither ladye,”
      He said wi’ sighs and tears,
   “I wot my coortin’ sall not be
      Anither thirty years

   “For gin I find a ladye gay,
      Exactly to my taste,
   I’ll pop the question, aye or nay,
      In twenty years at maist.”

                [Picture: Sadly went he through the door]




FOUR RIDDLES


[THESE consist of two Double Acrostics and two Charades.

No. I. was written at the request of some young friends, who had gone to
a ball at an Oxford Commemoration—and also as a specimen of what might be
done by making the Double Acrostic _a connected poem_ instead of what it
has hitherto been, a string of disjointed stanzas, on every conceivable
subject, and about as interesting to read straight through as a page of a
Cyclopædia.  The first two stanzas describe the two main words, and each
subsequent stanza one of the cross “lights.”

No. II. was written after seeing Miss Ellen Terry perform in the play of
“Hamlet.”  In this case the first stanza describes the two main words.

No. III. was written after seeing Miss Marion Terry perform in Mr.
Gilbert’s play of “Pygmalion and Galatea.”  The three stanzas
respectively describe “My First,” “My Second,” and “My Whole.”]

                                      I

   THERE was an ancient City, stricken down
      With a strange frenzy, and for many a day
   They paced from morn to eve the crowded town,
            And danced the night away.

   I asked the cause: the aged man grew sad:
      They pointed to a building gray and tall,
   And hoarsely answered “Step inside, my lad,
            And then you’ll see it all.”

                                * * * * *

   Yet what are all such gaieties to me
      Whose thoughts are full of indices and surds?

   _x_2 + 7_x_ + 53 = 11/3

   But something whispered “It will soon be done:
      Bands cannot always play, nor ladies smile:
   Endure with patience the distasteful fun
            For just a little while!”

   A change came o’er my Vision—it was night:
      We clove a pathway through a frantic throng:
   The steeds, wild-plunging, filled us with affright:
            The chariots whirled along.

   Within a marble hall a river ran—
      A living tide, half muslin and half cloth:
   And here one mourned a broken wreath or fan,
            Yet swallowed down her wrath;

   And here one offered to a thirsty fair
      (His words half-drowned amid those thunders tuneful)
   Some frozen viand (there were many there),
            A tooth-ache in each spoonful.

   There comes a happy pause, for human strength
      Will not endure to dance without cessation;
   And every one must reach the point at length
            Of absolute prostration.

   At such a moment ladies learn to give,
      To partners who would urge them over-much,
   A flat and yet decided negative—
            Photographers love such.

   There comes a welcome summons—hope revives,
      And fading eyes grow bright, and pulses quicken:
   Incessant pop the corks, and busy knives
            Dispense the tongue and chicken.

   Flushed with new life, the crowd flows back again:
      And all is tangled talk and mazy motion—
   Much like a waving field of golden grain,
            Or a tempestuous ocean.

   And thus they give the time, that Nature meant
      For peaceful sleep and meditative snores,
   To ceaseless din and mindless merriment
            And waste of shoes and floors.

   And One (we name him not) that flies the flowers,
      That dreads the dances, and that shuns the salads,
   They doom to pass in solitude the hours,
            Writing acrostic-ballads.

   How late it grows!  The hour is surely past
      That should have warned us with its double knock?
   The twilight wanes, and morning comes at last—
            “Oh, Uncle, what’s o’clock?”

   The Uncle gravely nods, and wisely winks.
      It _may_ mean much, but how is one to know?
   He opens his mouth—yet out of it, methinks,
            No words of wisdom flow.



II


   EMPRESS of Art, for thee I twine
      This wreath with all too slender skill.
   Forgive my Muse each halting line,
      And for the deed accept the will!

                                * * * * *

   O day of tears!  Whence comes this spectre grim,
      Parting, like Death’s cold river, souls that love?
   Is not he bound to thee, as thou to him,
      By vows, unwhispered here, yet heard above?

   And still it lives, that keen and heavenward flame,
      Lives in his eye, and trembles in his tone:
   And these wild words of fury but proclaim
      A heart that beats for thee, for thee alone!

   But all is lost: that mighty mind o’erthrown,
      Like sweet bells jangled, piteous sight to see!
   “Doubt that the stars are fire,” so runs his moan,
      “Doubt Truth herself, but not my love for thee!”

   A sadder vision yet: thine aged sire
      Shaming his hoary locks with treacherous wile!
   And dost thou now doubt Truth to be a liar?
      And wilt thou die, that hast forgot to smile?

   Nay, get thee hence!  Leave all thy winsome ways
      And the faint fragrance of thy scattered flowers:
   In holy silence wait the appointed days,
      And weep away the leaden-footed hours.



III.


   THE air is bright with hues of light
      And rich with laughter and with singing:
   Young hearts beat high in ecstasy,
   And banners wave, and bells are ringing:
   But silence falls with fading day,
   And there’s an end to mirth and play.
            Ah, well-a-day

   Rest your old bones, ye wrinkled crones!
      The kettle sings, the firelight dances.
   Deep be it quaffed, the magic draught
   That fills the soul with golden fancies!
   For Youth and Pleasance will not stay,
   And ye are withered, worn, and gray.
            Ah, well-a-day!

   O fair cold face!  O form of grace,
      For human passion madly yearning!
   O weary air of dumb despair,
   From marble won, to marble turning!
   “Leave us not thus!” we fondly pray.
   “We cannot let thee pass away!”
            Ah, well-a-day!



IV.


   MY First is singular at best:
         More plural is my Second:
   My Third is far the pluralest—
   So plural-plural, I protest
         It scarcely can be reckoned!

   My First is followed by a bird:
         My Second by believers
   In magic art: my simple Third
   Follows, too often, hopes absurd
         And plausible deceivers.

   My First to get at wisdom tries—
         A failure melancholy!
   My Second men revered as wise:
   My Third from heights of wisdom flies
         To depths of frantic folly.

   My First is ageing day by day:
         My Second’s age is ended:
   My Third enjoys an age, they say,
   That never seems to fade away,
         Through centuries extended.

   My Whole?  I need a poet’s pen
         To paint her myriad phases:
   The monarch, and the slave, of men—
   A mountain-summit, and a den
         Of dark and deadly mazes—

   A flashing light—a fleeting shade—
         Beginning, end, and middle
   Of all that human art hath made
   Or wit devised!  Go, seek _her_ aid,
         If you would read my riddle!




FAME’S PENNY-TRUMPET


[Affectionately dedicated to all “original researchers” who pant for
“endowment.”]

   BLOW, blow your trumpets till they crack,
      Ye little men of little souls!
   And bid them huddle at your back—
      Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals!

   Fill all the air with hungry wails—
      “Reward us, ere we think or write!
   Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails
      To sate the swinish appetite!”

   And, where great Plato paced serene,
      Or Newton paused with wistful eye,
   Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean
      And Babel-clamour of the sty

   Be yours the pay: be theirs the praise:
      We will not rob them of their due,
   Nor vex the ghosts of other days
      By naming them along with you.

   They sought and found undying fame:
      They toiled not for reward nor thanks:
   Their cheeks are hot with honest shame
      For you, the modern mountebanks!

   Who preach of Justice—plead with tears
      That Love and Mercy should abound—
   While marking with complacent ears
      The moaning of some tortured hound:

   Who prate of Wisdom—nay, forbear,
      Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath,
   Trampling, with heel that will not spare,
      The vermin that beset her path!

   Go, throng each other’s drawing-rooms,
      Ye idols of a petty clique:
   Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes,
      And make your penny-trumpets squeak.

             [Picture: Go, throng each other’s drawing-rooms]

   Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds
      Of learning from a nobler time,
   And oil each other’s little heads
      With mutual Flattery’s golden slime:

   And when the topmost height ye gain,
      And stand in Glory’s ether clear,
   And grasp the prize of all your pain—
      So many hundred pounds a year—

   Then let Fame’s banner be unfurled!
      Sing Pæans for a victory won!
   Ye tapers, that would light the world,
      And cast a shadow on the Sun—

   Who still shall pour His rays sublime,
      One crystal flood, from East to West,
   When _ye_ have burned your little time
      And feebly flickered into rest!




I.

THE WHITE RABBIT.


Once upon a time, there was a little girl called Alice: and she had a
very curious dream.

Would you like to hear what it was that she dreamed about?

Well, this was the _first_ thing that happened. A White Rabbit came
running by, in a great hurry; and, just as it passed Alice, it stopped,
and took its watch out of its pocket.

Wasn’t _that_ a funny thing? Did _you_ ever see a Rabbit that had a
watch, and a pocket to put it in? Of course, when a Rabbit has a watch,
it _must_ have a pocket to put it in: it would never do to carry it
about in its mouth----and it wants its hands sometimes, to run about
with.

Hasn’t it got pretty pink eyes (I think _all_ White Rabbits have pink
eyes); and pink ears; and a nice brown coat; and you can just see its
red pocket-handkerchief peeping out of its coat-pocket: and, what with
its blue neck-tie and its yellow waistcoat, it really is _very_ nicely
dressed.

“Oh dear, oh dear!” said the Rabbit. “I shall be too late!” _What_
would it be too late _for_, I wonder? Well, you see, it had to go and
visit the Duchess (you’ll see a picture of the Duchess, soon, sitting
in her kitchen): and the Duchess was a very cross old lady: and the
Rabbit _knew_ she’d be very angry indeed if he kept her waiting. So the
poor thing was as frightened as frightened could be (Don’t you see how
he’s trembling? Just shake the book a little, from side to side, and
you’ll soon see him tremble), because he thought the Duchess would have
his head cut off, for a punishment. That was what the Queen of Hearts
used to do, when _she_ was angry with people (you’ll see a picture of
_her_, soon): at least she used to _order_ their heads to be cut off,
and she always _thought_ it was done, though they never _really_ did it.

And so, when the White Rabbit ran away, Alice wanted to see what would
happen to it: so she ran after it: and she ran, and she ran, till she
tumbled right down the rabbit-hole.

And then she had a very long fall indeed. Down, and down, and down,
till she began to wonder if she was going right _through_ the World, so
as to come out on the other side!

It was just like a very deep well: only there was no water in it. If
anybody _really_ had such a fall as that, it would kill them, most
likely: but you know it doesn’t hurt a bit to fall in a _dream_,
because, all the time you _think_ you’re falling, you really _are_
lying somewhere, safe and sound, and fast asleep!

However, this terrible fall came to an end at last, and down came Alice
on a heap of sticks and dry leaves. But she wasn’t a bit hurt, and up
she jumped, and ran after the Rabbit again.

And so that was the beginning of Alice’s curious dream. And, next time
you see a White Rabbit, try and fancy _you’re_ going to have a curious
dream, just like dear little Alice.




[Illustration]

II.

HOW ALICE GREW TALL.


And so, after Alice had tumbled down the rabbit-hole, and had run a
long long way underground, all of a sudden she found herself in a great
hall, with doors all round it.

But all the doors were locked: so, you see, poor Alice couldn’t get out
of the hall: and that made her very sad.

However, after a little while, she came to a little table, all made of
glass, with three legs (There are _two_ of the legs in the picture, and
just the _beginning_ of the other leg, do you see?), and on the table
was a little key: and she went round the hall, and tried if she could
unlock any of the doors with it.

Poor Alice! The key wouldn’t unlock _any_ of the doors. But at last she
came upon a tiny little door: and oh, how glad she was, when she found
the key would fit it!

So she unlocked the tiny little door, and she stooped down and looked
through it, and what do you think she saw? Oh, such a beautiful garden!
And she did so _long_ to go into it! But the door was _far_ too small.
She couldn’t squeeze herself through, any more than _you_ could squeeze
yourself into a mouse-hole!

So poor little Alice locked up the door, and took the key back to the
table again: and _this_ time she found quite a new thing on it (now
look at the picture again), and what do you think it was? It was a
little bottle, with a label tied to it, with the words “DRINK ME” on
the label.

So she tasted it: and it was _very_ nice: so she set to work, and drank
it up. And then _such_ a curious thing happened to her! You’ll never
guess what it was: so I shall have to tell you. She got smaller, and
smaller, till at last she was just the size of a little doll!

Then she said to herself “_Now_ I’m the right size to get through the
little door!” And away she ran. But, when she got there, the door was
locked, and the key was on the top of the table, and she couldn’t reach
it! _Wasn’t_ it a pity she had locked up the door again?

Well, the next thing she found was a little cake: and it had the words
“EAT ME” marked on it. So of course she set to work and ate it up. And
_then_ what do you think happened to her? No, you’ll never guess! I
shall have to tell you again.

She grew, and she grew, and she grew. Taller than she was before!
Taller than _any_ child! Taller than any grown-up person! Taller, and
taller, and taller! Just look at the picture, and you’ll _see_ how tall
she got!

[Illustration]

Which would _you_ have liked the best, do you think, to be a little
tiny Alice, no larger than a kitten, or a great tall Alice, with your
head always knocking against the ceiling?




III.

THE POOL OF TEARS.


Perhaps you think Alice must have been very much pleased, when she had
eaten the little cake, to find herself growing so tremendously tall?
Because of course it would be easy enough, _now_, to reach the little
key off the glass table, and to open the little tiny door.

Well, of course she could do _that_: but what good was it to get the
door open, when she couldn’t get _through_? She was worse off than
ever, poor thing! She could just manage, by putting her head down,
close to the ground, to _look_ through with one eye! But that was _all_
she could do. No wonder the poor tall child sat down and cried as if
her heart would break.

So she cried, and she cried. And her tears ran down the middle of the
hall, like a deep river. And very soon there was quite a large Pool of
Tears, reaching half-way down the hall.

And there she might have staid, till this very day, if the White
Rabbit hadn’t happened to come through the hall, on his way to visit
the Duchess. He was dressed up as grand as grand could be, and he
had a pair of white kid gloves in one hand, and a little fan in the
other hand: and he kept on muttering to himself “Oh, the Duchess, the
Duchess! Oh, _won’t_ she be savage if I’ve kept her waiting!”

But he didn’t see Alice, you know. So, when she began to say “If
you please, Sir----” her voice seemed to come from the top of the
hall, because her head was so high up. And the Rabbit was dreadfully
frightened: and he dropped the gloves and the fan, and ran away as hard
as he could go.

Then a _very_ curious thing indeed happened. Alice took up the fan, and
began to fan herself with it: and, lo and behold, she got quite small
again, and, all in a minute, she was just about the size of a mouse!

[Illustration]

Now look at the picture, and you’ll soon guess what happened next. It
looks just like the sea, doesn’t it? But it _really_ is the Pool of
Tears----all made of _Alice’s_ tears, you know!

And Alice has tumbled into the Pool: and the Mouse has tumbled in: and
there they are, swimming about together.

Doesn’t Alice look pretty, as she swims across the picture? You can
just see her blue stockings, far away under the water.

But why is the Mouse swimming away from Alice in such a hurry? Well,
the reason is, that Alice began talking about cats and dogs: and a
Mouse always _hates_ talking about cats and dogs!

Suppose _you_ were swimming about, in a Pool of your own Tears: and
suppose somebody began talking to _you_ about lesson-books and bottles
of medicine, wouldn’t _you_ swim away as hard as you could go?




IV.

THE CAUCUS-RACE.


When Alice and the Mouse had got out of the Pool of Tears, of course
they were very wet: and so were a lot of other curious creatures, that
had tumbled in as well. There was a Dodo (that’s the great bird, in
front, leaning on a walking-stick); and a Duck; and a Lory (that’s just
behind the Duck, looking over its head); and an Eaglet (that’s on the
left-hand side of the Lory); and several others.

Well, and so they didn’t know how in the world they were to get dry
again. But the Dodo----who was a very wise bird----told them the right
way was to have a Caucus-Race. And what do you think _that_ was?

_You don’t know?_ Well, you _are_ an ignorant child! Now, be very
attentive, and I’ll soon cure you of your ignorance!

First, you must have a _racecourse_. It ought to be a _sort_ of circle,
but it doesn’t much matter _what_ shape it is, so long as it goes a
good way round, and joins on to itself again.

Then, you must put all the _racers_ on the course, here and there:
it doesn’t matter _where_, so long as you don’t crowd them too much
together.

Then, you needn’t say “One, two, three, and away!” but let them all set
off running just when they like, and leave off just when they like.

So all these creatures, Alice and all, went on running round and round,
till they were all quite dry again. And then the Dodo said _everybody_
had won, and _everybody_ must have prizes!

Of course _Alice_ had to give them their prizes. And she had nothing
to give them but a few comfits she happened to have in her pocket. And
there was just one a-piece, all round. And there was no prize for Alice!

So what do you think they did? Alice had nothing left but her thimble.
Now look at the picture, and you’ll see what happened.

[Illustration]

“Hand it over here!” said the Dodo.

Then the Dodo took the thimble and handed it back to Alice, and said
“We beg your acceptance of this elegant thimble!” And then all the
other creatures cheered.

Wasn’t _that_ a curious sort of present to give her? Suppose they
wanted to give _you_ a birthday-present, would you rather they should
go to your toy-cupboard, and pick out your nicest doll, and say “Here,
my love, here’s a lovely birthday-present for you!” or would you like
them to give you something _new_, something that _didn’t_ belong to you
before?




V.

BILL, THE LIZARD.


Now I’m going to tell you about Alice’s Adventures in the White
Rabbit’s house.

Do you remember how the Rabbit dropped his gloves and his fan, when
he was so frightened at hearing Alice’s voice, that seemed to come
down from the sky? Well, of course he couldn’t go to visit the Duchess
_without_ his gloves and his fan: so, after a bit, he came back again
to look for them.

By this time the Dodo and all the other curious creatures had gone
away, and Alice was wandering about all alone.

So what do you think he did? Actually he thought she was his housemaid,
and began ordering her about! “Mary Ann!” he said. “Go home this very
minute, and fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick, now!”

Perhaps he couldn’t see very clearly with his pink eyes: for I’m sure
Alice doesn’t look very _like_ a housemaid, _does_ she? However she was
a very good-natured little girl: so she wasn’t a bit offended, but ran
off to the Rabbit’s house as quick as she could.

It was lucky she found the door open: for, if she had had to ring, I
suppose the _real_ Mary Ann would have come to open the door: and she
would _never_ have let Alice come in. And I’m sure it was _very_ lucky
she didn’t meet the real Mary Ann, as she trotted upstairs: for I’m
afraid she would have taken Alice for a robber!

So at last she found her way into the Rabbit’s room: and there was a
pair of gloves lying on the table, and she was just going to take them
up and go away, when she happened to see a little bottle on the table.
And of course it had the words “DRINK ME!” on the label. And of course
Alice drank some!

Well, I think that was _rather_ lucky, too: don’t _you_? For, if she
_hadn’t_ drunk any, all this wonderful adventure, that I’m going to
tell you about, wouldn’t have happened at all. And wouldn’t _that_ have
been a pity?

You’re getting so used to Alice’s Adventures, that I daresay you can
guess what happened next? If you can’t, I’ll tell you.

She grew, and she grew, and she grew. And in a very short time the room
was full of _Alice_: just in the same way as a jar is full of jam!
There was _Alice_ all the way up to the ceiling: and _Alice_ in every
corner of the room!

[Illustration]

The door opened inwards: so of course there wasn’t any room to open it:
so when the Rabbit got tired of waiting, and came to fetch his gloves
for himself, of course he couldn’t get in.

So what do you think he did? (Now we come to the picture). He sent
Bill, the Lizard, up to the roof of the house, and told him to get
down the chimney. But Alice happened to have one of her feet in the
fire-place: so, when she heard Bill coming down the chimney, she just
gave a little tiny kick, and away went Bill, flying up into the sky!

Poor little Bill! Don’t you pity him very much? How frightened he must
have been!




VI.

THE DEAR LITTLE PUPPY.


Well, it doesn’t look such a very _little_ Puppy, does it? But then,
you see, Alice had grown very small indeed: and _that’s_ what makes
the Puppy look so large. When Alice had eaten one of those little
magic cakes, that she found in the White Rabbit’s house, it made her
get quite small, directly, so that she could get through the door: or
else she could _never_ have got out of the house again. Wouldn’t _that_
have been a pity? Because then she wouldn’t have dreamed all the other
curious things that we’re going to read about.

So it really _was_ a _little_ Puppy, you see. And isn’t it a little
_pet_? And look at the way it’s barking at the little stick that Alice
is holding out for it! You can see she was a _little_ afraid of it,
all the time, because she’s got behind that great thistle, for fear it
should run over her. That would have been just about as bad, for _her_,
as it would be for _you_ to be run over by a waggon and four horses!

Have you got a little pet puppy at _your_ home? If you have, I hope
you’re always kind to it, and give it nice things to eat.

Once upon a time, I knew some little children, about as big as you; and
they had a little pet dog of their own; and it was called _Dash_. And
this is what they told me about its birthday-treat.

“Do you know, one day we remembered it was Dash’s birthday that day. So
we said ‘Let’s give Dash a nice birthday-treat, like what we have on
_our_ birthdays!’ So we thought and we thought ‘Now, what is it _we_
like best of all, on _our_ birthdays?’ And we thought and we thought.
And at last we all called out together “Why, its _oatmeal-porridge_, of
course!” So of course we thought Dash would be _quite_ sure to like it
very much, too.

[Illustration]

“So we went to the cook, and we got her to make a saucerful of nice
oatmeal-porridge. And then we called Dash into the house, and we said
‘Now, Dash, you’re going to have your birthday-treat!’ We expected Dash
would jump for joy: but it didn’t, one bit!

“So we put the saucer down before it, and we said ‘Now, Dash, don’t be
greedy! Eat it nicely, like a good dog!’

“So Dash just tasted it with the tip of its tongue: and then it made,
oh, such a horrid face! And then, do you know, it did _hate_ it so, it
wouldn’t eat a bit more of it! So we had to put it all down its throat
with a spoon!”

I wonder if Alice will give _this_ little Puppy some porridge? I don’t
think she _can_, because she hasn’t got any with her. I can’t see any
saucer in the picture.




VII.

THE BLUE CATERPILLAR.


Would you like to know what happened to Alice, after she had got away
from the Puppy? It was far too large an animal, you know, for _her_ to
play with. (I don’t suppose _you_ would much enjoy playing with a young
Hippopotamus, would you? You would always be expecting to be crushed as
flat as a pancake under its great heavy feet!) So Alice was very glad
to run away, while it wasn’t looking.

Well, she wandered up and down, and didn’t know what in the world to
do, to make herself grow up to her right size again. Of course she knew
that she had to eat or drink _something_: that was the regular rule,
you know: but she couldn’t guess _what_ thing.

[Illustration]

However, she soon came to a great mushroom, that was so tall that she
couldn’t see over the top of it without standing on tip-toe. And what
do you think she saw? Something that I’m sure _you_ never talked to, in
all your life!

It was a large Blue Caterpillar.

I’ll tell you, soon, what Alice and the Caterpillar talked about: but
first let us have a good look at the picture.

That curious thing, standing in front of the Caterpillar, is called a
“hookah”: and it’s used for smoking. The smoke comes through that long
tube, that winds round and round like a serpent.

And do you see its long nose and chin? At least, they _look_ exactly
like a nose and chin, don’t they? But they really _are_ two of its
legs. You know a Caterpillar has got _quantities_ of legs: you can see
some more of them, further down.

What a bother it must be to a Caterpillar, counting over such a lot of
legs, every night, to make sure it hasn’t lost any of them!

And _another_ great bother must be, having to settle _which_ leg it had
better move first. I think, if _you_ had forty or fifty legs, and if
you wanted to go a walk, you’d be such a time in settling which leg to
begin with, that you’d never go a walk at all!

And what did Alice and the Caterpillar _talk_ about, I wonder?

Well, Alice told it how _very_ confusing it was, being first one size
and then another.

And the Caterpillar asked her if she liked the size she was, just then.

And Alice said she would like to be just a _little_ bit larger----three
inches was such a _wretched_ height to be! (Just mark off three inches
on the wall, about the length of your middle finger, and you’ll see
what size she was.)

And the Caterpillar told her one side of the mushroom would make her
grow _taller_, and the other side would make her grow _shorter_.

So Alice took two little bits of it with her to nibble, and managed to
make herself quite a nice comfortable height, before she went on to
visit the Duchess.




[Illustration]

VIII.

THE PIG-BABY.


Would you like to hear about Alice’s visit to the Duchess? It was a
very interesting visit indeed, I can assure you.

Of course she knocked at the door to begin with: but nobody came: so
she had to open it for herself.

Now, if you look at the picture, you’ll see exactly what Alice saw when
she got inside.

The door led right into the kitchen, you see. The Duchess sat in the
middle of the room, nursing the Baby. The Baby was howling. The soup
was boiling. The Cook was stirring the soup. The Cat----it was a
_Cheshire_ Cat----was grinning, as Cheshire Cats always do. All these
things were happening just as Alice went in.

The Duchess has a beautiful cap and gown, hasn’t she? But I’m afraid
she _hasn’t_ got a very beautiful _face_.

The Baby----well, I daresay you’ve seen _several_ nicer babies than
_that_: and more good-tempered ones, too. However, take a good look at
it, and we’ll see if you know it again, next time you meet it!

The Cook----well, you _may_ have seen nicer cooks, once or twice.

But I’m nearly sure you’ve _never_ seen a nicer _Cat_! Now _have_ you?
And _wouldn’t_ you like to have a Cat of your own, just like that one,
with lovely green eyes, and smiling so sweetly?

The Duchess was very rude to Alice. And no wonder. Why, she even called
her own _Baby_ “Pig!” And it _wasn’t_ a Pig, _was_ it? And she ordered
the Cook to chop off Alice’s head: though of course the Cook didn’t do
it: and at last she threw the Baby at her! So Alice caught the Baby,
and took it away with her: and I think that was about the best thing
she could do.

So she wandered away, through the wood, carrying the ugly little thing
with her. And a great job it was to keep hold of it, it wriggled about
so. But at last she found out that the _proper_ way was, to keep tight
hold of its left foot and its right ear.

But don’t _you_ try to hold on to a Baby like that, my Child! There are
not many babies that _like_ being nursed in _that_ way!

Well, and so the Baby kept grunting, and grunting so that Alice had to
say to it, quite seriously, “If you’re going to turn into a _Pig_, my
dear, I’ll have nothing more to do with you. Mind now!”

And at last she looked down into its face, and what _do_ you think had
happened to it? Look at the picture, and see if you can guess.

[Illustration]

“Why, _that’s_ not the Baby that Alice was nursing, is it?”

Ah, I _knew_ you wouldn’t know it again, though I told you to take a
good look at it! Yes, it _is_ the Baby. And it’s turned into a little
_Pig_!

So Alice put it down, and let it trot away into the wood. And she said
to herself “It was a _very_ ugly _Baby_: but it makes rather a handsome
_Pig_, I think.”

Don’t you think she was right?




IX.

THE CHESHIRE-CAT.


All alone, all alone! Poor Alice! No Baby, not even a _Pig_ to keep her
company!

So you may be sure she was very glad indeed, when she saw the
Cheshire-Cat, perched up in a tree, over her head.

The Cat has a very nice smile, no doubt: but just look what a lot of
teeth it’s got! Isn’t Alice just a _little_ shy of it?

Well, yes, a _little_. But then, it couldn’t help having teeth, you
know: and it _could_ have helped smiling, supposing it had been cross.
So, on the whole, she was _glad_.

Doesn’t Alice look very prim, holding her head so straight up, and with
her hands behind her, just as if she were going to say her lessons to
the Cat!

[Illustration]

And that reminds me. There’s a little lesson I want to teach _you_,
while we’re looking at this picture of Alice and the Cat. Now don’t be
in a bad temper about it, my dear Child! It’s a very _little_ lesson
indeed!

Do you see that Fox-Glove growing close to the tree? And do you know
why it’s called a _Fox_-Glove? Perhaps you think it’s got something to
do with a Fox? No indeed! _Foxes_ never wear Gloves!

The right word is “_Folk’s_-Gloves.” Did you ever hear that Fairies
used to be called “the good _Folk_”?

Now we’ve finished the lesson, and we’ll wait a minute, till you’ve got
your temper again.

Well? Do you feel quite good-natured again? No temper-ache? No
crossness about the corners of the mouth? Then we’ll go on.

“Cheshire Puss!” said Alice. (_Wasn’t_ that a pretty name for a Cat?)
“Would you tell me which way I ought to go from here?”

And so the Cheshire-Cat told her which way she ought to go, if she
wanted to visit the Hatter, and which way to go, to visit the March
Hare. “They’re both mad!” said the Cat.

And then the Cat vanished away, just like the flame of a candle when it
goes out!

So Alice set off, to visit the March Hare. And as she went along, there
was the Cat again! And she told it she didn’t _like_ it coming and
going so quickly.

[Illustration]

So this time the Cat vanished quite slowly, beginning with the tail,
and ending with the grin. Wasn’t _that_ a curious thing, a Grin without
any Cat? Would you like to see one?

If you turn up the corner of this leaf, you’ll have Alice looking at
the Grin: and she doesn’t look a bit more frightened than when she was
looking at the Cat, _does_ she?




X.

THE MAD TEA-PARTY.


This is the Mad Tea-Party. You see Alice had left the Cheshire-Cat, and
had gone off to see the March Hare and the Hatter, as the Cheshire-Cat
had advised her: and she found them having tea under a great tree, with
a Dormouse sitting between them.

There were only those three at the table, but there were quantities of
tea-cups set all along it. You ca’n’t see all the table, you know, and
even in the bit you _can_ see there are nine cups, counting the one the
March Hare has got in his hand.

That’s the March Hare, with the long ears, and straws mixed up with his
hair. The straws showed he was mad----I don’t know why. Never twist up
straws among _your_ hair, for fear people should think you’re mad!

There was a nice green arm-chair at the end of the table, that looked
as if it was just meant for Alice: so she went and sat down in it.

Then she had quite a long talk with the March Hare and the Hatter. The
Dormouse didn’t say much. You see it was fast asleep generally, and it
only just woke up for a moment, now and then.

As long as it was asleep, it was very useful to the March Hare and the
Hatter, because it had a nice round soft head, just like a pillow: so
they could put their elbows on it, and lean across it, and talk to
each other quite comfortably. You wouldn’t like people to use _your_
head for a pillow, _would_ you? But if you were fast asleep, like the
Dormouse, you wouldn’t feel it: so I suppose you wouldn’t care about it.

[Illustration]

I’m afraid they gave Alice _very_ little to eat and drink. However,
after a bit, she helped herself to some tea and bread-and-butter: only
I don’t quite see where she _got_ the bread-and-butter: and she had no
plate for it. Nobody seems to have a plate except the Hatter. I believe
the March Hare must have had one as well: because, when they all moved
one place on (that was the rule at this curious tea-party), and Alice
had to go into the place of the March Hare, she found he had just upset
the milk-jug into his plate. So I suppose his plate and the milk-jug
are hidden behind that large tea-pot.

The Hatter used to carry about hats to sell: and even the one that he’s
got on his head is meant to be sold. You see it’s got its price marked
on it----a “10” and a “6”----that means “ten shillings and sixpence.”
Wasn’t that a funny way of selling hats? And hasn’t he got a beautiful
neck-tie on? Such a lovely yellow tie, with large red spots.

He has just got up to say to Alice “Your hair wants cutting!” That was
a rude thing to say, _wasn’t_ it? And do you think her hair _does_ want
cutting? _I_ think it’s a very pretty length----just the right length.




XI.

THE QUEEN’S GARDEN.


This is a little bit of the beautiful garden I told you about. You see
Alice had managed at last to get quite small, so that she could go
through the little door. I suppose she was about as tall as a mouse,
if it stood on its hind-legs: so of course this was a _very_ tiny
rose-tree: and these are _very_ tiny gardeners.

[Illustration]

What funny little men they are! But _are_ they men, do you think? I
think they must be live cards, with just a head, and arms, and legs, so
as to _look_ like little men. And what _are_ they doing with that red
paint, I wonder? Well, you see, this is what they told Alice The Queen
of Hearts wanted to have a _red_ rose-tree just in that corner: and
these poor little gardeners had made a great mistake, and had put in a
_white_ one instead: and they were so frightened about it, because the
Queen was _sure_ to be angry, and then she would order all their heads
to be cut off!

She was a dreadfully savage Queen, and that was the way she always did,
when she was angry with people. “Off with their heads!” They didn’t
_really_ cut their heads off, you know: because nobody ever obeyed her:
but that was what she always _said_.

_Now_ ca’n’t you guess what the poor little gardeners are trying to
do? They’re trying to paint the roses _red_, and they’re in a great
hurry to get it done before the Queen comes. And then _perhaps_ the
Queen won’t find out it was a _white_ rose-tree to begin with: and then
_perhaps_ the little men won’t get their heads cut off!

You see there were _five_ large white roses on the tree----such a job
to get them all painted red! But they’ve got three and a half done,
now, and if only they wouldn’t stop to talk----work away, little men,
_do_ work away! Or the Queen will be coming before it’s done! And if
she finds any _white_ roses on the tree, do you know what will happen?
It will be “Off with their heads!” Oh, work away, my little men! Hurry,
hurry!

[Illustration]

_The Queen has come!_ And _isn’t_ she angry? Oh, my poor little Alice!




XII.

THE LOBSTER-QUADRILLE.


Did you ever play at Croquet? There are large wooden balls, painted
with different colours, that you have to roll about; and arches of
wire, that you have to send them through; and great wooden mallets,
with long handles, to knock the balls about with.

Now look at the picture, and you’ll see that _Alice_ has just been
playing a Game of Croquet.

“But she _couldn’t_ play, with that great red what’s-its-name in her
arms! Why, how could she hold the mallet?”

[Illustration]

Why, my dear Child, that great red what’s-its-name (its _real_ name is
“_a Flamingo_”) _is_ the mallet! In this Croquet-Game, the balls were
live _Hedge-hogs_----you know a hedge-hog can roll itself up into a
ball?----and the mallets were live _Flamingos_!

So Alice is just resting from the Game, for a minute, to have a chat
with that dear old thing, the Duchess: and of course she keeps her
mallet under her arm, so as not to lose it.

“But I don’t think she _was_ a dear old thing, one bit! To call her
Baby a _Pig_, and to want to chop off Alice’s head!”

Oh, that was only a joke, about chopping off Alice’s head: and as
to the Baby----why, it _was_ a Pig, you know! And just look at her
_smile_! Why, it’s wider than all Alice’s head: and yet you can only
see half of it!

Well, they’d only had a _very_ little chat, when the Queen came and
took Alice away, to see the Gryphon and the Mock Turtle.

_You don’t know what a Gryphon is?_ Well! Do you know _anything_?
That’s the question. However, look at the picture. That creature with
a red head, and red claws, and green scales, is the _Gryphon_. Now you
know.

And the other’s the _Mock Turtle_. It’s got a calf’s-head, because
calf’s head is used to make _Mock Turtle Soup_. Now you know.

“But what are they _doing_, going round and round Alice like that?”

Why, I thought of _course_ you’d know _that_! They’re dancing _a
Lobster-Quadrille_.

[Illustration]

And next time _you_ meet a Gryphon and a Mock Turtle, I daresay they’ll
dance it for _you_, if you ask them prettily. Only don’t let them come
_quite_ close, or they’ll be treading on your toes, as they did on poor
Alice’s.




XIII.

WHO STOLE THE TARTS?


Did you ever hear how the Queen of Hearts made some tarts? And can you
tell me what became of them?

“Why, of _course_ I can! Doesn’t the song tell all about it?

    _The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts:
        All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
        And took them quite away!_”

Well, yes, the _Song_ says so. But it would never do to punish the poor
Knave, just because there was a _Song_ about him. They had to take him
prisoner, and put chains on his wrists, and bring him before the King
of Hearts, so that there might be a regular trial.

Now, if you look at the big picture, at the beginning of this book,
you’ll see what a grand thing a trial is, when the Judge is a King!

The King is very grand, _isn’t_ he? But he doesn’t look very _happy_. I
think that big crown, on the top of his wig, must be _very_ heavy and
uncomfortable. But he had to wear them _both_, you see, so that people
might know he was a Judge _and_ a King.

And _doesn’t_ the Queen look cross? She can see the dish of tarts on
the table, that she had taken such trouble to make. And she can see the
bad Knave (do you see the chains hanging from his wrists?) that stole
them away from her: so I don’t think it’s any wonder if she _does_ feel
a _little_ cross.

The White Rabbit is standing near the King, reading out the Song, to
tell everybody what a bad Knave he is: and the Jury (you can just see
two of them, up in the Jury-box, the Frog and the Duck) have to settle
whether he’s “guilty” or “not guilty.”

Now I’ll tell you about the accident that happened to Alice.

You see, she was sitting close by the Jury-box: and she was called as
a witness. You know what a “witness” is? A “witness” is a person who
has seen the prisoner do whatever he’s accused of, or at any rate knows
_something_ that’s important in the trial.

But _Alice_ hadn’t seen the Queen _make_ the tarts: and she hadn’t seen
the Knave _take_ the tarts: and, in fact, she didn’t know anything
about it: so why in the world they wanted _her_ to be a witness, I’m
sure _I_ ca’n’t tell you!

Anyhow, they _did_ want her. And the White Rabbit blew his big trumpet,
and shouted out “Alice!” And so Alice jumped up in a great hurry. And
then----

And then what _do_ you think happened? Why, her skirt caught against
the Jury-box, and tipped it over, and all the poor little Jurors came
tumbling out of it!

[Illustration]

Let’s try if we can make out all the twelve. You know there ought
to be twelve to make up a Jury. I see the Frog, and the Dormouse,
and the Rat and the Ferret, and the Hedgehog, and the Lizard, and
the Bantam-Cock, and the Mole, and the Duck, and the Squirrel, and a
screaming bird, with a long beak, just behind the Mole.

But that only makes eleven: we must find one more creature.

Oh, do you see a little white head, coming out behind the Mole, and
just under the Duck’s beak? That makes up the twelve.

Mr. Tenniel says the screaming bird is a _Storkling_ (of course you
know what _that_ is?) and the little white head is a _Mouseling_. Isn’t
it a little _darling_?

Alice picked them all up again, very carefully, and I hope they weren’t
_much_ hurt!




XIV.

THE SHOWER OF CARDS.


Oh dear, oh dear! What _is_ it all about? And what’s happening to Alice?

Well, I’ll tell you all about it, as well I can. The way the trial
ended was this. The King wanted the Jury to settle whether the Knave
of Hearts was _guilty_ or _not guilty_----that means that they were to
settle whether _he_ had stolen the Tarts, or if somebody else had taken
them. But the wicked _Queen_ wanted to have his _punishment_ settled,
first of all. That wasn’t at all fair, _was_ it? Because, you know,
supposing he never _took_ the Tarts, then of course he oughtn’t to be
punished. Would _you_ like to be punished for something you hadn’t
done?

[Illustration]

So Alice said “Stuff and nonsense!”

So the Queen said “Off with her head!” (Just what she always said, when
she was angry.)

So Alice said “Who cares for _you_? You’re nothing but a pack of cards!”

So they were _all_ very angry, and flew up into the air, and came
tumbling down again, all over Alice, just like a shower of rain.

And I think you’ll _never_ guess what happened next. The next thing
was, Alice woke up out of her curious dream. And she found that the
cards were only some leaves off the tree, that the wind had blown down
upon her face.

_Wouldn’t_ it be a nice thing to have a curious dream, just like Alice?

The best plan is this. First lie down under a tree, and wait till a
White Rabbit runs by, with a watch in his hand: then shut your eyes,
and pretend to be dear little Alice.

Good-bye, Alice dear, good-bye!


THE END.




AN EASTER GREETING

TO

EVERY CHILD WHO LOVES “ALICE.”


My dear Child,

_Please to fancy, if you can, that you are reading a real letter, from
a real friend whom you have seen, and whose voice you can seem to
yourself to hear, wishing you, as I do now with all my heart, a happy
Easter._

_Do you know that delicious dreamy feeling, when one first wakes on a
summer morning, with the twitter of birds in the air, and the fresh
breeze coming in at the open window----when, lying lazily with eyes
half shut, one sees as in a dream green boughs waving, or waters
rippling in a golden light? It is a pleasure very near to sadness,
bringing tears to one’s eyes like a beautiful picture or poem. And
is not that a Mother’s gentle hand that undraws your curtains, and a
Mother’s sweet voice that summons you to rise? To rise and forget, in
the bright sunlight, the ugly dreams that frightened you so when all
was dark----to rise and enjoy another happy day, first kneeling to
thank that unseen Friend who sends you the beautiful sun?_

_Are these strange words from a writer of such tales as “Alice”? And is
this a strange letter to find in a book of nonsense? It may be so. Some
perhaps may blame me for thus mixing together things grave and gay;
others may smile and think it odd that any one should speak of solemn
things at all, except in Church and on a Sunday: but I think----nay, I
am sure----that some children will read this gently and lovingly, and
in the spirit in which I have written it._

_For I do not believe God means us thus to divide life into two
halves----to wear a grave face on Sunday, and to think it out-of-place
to even so much as mention Him on a week-day. Do you think He cares to
see only kneeling figures and to hear only tones of prayer----and that
He does not also love to see the lambs leaping in the sunlight, and
to hear the merry voices of the children, as they roll among the hay?
Surely their innocent laughter is as sweet in His ears as the grandest
anthem that ever rolled up from the “dim religious light” of some
solemn cathedral?_

_And if I have written anything to add to those stores of innocent and
healthy amusement that are laid up in books for the children I love so
well, it is surely something I may hope to look back upon without shame
and sorrow (as how much of life must then be recalled!) when my turn
comes to walk through the valley of shadows._

_This Easter sun will rise on you, dear child, “feeling your life in
every limb,” and eager to rush out into the fresh morning air----and
many an Easter-day will come and go, before it finds you feeble
and grey-headed, creeping wearily out to bask once more in the
sunlight----but it is good, even now, to think sometimes of that great
morning when “the Sun of righteousness” shall “arise with healing in
his wings.”_

_Surely your gladness need not be the less for the thought that you
will one day see a brighter dawn than this----when lovelier sights
will meet your eyes than any waving trees or rippling waters----when
angel-hands shall undraw your curtains, and sweeter tones than ever
loving Mother breathed shall wake you to a new and glorious day----and
when all the sadness, and the sin, that darkened life on this little
earth, shall be forgotten like the dreams of a night that is past!_

    _Your affectionate Friend_,

      _LEWIS CARROLL_.




CHRISTMAS GREETINGS.

(_FROM A FAIRY TO A CHILD._)


    Lady dear, if Fairies may
      For a moment lay aside
    Cunning tricks and elfish play,
      ’Tis at happy Christmas-tide.

    We have heard the children say--
      Gentle children, whom we love--
    Long ago, on Christmas Day,
      Came a message from above.

    Still, as Christmas-tide comes round,
      They remember it again--
    Echo still the joyful sound
      “Peace on earth, good-will to men!”

    Yet the hearts must childlike be
      Where such heavenly guests abide:
    Unto children, in their glee,
      All the year is Christmas-tide!

    Thus, forgetting tricks and play
      For a moment, Lady dear,
    We would wish you, if we may,
      Merry Christmas, glad New Year!

      _LEWIS CARROLL_



PREFACE

If--and the thing is wildly possible--the charge of writing nonsense
were ever brought against the author of this brief but instructive
poem, it would be based, I feel convinced, on the line (in p.4)

          “Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes.”

In view of this painful possibility, I will not (as I might) appeal
indignantly to my other writings as a proof that I am incapable of
such a deed: I will not (as I might) point to the strong moral purpose
of this poem itself, to the arithmetical principles so cautiously
inculcated in it, or to its noble teachings in Natural History--I will
take the more prosaic course of simply explaining how it happened.

The Bellman, who was almost morbidly sensitive about appearances, used
to have the bowsprit unshipped once or twice a week to be revarnished,
and it more than once happened, when the time came for replacing it,
that no one on board could remember which end of the ship it belonged
to. They knew it was not of the slightest use to appeal to the Bellman
about it--he would only refer to his Naval Code, and read out in
pathetic tones Admiralty Instructions which none of them had ever been
able to understand--so it generally ended in its being fastened on,
anyhow, across the rudder. The helmsman used to stand by with tears in
his eyes; he knew it was all wrong, but alas!  Rule 42 of the Code, “No
one shall speak to the Man at the Helm,” had been completed by the
Bellman himself with the words “and the Man at the Helm shall speak to
no one.”  So remonstrance was impossible, and no steering could be done
till the next varnishing day.  During these bewildering intervals the
ship usually sailed backwards.

As this poem is to some extent connected with the lay of the Jabberwock,
let me take this opportunity of answering a question that has often been
asked me, how to pronounce “slithy toves.”  The “i” in “slithy” is long,
as in “writhe”; and “toves” is pronounced so as to rhyme with “groves.”
 Again, the first “o” in “borogoves” is pronounced like the “o” in
“borrow.”  I have heard people try to give it the sound of the “o” in
“worry”.  Such is Human Perversity.

This also seems a fitting occasion to notice the other hard words in
that poem.  Humpty-Dumpty’s theory, of two meanings packed into one word
like a portmanteau, seems to me the right explanation for all.

For instance, take the two words “fuming” and “furious.”  Make up your
mind that you will say both words, but leave it unsettled which you will
first.  Now open your mouth and speak.  If your thoughts incline
ever so little towards “fuming,” you will say “fuming-furious;” if they
turn, by even a hair’s breadth, towards “furious,” you will say
“furious-fuming;” but if you have the rarest of gifts, a perfectly
balanced mind, you will say “frumious.”

Supposing that, when Pistol uttered the well-known words--

          “Under which king, Bezonian?  Speak or die!”

Justice Shallow had felt certain that it was either William or Richard,
but had not been able to settle which, so that he could not possibly say
either name before the other, can it be doubted that, rather than die,
he would have gasped out “Rilchiam!”



                 Fit the First

                  THE LANDING


     “Just the place for a Snark!” the Bellman cried,
          As he landed his crew with care;
     Supporting each man on the top of the tide
          By a finger entwined in his hair.

     “Just the place for a Snark!  I have said it twice:
          That alone should encourage the crew.
     Just the place for a Snark!  I have said it thrice:
          What I tell you three times is true.”

     The crew was complete: it included a Boots--
          A maker of Bonnets and Hoods--
     A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes--
          And a Broker, to value their goods.

     A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense,
          Might perhaps have won more than his share--
     But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense,
          Had the whole of their cash in his care.

     There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck,
          Or would sit making lace in the bow:
     And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck,
          Though none of the sailors knew how.

     There was one who was famed for the number of things
          He forgot when he entered the ship:
     His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings,
          And the clothes he had bought for the trip.

     He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
          With his name painted clearly on each:
     But, since he omitted to mention the fact,
          They were all left behind on the beach.

     The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
          He had seven coats on when he came,
     With three pairs of boots--but the worst of it was,
          He had wholly forgotten his name.

     He would answer to “Hi!” or to any loud cry,
          Such as “Fry me!” or “Fritter my wig!”
      To “What-you-may-call-um!” or “What-was-his-name!”
           But especially “Thing-um-a-jig!”

     While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
          He had different names from these:
     His intimate friends called him “Candle-ends,”
           And his enemies “Toasted-cheese.”

     “His form is ungainly--his intellect small--”
           (So the Bellman would often remark)
     “But his courage is perfect!  And that, after all,
          Is the thing that one needs with a Snark.”

     He would joke with hyenas, returning their stare
          With an impudent wag of the head:
     And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear,
          “Just to keep up its spirits,” he said.

     He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late--
          And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad--
     He could only bake Bridecake--for which, I may state,
          No materials were to be had.

     The last of the crew needs especial remark,
          Though he looked an incredible dunce:
     He had just one idea--but, that one being “Snark,”
           The good Bellman engaged him at once.

     He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared,
          When the ship had been sailing a week,
     He could only kill Beavers.  The Bellman looked scared,
          And was almost too frightened to speak:

     But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone,
          There was only one Beaver on board;
     And that was a tame one he had of his own,
          Whose death would be deeply deplored.

     The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark,
          Protested, with tears in its eyes,
     That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark
          Could atone for that dismal surprise!

     It strongly advised that the Butcher should be
          Conveyed in a separate ship:
     But the Bellman declared that would never agree
          With the plans he had made for the trip:

     Navigation was always a difficult art,
          Though with only one ship and one bell:
     And he feared he must really decline, for his part,
          Undertaking another as well.

     The Beaver’s best course was, no doubt, to procure
          A second-hand dagger-proof coat--
     So the Baker advised it--and next, to insure
          Its life in some Office of note:

     This the Banker suggested, and offered for hire
          (On moderate terms), or for sale,
     Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire,
          And one Against Damage From Hail.

     Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day,
          Whenever the Butcher was by,
     The Beaver kept looking the opposite way,
          And appeared unaccountably shy.



                      Fit the Second

                   THE BELLMAN’S SPEECH


     The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies--
          Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
     Such solemnity, too!  One could see he was wise,
          The moment one looked in his face!

     He had bought a large map representing the sea,
          Without the least vestige of land:
     And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
          A map they could all understand.

     “What’s the good of Mercator’s North Poles and Equators,
          Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?”
      So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
          “They are merely conventional signs!

     “Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
          But we’ve got our brave Captain to thank:”
      (So the crew would protest) “that he’s bought us the best--
          A perfect and absolute blank!”

     This was charming, no doubt; but they shortly found out
          That the Captain they trusted so well
     Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
          And that was to tingle his bell.

     He was thoughtful and grave--but the orders he gave
          Were enough to bewilder a crew.
     When he cried “Steer to starboard, but keep her head larboard!”
           What on earth was the helmsman to do?

     Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:
          A thing, as the Bellman remarked,
     That frequently happens in tropical climes,
          When a vessel is, so to speak, “snarked.”

     But the principal failing occurred in the sailing,
          And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed,
     Said he had hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East,
          That the ship would not travel due West!

     But the danger was past--they had landed at last,
          With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
     Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view,
          Which consisted of chasms and crags.

     The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low,
          And repeated in musical tone
     Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe--
          But the crew would do nothing but groan.

     He served out some grog with a liberal hand,
          And bade them sit down on the beach:
     And they could not but own that their Captain looked grand,
          As he stood and delivered his speech.

     “Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!”
           (They were all of them fond of quotations:
     So they drank to his health, and they gave him three cheers,
          While he served out additional rations).

     “We have sailed many months, we have sailed many weeks,
          (Four weeks to the month you may mark),
     But never as yet [‘tis your Captain who speaks)
          Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark!

     “We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days,
          (Seven days to the week I allow),
     But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze,
          We have never beheld till now!

     “Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
          The five unmistakable marks
     By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
          The warranted genuine Snarks.

     “Let us take them in order.  The first is the taste,
          Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
     Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
          With a flavour of Will-o’-the-wisp.

     “Its habit of getting up late you’ll agree
          That it carries too far, when I say
     That it frequently breakfasts at five-o’clock tea,
          And dines on the following day.

     “The third is its slowness in taking a jest.
          Should you happen to venture on one,
     It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:
          And it always looks grave at a pun.

     “The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
          Which is constantly carries about,
     And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes--
          A sentiment open to doubt.

     “The fifth is ambition.  It next will be right
          To describe each particular batch:
     Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
          And those that have whiskers, and scratch.

     “For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
          Yet, I feel it my duty to say,
     Some are Boojums--” The Bellman broke off in alarm,
          For the Baker had fainted away.



                      Fit the Third

                     THE BAKER’S TALE


     They roused him with muffins--they roused him with ice--
          They roused him with mustard and cress--
     They roused him with jam and judicious advice--
          They set him conundrums to guess.

     When at length he sat up and was able to speak,
          His sad story he offered to tell;
     And the Bellman cried “Silence!  Not even a shriek!”
           And excitedly tingled his bell.

     There was silence supreme!  Not a shriek, not a scream,
          Scarcely even a howl or a groan,
     As the man they called “Ho!” told his story of woe
          In an antediluvian tone.

     “My father and mother were honest, though poor--”
           “Skip all that!” cried the Bellman in haste.
     “If it once becomes dark, there’s no chance of a Snark--
          We have hardly a minute to waste!”

     “I skip forty years,” said the Baker, in tears,
          “And proceed without further remark
     To the day when you took me aboard of your ship
          To help you in hunting the Snark.

     “A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named)
          Remarked, when I bade him farewell--”
      “Oh, skip your dear uncle!” the Bellman exclaimed,
          As he angrily tingled his bell.

     “He remarked to me then,” said that mildest of men,
          “‘If your Snark be a Snark, that is right:
     Fetch it home by all means--you may serve it with greens,
          And it’s handy for striking a light.

     “‘You may seek it with thimbles--and seek it with care;
          You may hunt it with forks and hope;
     You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
          You may charm it with smiles and soap--’”

     (“That’s exactly the method,” the Bellman bold
          In a hasty parenthesis cried,
     “That’s exactly the way I have always been told
          That the capture of Snarks should be tried!”)

     “‘But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
          If your Snark be a Boojum!  For then
     You will softly and suddenly vanish away,
          And never be met with again!’

     “It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul,
          When I think of my uncle’s last words:
     And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl
          Brimming over with quivering curds!

     “It is this, it is this--” “We have had that before!”
           The Bellman indignantly said.
     And the Baker replied “Let me say it once more.
          It is this, it is this that I dread!

     “I engage with the Snark--every night after dark--
          In a dreamy delirious fight:
     I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes,
          And I use it for striking a light:

     “But if ever I meet with a Boojum, that day,
          In a moment (of this I am sure),
     I shall softly and suddenly vanish away--
          And the notion I cannot endure!”



                      Fit the fourth

                       THE HUNTING


     The Bellman looked huffish, and wrinkled his brow.
          “If only you’d spoken before!
     It’s excessively awkward to mention it now,
          With the Snark, so to speak, at the door!

     “We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe,
          If you never were met with again--
     But surely, my man, when the voyage began,
          You might have suggested it then?

     “It’s excessively awkward to mention it now--
          As I think I’ve already remarked.”
      And the man they called “Hi!” replied, with a sigh,
          “I informed you the day we embarked.

     “You may charge me with murder--or want of sense--
          (We are all of us weak at times):
     But the slightest approach to a false pretence
          Was never among my crimes!

     “I said it in Hebrew--I said it in Dutch--
          I said it in German and Greek:
     But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much)
          That English is what you speak!”

     “‘Tis a pitiful tale,” said the Bellman, whose face
          Had grown longer at every word:
     “But, now that you’ve stated the whole of your case,
          More debate would be simply absurd.

     “The rest of my speech” (he explained to his men)
          “You shall hear when I’ve leisure to speak it.
     But the Snark is at hand, let me tell you again!
          ‘Tis your glorious duty to seek it!

     “To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care;
          To pursue it with forks and hope;
     To threaten its life with a railway-share;
          To charm it with smiles and soap!

     “For the Snark’s a peculiar creature, that won’t
          Be caught in a commonplace way.
     Do all that you know, and try all that you don’t:
          Not a chance must be wasted to-day!

     “For England expects--I forbear to proceed:
          ‘Tis a maxim tremendous, but trite:
     And you’d best be unpacking the things that you need
          To rig yourselves out for the fight.”

     Then the Banker endorsed a blank cheque (which he crossed),
          And changed his loose silver for notes.
     The Baker with care combed his whiskers and hair,
          And shook the dust out of his coats.

     The Boots and the Broker were sharpening a spade--
          Each working the grindstone in turn:
     But the Beaver went on making lace, and displayed
          No interest in the concern:

     Though the Barrister tried to appeal to its pride,
          And vainly proceeded to cite
     A number of cases, in which making laces
          Had been proved an infringement of right.

     The maker of Bonnets ferociously planned
          A novel arrangement of bows:
     While the Billiard-marker with quivering hand
          Was chalking the tip of his nose.

     But the Butcher turned nervous, and dressed himself fine,
          With yellow kid gloves and a ruff--
     Said he felt it exactly like going to dine,
          Which the Bellman declared was all “stuff.”

     “Introduce me, now there’s a good fellow,” he said,
          “If we happen to meet it together!”
      And the Bellman, sagaciously nodding his head,
          Said “That must depend on the weather.”

     The Beaver went simply galumphing about,
          At seeing the Butcher so shy:
     And even the Baker, though stupid and stout,
          Made an effort to wink with one eye.

     “Be a man!” said the Bellman in wrath, as he heard
          The Butcher beginning to sob.
     “Should we meet with a Jubjub, that desperate bird,
          We shall need all our strength for the job!”



                      Fit the Fifth

                   THE BEAVER’S LESSON


     They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
          They pursued it with forks and hope;
     They threatened its life with a railway-share;
          They charmed it with smiles and soap.

     Then the Butcher contrived an ingenious plan
          For making a separate sally;
     And had fixed on a spot unfrequented by man,
          A dismal and desolate valley.

     But the very same plan to the Beaver occurred:
          It had chosen the very same place:
     Yet neither betrayed, by a sign or a word,
          The disgust that appeared in his face.

     Each thought he was thinking of nothing but “Snark”
           And the glorious work of the day;
     And each tried to pretend that he did not remark
          That the other was going that way.

     But the valley grew narrow and narrower still,
          And the evening got darker and colder,
     Till (merely from nervousness, not from goodwill)
          They marched along shoulder to shoulder.

     Then a scream, shrill and high, rent the shuddering sky,
          And they knew that some danger was near:
     The Beaver turned pale to the tip of its tail,
          And even the Butcher felt queer.

     He thought of his childhood, left far far behind--
          That blissful and innocent state--
     The sound so exactly recalled to his mind
          A pencil that squeaks on a slate!

     “‘Tis the voice of the Jubjub!” he suddenly cried.
          (This man, that they used to call “Dunce.”)
     “As the Bellman would tell you,” he added with pride,
          “I have uttered that sentiment once.

     “‘Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat;
          You will find I have told it you twice.
     ‘Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete,
          If only I’ve stated it thrice.”

     The Beaver had counted with scrupulous care,
          Attending to every word:
     But it fairly lost heart, and outgrabe in despair,
          When the third repetition occurred.

     It felt that, in spite of all possible pains,
          It had somehow contrived to lose count,
     And the only thing now was to rack its poor brains
          By reckoning up the amount.

     “Two added to one--if that could but be done,”
           It said, “with one’s fingers and thumbs!”
      Recollecting with tears how, in earlier years,
          It had taken no pains with its sums.

     “The thing can be done,” said the Butcher, “I think.
          The thing must be done, I am sure.
     The thing shall be done!  Bring me paper and ink,
          The best there is time to procure.”

     The Beaver brought paper, portfolio, pens,
          And ink in unfailing supplies:
     While strange creepy creatures came out of their dens,
          And watched them with wondering eyes.

     So engrossed was the Butcher, he heeded them not,
          As he wrote with a pen in each hand,
     And explained all the while in a popular style
          Which the Beaver could well understand.

     “Taking Three as the subject to reason about--
          A convenient number to state--
     We add Seven, and Ten, and then multiply out
          By One Thousand diminished by Eight.

     “The result we proceed to divide, as you see,
          By Nine Hundred and Ninety Two:
     Then subtract Seventeen, and the answer must be
          Exactly and perfectly true.

     “The method employed I would gladly explain,
          While I have it so clear in my head,
     If I had but the time and you had but the brain--
          But much yet remains to be said.

     “In one moment I’ve seen what has hitherto been
          Enveloped in absolute mystery,
     And without extra charge I will give you at large
          A Lesson in Natural History.”

     In his genial way he proceeded to say
          (Forgetting all laws of propriety,
     And that giving instruction, without introduction,
          Would have caused quite a thrill in Society),

     “As to temper the Jubjub’s a desperate bird,
          Since it lives in perpetual passion:
     Its taste in costume is entirely absurd--
          It is ages ahead of the fashion:

     “But it knows any friend it has met once before:
          It never will look at a bribe:
     And in charity-meetings it stands at the door,
          And collects--though it does not subscribe.

     “Its’ flavour when cooked is more exquisite far
          Than mutton, or oysters, or eggs:
     (Some think it keeps best in an ivory jar,
          And some, in mahogany kegs:)

     “You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue:
          You condense it with locusts and tape:
     Still keeping one principal object in view--
          To preserve its symmetrical shape.”

     The Butcher would gladly have talked till next day,
          But he felt that the lesson must end,
     And he wept with delight in attempting to say
          He considered the Beaver his friend.

     While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks
          More eloquent even than tears,
     It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books
          Would have taught it in seventy years.

     They returned hand-in-hand, and the Bellman, unmanned
          (For a moment) with noble emotion,
     Said “This amply repays all the wearisome days
          We have spent on the billowy ocean!”

     Such friends, as the Beaver and Butcher became,
          Have seldom if ever been known;
     In winter or summer, ‘twas always the same--
          You could never meet either alone.

     And when quarrels arose--as one frequently finds
          Quarrels will, spite of every endeavour--
     The song of the Jubjub recurred to their minds,
          And cemented their friendship for ever!



                      Fit the Sixth

                  THE BARRISTER’S DREAM


     They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
          They pursued it with forks and hope;
     They threatened its life with a railway-share;
          They charmed it with smiles and soap.

     But the Barrister, weary of proving in vain
          That the Beaver’s lace-making was wrong,
     Fell asleep, and in dreams saw the creature quite plain
          That his fancy had dwelt on so long.

     He dreamed that he stood in a shadowy Court,
          Where the Snark, with a glass in its eye,
     Dressed in gown, bands, and wig, was defending a pig
          On the charge of deserting its sty.

     The Witnesses proved, without error or flaw,
          That the sty was deserted when found:
     And the Judge kept explaining the state of the law
          In a soft under-current of sound.

     The indictment had never been clearly expressed,
          And it seemed that the Snark had begun,
     And had spoken three hours, before any one guessed
          What the pig was supposed to have done.

     The Jury had each formed a different view
          (Long before the indictment was read),
     And they all spoke at once, so that none of them knew
          One word that the others had said.

     “You must know--” said the Judge: but the Snark exclaimed “Fudge!”
           That statute is obsolete quite!
     Let me tell you, my friends, the whole question depends
          On an ancient manorial right.

     “In the matter of Treason the pig would appear
          To have aided, but scarcely abetted:
     While the charge of Insolvency fails, it is clear,
          If you grant the plea ‘never indebted.’

     “The fact of Desertion I will not dispute;
          But its guilt, as I trust, is removed
     (So far as related to the costs of this suit)
          By the Alibi which has been proved.

     “My poor client’s fate now depends on your votes.”
           Here the speaker sat down in his place,
     And directed the Judge to refer to his notes
          And briefly to sum up the case.

     But the Judge said he never had summed up before;
          So the Snark undertook it instead,
     And summed it so well that it came to far more
          Than the Witnesses ever had said!

     When the verdict was called for, the Jury declined,
          As the word was so puzzling to spell;
     But they ventured to hope that the Snark wouldn’t mind
          Undertaking that duty as well.

     So the Snark found the verdict, although, as it owned,
          It was spent with the toils of the day:
     When it said the word “GUILTY!” the Jury all groaned,
          And some of them fainted away.

     Then the Snark pronounced sentence, the Judge being quite
          Too nervous to utter a word:
     When it rose to its feet, there was silence like night,
          And the fall of a pin might be heard.

     “Transportation for life” was the sentence it gave,
          “And _then_ to be fined forty pound.”
      The Jury all cheered, though the Judge said he feared
          That the phrase was not legally sound.

     But their wild exultation was suddenly checked
          When the jailer informed them, with tears,
     Such a sentence would have not the slightest effect,
          As the pig had been dead for some years.

     The Judge left the Court, looking deeply disgusted:
          But the Snark, though a little aghast,
     As the lawyer to whom the defense was entrusted,
          Went bellowing on to the last.

     Thus the Barrister dreamed, while the bellowing seemed
          To grow every moment more clear:
     Till he woke to the knell of a furious bell,
          Which the Bellman rang close at his ear.



                     Fit the Seventh

                    THE BANKER’S FATE


     They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
          They pursued it with forks and hope;
     They threatened its life with a railway-share;
          They charmed it with smiles and soap.

     And the Banker, inspired with a courage so new
          It was matter for general remark,
     Rushed madly ahead and was lost to their view
          In his zeal to discover the Snark

     But while he was seeking with thimbles and care,
          A Bandersnatch swiftly drew nigh
     And grabbed at the Banker, who shrieked in despair,
          For he knew it was useless to fly.

     He offered large discount--he offered a cheque
          (Drawn “to bearer”) for seven-pounds-ten:
     But the Bandersnatch merely extended its neck
          And grabbed at the Banker again.

     Without rest or pause--while those frumious jaws
          Went savagely snapping around--
     He skipped and he hopped, and he floundered and flopped,
          Till fainting he fell to the ground.

     The Bandersnatch fled as the others appeared
          Led on by that fear-stricken yell:
     And the Bellman remarked “It is just as I feared!”
           And solemnly tolled on his bell.

     He was black in the face, and they scarcely could trace
          The least likeness to what he had been:
     While so great was his fright that his waistcoat turned white--
          A wonderful thing to be seen!

     To the horror of all who were present that day.
          He uprose in full evening dress,
     And with senseless grimaces endeavoured to say
          What his tongue could no longer express.

     Down he sank in a chair--ran his hands through his hair--
          And chanted in mimsiest tones
     Words whose utter inanity proved his insanity,
          While he rattled a couple of bones.

     “Leave him here to his fate--it is getting so late!”
           The Bellman exclaimed in a fright.
     “We have lost half the day.  Any further delay,
          And we sha’nt catch a Snark before night!”



                      Fit the Eighth

                      THE VANISHING


     They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
          They pursued it with forks and hope;
     They threatened its life with a railway-share;
          They charmed it with smiles and soap.

     They shuddered to think that the chase might fail,
          And the Beaver, excited at last,
     Went bounding along on the tip of its tail,
          For the daylight was nearly past.

     “There is Thingumbob shouting!” the Bellman said,
          “He is shouting like mad, only hark!
     He is waving his hands, he is wagging his head,
          He has certainly found a Snark!”

     They gazed in delight, while the Butcher exclaimed
          “He was always a desperate wag!”
      They beheld him--their Baker--their hero unnamed--
          On the top of a neighboring crag.

     Erect and sublime, for one moment of time.
          In the next, that wild figure they saw
     (As if stung by a spasm) plunge into a chasm,
          While they waited and listened in awe.

     “It’s a Snark!” was the sound that first came to their ears,
          And seemed almost too good to be true.
     Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers:
          Then the ominous words “It’s a Boo-”

     Then, silence.  Some fancied they heard in the air
          A weary and wandering sigh
     Then sounded like “-jum!” but the others declare
          It was only a breeze that went by.

     They hunted till darkness came on, but they found
          Not a button, or feather, or mark,
     By which they could tell that they stood on the ground
          Where the Baker had met with the Snark.

     In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
          In the midst of his laughter and glee,
     He had softly and suddenly vanished away---
          For the Snark _was_ a Boojum, you see.




NEW LAMPS FOR OLD.





             "Light come, light go."
                    _________

                1.  Propositions.

            "Some new Cakes are nice."
            "No new Cakes are nice."
            "All new cakes are nice."

There are three 'PROPOSITIONS' for you--the only three kinds we
are going to use in this Game:  and the first thing to be done is
to learn how to express them on the Board.

Let us begin with

"Some new Cakes are nice."

But before doing so, a remark has to be made--one that is rather
important, and by no means easy to understand all in a moment:  so
please to read this VERY carefully.

The world contains many THINGS (such as "Buns", "Babies", "Beetles".
"Battledores". &c.);  and these Things possess many ATTRIBUTES
(such as "baked", "beautiful", "black", "broken", &c.:  in fact,
whatever can be "attributed to", that is "said to belong to", any
Thing, is an Attribute).  Whenever we wish to mention a Thing, we
use a SUBSTANTIVE:  when we wish to mention an Attribute, we use
an ADJECTIVE.  People have asked the question "Can a Thing exist
without any Attributes belonging to it?"  It is a very puzzling
question, and I'm not going to try to answer it:  let us turn up
our noses, and treat it with contemptuous silence, as if it really
wasn't worth noticing.  But, if they put it the other way, and ask
"Can an Attribute exist without any Thing for it to belong to?", we
may say at once "No:  no more than a Baby could go a railway-journey
with no one to take care of it!"  You never saw "beautiful" floating
about in the air, or littered about on the floor, without any Thing
to BE beautiful, now did you?

And now what am I driving at, in all this long rigmarole?  It is
this.  You may put "is" or "are" between names of two THINGS (for
example, "some Pigs are fat Animals"), or between the names of two
ATTRIBUTES (for example, "pink is light-red"), and in each case it
will make good sense.  But, if you put "is" or "are" between the
name of a THING and the name of an ATTRIBUTE (for example, "some
Pigs are pink"), you do NOT make good sense (for how can a Thing
BE an Attribute?) unless you have an understanding with the person
to whom you are speaking.  And the simplest understanding would, I
think, be this--that the Substantive shall be supposed to be repeated
at the end of the sentence, so that the sentence, if written out
in full, would be "some Pigs are pink (Pigs)".  And now the word
"are" makes quite good sense.

Thus, in order to make good sense of the Proposition "some new Cakes
are nice", we must suppose it to be written out in full, in the
form "some new Cakes are nice (Cakes)".  Now this contains two
'TERMS'--"new Cakes" being one of them, and "nice (Cakes)" the
other.  "New Cakes," being the one we are talking about, is called
the 'SUBJECT' of the Proposition, and "nice (Cakes)" the 'PREDICATE'.
Also this Proposition is said to be a 'PARTICULAR' one, since it
does not speak of the WHOLE of its Subject, but only of a PART of
it.  The other two kinds are said to be 'UNIVERSAL', because they
speak of the WHOLE of their Subjects--the one denying niceness, and
the other asserting it, of the WHOLE class of "new Cakes".  Lastly,
if you would like to have a definition of the word 'PROPOSITION'
itself, you may take this:--"a sentence stating that some, or
none, or all, of the Things belonging to a certain class, called
its 'Subject', are also Things belonging to a certain other class,
called its 'Predicate'".

You will find these seven words--PROPOSITION, ATTRIBUTE, TERM,
SUBJECT, PREDICATE, PARTICULAR, UNIVERSAL--charmingly useful, if
any friend should happen to ask if you have ever studied Logic.
Mind you bring all seven words into your answer, and you friend
will go away deeply impressed--'a sadder and a wiser man'.

Now please to look at the smaller Diagram on the Board, and suppose
it to be a cupboard, intended for all the Cakes in the world (it
would have to be a good large one, of course).  And let us suppose
all the new ones to be put into the upper half (marked 'x'), and all
the rest (that is, the NOT-new ones) into the lower half (marked
'x'').  Thus the lower half would contain ELDERLY Cakes, AGED
Cakes, ANTE-DILUVIAN Cakes--if there are any:  I haven't seen many,
myself--and so on.  Let us also suppose all the nice Cakes to be
put into the left-hand half (marked 'y'), and all the rest (that
is, the not-nice ones) into the right-hand half (marked 'y'').  At
present, then, we must understand x to mean "new", x' "not-new",
y "nice", and y' "not-nice."

And now what kind of Cakes would you expect to find in compartment
No. 5?

It is part of the upper half, you see; so that, if it has any Cakes
in it, they must be NEW: and it is part of the left-hand half;
so that they must be NICE.  Hence if there are any Cakes in this
compartment, they must have the double 'ATTRIBUTE' "new and nice":
or, if we use letters, the must be "x y."

Observe that the letters x, y are written on two of the edges of
this compartment.  This you will find a very convenient rule for
knowing what Attributes belong to the Things in any compartment.
Take No. 7, for instance.  If there are any Cakes there, they must
be "x' y", that is, they must be "not-new and nice."

Now let us make another agreement--that a red counter in a
compartment shall mean that it is 'OCCUPIED', that is, that there
are SOME Cakes in it.  (The word 'some,' in Logic, means 'one or
more' so that a single Cake in a compartment would be quite enough
reason for saying "there are SOME Cakes here").  Also let us agree
that a grey counter in a compartment shall mean that it is 'EMPTY',
that is that there are NO Cakes in it.  In the following Diagrams,
I shall put '1' (meaning 'one or more') where you are to put a RED
counter, and '0' (meaning 'none') where you are to put a GREY one.

As the Subject of our Proposition is to be "new Cakes", we are only
concerned, at present, with the UPPER half of the cupboard, where
all the Cakes have the attribute x, that is, "new."

Now, fixing our attention on this upper half, suppose we found it
marked like this,


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |     |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


that is, with a red counter in No. 5.  What would this tell us,
with regard to the class of "new Cakes"?

Would it not tell us that there are SOME of them in the x y-compartment?
That is, that some of them (besides having the Attribute x, which
belongs to both compartments) have the Attribute y (that is, "nice").
This we might express by saying "some x-Cakes are y-(Cakes)", or,
putting words instead of letters,


"Some new Cakes are nice (Cakes)",


or, in a shorter form,


"Some new Cakes are nice".


At last we have found out how to represent the first Proposition
of this Section.  If you have not CLEARLY understood all I have
said, go no further, but read it over and over again, till you DO
understand it.  After that is once mastered, you will find all the
rest quite easy.

It will save a little trouble, in doing the other Propositions,
if we agree to leave out the word "Cakes" altogether.  I find it
convenient to call the whole class of Things, for which the cupboard
is intended, the 'UNIVERSE.'  Thus we might have begun this business
by saying "Let us take a Universe of Cakes."  (Sounds nice, doesn't
it?)

Of course any other Things would have done just as well as Cakes.
We might make Propositions about "a Universe of Lizards", or even
"a Universe of Hornets".  (Wouldn't THAT be a charming Universe to
live in?)

So far, then, we have learned that


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |     |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


means "some x and y," i.e. "some new are nice."

I think you will see without further explanation, that


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |     |  1  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


means "some x are y'," i.e. "some new are not-nice."

Now let us put a GREY counter into No. 5, and ask ourselves the
meaning of


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  0  |     |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


This tells us that the x y-compartment is EMPTY, which we may express
by "no x are y", or, "no new Cakes are nice".  This is the second
of the three Propositions at the head of this Section.

In the same way,


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |     |  0  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


would mean "no x are y'," or, "no new Cakes are not-nice."

What would you make of this, I wonder?


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |  1  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


I hope you will not have much trouble in making out that this
represents a DOUBLE Proposition: namely, "some x are y, AND some
are y'," i.e. "some new are nice, and some are not-nice."

The following is a little harder, perhaps:


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  0  |  0  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


This means "no x are y, AND none are y'," i.e. "no new are nice,
AND none are not-nice": which leads to the rather curious result
that "no new exist," i.e. "no Cakes are new."  This is because
"nice" and "not-nice" make what we call an 'EXHAUSTIVE' division
of the class "new Cakes": i.e. between them, they EXHAUST the whole
class, so that all the new Cakes, that exist, must be found in one
or the other of them.

And now suppose you had to represent, with counters the contradictory
to "no Cakes are new", which would be "some Cakes are new", or,
putting letters for words, "some Cakes are x", how would you do
it?

This will puzzle you a little, I expect.  Evidently you must put
a red counter SOMEWHERE in the x-half of the cupboard, since you
know there are SOME new Cakes.  But you must not put it into the
LEFT-HAND compartment, since you do not know them to be NICE: nor
may you put it into the RIGHT-HAND one, since you do not know them
to be NOT-NICE.

What, then, are you to do?  I think the best way out of the
difficulty is to place the red counter ON THE DIVISION-LINE between
the xy-compartment and the xy'-compartment.  This I shall represent
(as I always put '1' where you are to put a red counter) by the
diagram


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |    -1-    |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


Our ingenious American cousins have invented a phrase to express
the position of a man who wants to join one or the other of two
parties--such as their two parties 'Democrats' and 'Republicans'--but
can't make up his mind WHICH.  Such a man is said to be "sitting
on the fence."  Now that is exactly the position of the red counter
you have just placed on the division-line.  He likes the look of
No. 5, and he likes the look of No. 6, and he doesn't know WHICH to
jump down into.  So there he sits astride, silly fellow, dangling
his legs, one on each side of the fence!

Now I am going to give you a much harder one to make out.  What
does this mean?


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |  0  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


This is clearly a DOUBLE Proposition.  It tells us not only that
"some x are y," but also the "no x are NOT y."  Hence the result
is "ALL x are y," i.e.  "all new Cakes are nice", which is the last
of the three Propositions at the head of this Section.

We see, then, that the Universal Proposition


"All new Cakes are nice"


consists of TWO Propositions taken together, namely,


             "Some new Cakes are nice,"
        and "No new Cakes are not-nice."


In the same way


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  0  |  1  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


would mean "all x are y' ", that is,


"All new Cakes are not-nice."


Now what would you make of such a Proposition as "The Cake you have
given me is nice"?  Is it Particular or Universal?


"Particular, of course," you readily reply.  "One single Cake is
hardly worth calling 'some,' even."


No, my dear impulsive Reader, it is 'Universal'.  Remember that,
few as they are (and I grant you they couldn't well be fewer),
they are (or rather 'it is') ALL that you have given me!  Thus, if
(leaving 'red' out of the question) I divide my Universe of Cakes
into two classes--the Cakes you have given me (to which I assign
the upper half of the cupboard), and those you HAVEN'T given me
(which are to go below)--I find the lower half fairly full, and the
upper one as nearly as possible empty.  And then, when I am told
to put an upright division into each half, keeping the NICE Cakes
to the left, and the NOT-NICE ones to the right, I begin by carefully
collecting ALL the Cakes you have given me (saying to myself, from
time to time, "Generous creature!  How shall I ever repay such
kindness?"), and piling them up in the left-hand compartment.  AND
IT DOESN'T TAKE LONG TO DO IT!

Here is another Universal Proposition for you.  "Barzillai Beckalegg
is an honest man."  That means "ALL the Barzillai Beckaleggs, that
I am now considering, are honest men."  (You think I invented that
name, now don't you?  But I didn't.  It's on a carrier's cart,
somewhere down in Cornwall.)

This kind of Universal Proposition (where the Subject is a single
Thing) is called an 'INDIVIDUAL' Proposition.

Now let us take "NICE Cakes" as the Subject of Proposition: that
is, let us fix our thoughts on the LEFT-HAND half of the cupboard,
where all the Cakes have attribute y, that is, "nice."


                                            -----
  Suppose we find it marked like this:--   |     |
                                           |  1  |
  What would that tell us?                 |     |
                                            -----
                                           |     |
                                           |     |
                                           |     |
                                            -----


I hope that it is not necessary, after explaining the HORIZONTAL
oblong so fully, to spend much time over the UPRIGHT one.  I hope
you will see, for yourself, that this means "some y are x", that
is,


"Some nice Cakes are new."


"But," you will say, "we have had this case before.  You put a red
counter into No. 5, and you told us it meant 'some new Cakes are
nice'; and NOW you tell us that it means 'some NICE Cakes are NEW'!
Can it mean BOTH?"

The question is a very thoughtful one, and does you GREAT credit,
dear Reader!  It DOES mean both. If you choose to take x (that
is, "new Cakes") as your Subject, and to regard No. 5 as part of a
HORIZONTAL oblong, you may read it "some x are y", that is, "some
new Cakes are nice": but, if you choose to take y (that is, "nice
Cake") as your Subject, and to regard No. 5 as part of an UPRIGHT
oblong, THEN you may read it "some y are x", that is, "some nice
Cakes are new".  They are merely two different ways of expressing
the very same truth.

Without more words, I will simply set down the other ways in which
this upright oblong might be marked, adding the meaning in each
case.  By comparing them with the various cases of the horizontal
oblong, you will, I hope, be able to understand them clearly.

You will find it a good plan to examine yourself on this table,
by covering up first one column and then the other, and 'dodging
about', as the children say.

Also you will do well to write out for yourself two other tables--one
for the LOWER half of the cupboard, and the other for its RIGHT-HAND
half.

And now I think we have said all we need to say about the smaller
Diagram, and may go on to the larger one.

  _________________________________________________
                 |
    Symbols.     |          Meanings.
  _______________|_________________________________
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |     |     |  Some y are x';
     |     |     |     i.e. Some nice are not-new.
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  1  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |  No y are x;
     |  0  |     |      i.e. No nice are new.
     |     |     |
      -----      |  [Observe that this is merely another way of
     |     |     |      expressing "No new are nice."]
     |     |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |     |     |  No y are x';
     |     |     |      i.e. No nice are not-new.
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  0  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  1  |     |  Some y are x, and some are x';
     |     |     |     i.e. Some nice are new, and some are
      -----      |            not-new.
     |     |     |
     |  1  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  0  |     |  No y are x, and none are x'; i.e. No y
     |     |     |       exist;
      -----      |     i.e. No Cakes are nice.
     |     |     |
     |  0  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  1  |     |  All y are x;
     |     |     |       i.e. All nice are new.
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  0  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
                 |
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  0  |     |  All y are x';
     |     |     |       i.e. All nice are not-new.
      -----      |
     |     |     |
     |  1  |     |
     |     |     |
      -----      |
  _______________|_________________________________


This may be taken to be a cupboard divided in the same way as the
last, but ALSO divided into two portions, for the Attribute m.  Let
us give to m the meaning "wholesome": and let us suppose that all
WHOLESOME Cakes are placed INSIDE the central Square, and all the
UNWHOLESOME ones OUTSIDE it, that is, in one or other of the four
queer-shaped OUTER compartments.

We see that, just as, in the smaller Diagram, the Cakes in each
compartment had TWO Attributes, so, here, the Cakes in each compartment
have THREE Attributes: and, just as the letters, representing the
TWO Attributes, were written on the EDGES of the compartment, so,
here, they are written at the CORNERS.  (Observe that m' is supposed
to be written at each of the four outer corners.)  So that we can
tell in a moment, by looking at a compartment, what three Attributes
belong to the Things in it.  For instance, take No. 12.  Here we
find x, y', m, at the corners: so we know that the Cakes in it, if
there are any, have the triple Attribute, 'xy'm', that is, "new,
not-nice, and wholesome." Again, take No. 16.  Here we find, at
the corners, x', y', m': so the Cakes in it are "not-new, not-nice,
and unwholesome."  (Remarkably untempting Cakes!)

It would take far too long to go through all the Propositions,
containing x and y, x and m, and y and m which can be represented
on this diagram (there are ninety-six altogether, so I am sure you
will excuse me!) and I must content myself with doing two or three,
as specimens.  You will do well to work out a lot more for yourself.

Taking the upper half by itself, so that our Subject is "new Cakes",
how are we to represent "no new Cakes are wholesome"?

This is, writing letters for words, "no x are m."  Now this tells us
that none of the Cakes, belonging to the upper half of the cupboard,
are to be found INSIDE the central Square: that is, the two
compartments, No. 11 and No. 12, are EMPTY.  And this, of course,
is represented by


                   -------------------
                  |         |         |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |  0  |  0  |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------


And now how are we to represent the contradictory Proposition "SOME x
are m"?  This is a difficulty I have already considered.  I think
the best way is to place a red counter ON THE DIVISION-LINE between
No. 11 and No. 12, and to understand this to mean that ONE of the
two compartments is 'occupied,' but that we do not at present know WHICH.
This I shall represent thus:--


                   -------------------
                  |         |         |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |    -1-    |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------

Now let us express "all x are m."

This consists, we know, of TWO Propositions,


                 "Some x are m,"
             and "No x are m'."

Let us express the negative part first.  This tells us that none
of the Cakes, belonging to the upper half of the cupboard, are to
be found OUTSIDE the central Square: that is, the two compartments,
No. 9 and No. 10, are EMPTY.  This, of course, is represented by


                   -------------------
                  | 0       |       0 |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------

But we have yet to represent "Some x are m."  This tells us that
there are SOME Cakes in the oblong consisting of No. 11 and No.
12: so we place our red counter, as in the previous example, on
the division-line between No. 11 and No. 12, and the result is


                   -------------------
                  | 0       |       0 |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |    -1-    |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------


Now let us try one or two interpretations.

What are we to make of this, with regard to x and y?


                   -------------------
                  |         |       0 |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |  1  |  0  |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------


This tells us, with regard to the xy'-Square, that it is wholly
'empty', since BOTH compartments are so marked.  With regard to
the xy-Square, it tells us that it is 'occupied'.  True, it is only
ONE compartment of it that is so marked; but that is quite enough,
whether the other be 'occupied' or 'empty', to settle the fact that
there is SOMETHING in the Square.

If, then, we transfer our marks to the smaller Diagram, so as to
get rid of the m-subdivisions, we have a right to mark it


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |  0  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


which means, you know, "all x are y."

The result would have been exactly the same, if the given oblong
had been marked thus:--


                   -------------------
                  | 1       |       0 |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |  0  |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------


Once more: how shall we interpret this, with regard to x and y?


                   -------------------
                  | 0       |       1 |
                  |    _____|_____    |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                   -------------------


This tells us, as to the xy-Square, that ONE of its compartments
is 'empty'.  But this information is quite useless, as there is no
mark in the OTHER compartment.  If the other compartment happened
to be 'empty' too, the Square would be 'empty': and, if it happened
to be 'occupied', the Square would be 'occupied'.  So, as we do
not know WHICH is the case, we can say nothing about THIS Square.

The other Square, the xy'-Square, we know (as in the previous
example) to be 'occupied'.

If, then, we transfer our marks to the smaller Diagram, we get
merely this:--


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |     |  1  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


which means, you know, "some x are y'."

These principles may be applied to all the other
oblongs.  For instance, to represent
"all y' are m'" we should mark the     -------
RIGHT-HAND UPRIGHT OBLONG (the one    |       |
that has the attribute y') thus:--    |---    |
                                      | 0 |   |
                                      |---|-1-|
                                      | 0 |   |
                                      |---    |
                                      |       |
                                       -------

and, if we were told to interpret the lower half of the cupboard,
marked as follows, with regard to x and y,


                   -------------------
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |   |     |  0  |   |
                  |   |     |     |   |
                  |    -----|-----    |
                  | 1       |       0 |
                   -------------------


we should transfer it to the smaller Diagram thus,


                      -----------
                     |     |     |
                     |  1  |  0  |
                     |     |     |
                      -----------


and read it "all x' are y."

Two more remarks about Propositions need to be made.

One is that, in every Proposition beginning with "some" or "all",
the ACTUAL EXISTENCE of the 'Subject' is asserted.  If, for instance,
I say "all misers are selfish," I mean that misers ACTUALLY EXIST.
If I wished to avoid making this assertion, and merely to state
the LAW that miserliness necessarily involves selfishness, I should
say "no misers are unselfish" which does not assert that any misers
exist at all, but merely that, if any DID exist, they WOULD be
selfish.

The other is that, when a Proposition begins with "some" or "no",
and contains more that two Attributes, these Attributes may be
re-arranged, and shifted from one Term to the other, "ad libitum."
For example, "some abc are def" may be re-arranged as "some bf are
acde," each being equivalent to "some Things are abcdef".  Again "No
wise old men are rash and reckless gamblers" may be re-arranged as
"No rash old gamblers are wise and reckless," each being equivalent
to "No men are wise old rash reckless gamblers."



2.  Syllogisms


Now suppose we divide our Universe of Things in three ways, with regard
to three different Attributes.  Out of these three Attributes, we
may make up three different couples (for instance, if they were a,
b, c, we might make up the three couples ab, ac, bc).  Also suppose
we have two Propositions given us, containing two of these three
couples, and that from them we can prove a third Proposition containing
the third couple.  (For example, if we divide our Universe for m,
x, and y; and if we have the two Propositions given us, "no m are
x'" and "all m' are y", containing the two couples mx and my, it
might be possible to prove from them a third Proposition, containing
x and y.)

In such a case we call the given Propositions 'THE PREMISSES', the
third one 'THE CONCLUSION' and the whole set 'A SYLLOGISM'.

Evidently, ONE of the Attributes must occur in both Premisses; or
else one must occur in ONE Premiss, and its CONTRADICTORY in the
other.

In the first case (when, for example, the Premisses are "some m
are x" and "no m are y'") the Term, which occurs twice, is called
'THE MIDDLE TERM', because it serves as a sort of link between the
other two Terms.

In the second case (when, for example, the Premisses are "no
m are x'" and "all m' are y") the two Terms, which contain these
contradictory Attributes, may be called 'THE MIDDLE TERMS'.

Thus, in the first case, the class of "m-Things" is the Middle
Term; and, in the second case, the two classes of "m-Things" and
"m'-Things" are the Middle Terms.

The Attribute, which occurs in the Middle Term or Terms, disappears
in the Conclusion, and is said to be "eliminated", which literally
means "turned out of doors".

Now let us try to draw a Conclusion from the two Premisses--

          "Some new Cakes are unwholesome;
           No nice Cakes are unwholesome."

In order to express them with counters, we need to divide Cakes in
THREE different ways, with regard to newness, to niceness, and to
wholesomeness.  For this we must use the larger Diagram, making x
mean "new", y "nice", and m "wholesome".  (Everything INSIDE the
central Square is supposed to have the attribute m, and everything
OUTSIDE it the attribute m', i.e. "not-m".)

You had better adopt the rule to make m mean the Attribute which
occurs in the MIDDLE Term or Terms.  (I have chosen m as the symbol,
because 'middle' begins with 'm'.)

Now, in representing the two Premisses, I prefer to begin with the
NEGATIVE one (the one beginning with "no"), because GREY counters
can always be placed with CERTAINTY, and will then help to fix the
position of the red counters, which are sometimes a little uncertain
where they will be most welcome.

Let us express, the "no nice Cakes are unwholesome (Cakes)", i.e.
"no y-Cakes are m'-(Cakes)".  This tells us that none of the Cakes
belonging to the y-half of the cupboard are in its m'-compartments
(i.e. the ones outside the central Square).  Hence the two compartments,
No. 9 and No. 15, are both 'EMPTY'; and we must place a grey counter
in EACH of them, thus:--


                    -----------
                   |0    |     |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |  |  |  |  |
                   |--|-----|--|
                   |  |  |  |  |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |0    |     |
                    -----------


We have now to express the other Premiss, namely, "some new Cakes
are unwholesome (Cakes)", i.e.  "some x-Cakes are m'-(Cakes)".  This
tells us that some of the Cakes in the x-half of the cupboard are
in its m'-compartments.  Hence ONE of the two compartments, No.
9 and No. 10, is 'occupied': and, as we are not told in WHICH of
these two compartments to place the red counter, the usual rule
would be to lay it on the division-line between them: but, in this
case, the other Premiss has settled the matter for us, by declaring
No. 9 to be EMPTY.  Hence the red counter has no choice, and MUST
go into No. 10, thus:--


                    -----------
                   |0    |    1|
                   |   --|--   |
                   |  |  |  |  |
                   |--|-----|--|
                   |  |  |  |  |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |0    |     |
                    -----------


And now what counters will this information enable us to place in
the SMALLER Diagram, so as to get some Proposition involving x and
y only, leaving out m?  Let us take its four compartments, one by
one.

First, No. 5.  All we know about THIS is that its OUTER portion
is empty: but we know nothing about its inner portion.  Thus the
Square MAY be empty, or it MAY have something in it.  Who can tell?
So we dare not place ANY counter in this Square.

Secondly, what of No. 6?  Here we are a little better off.  We
know that there is SOMETHING in it, for there is a red counter in
its outer portion.  It is true we do not know whether its inner
portion is empty or occupied: but what does THAT matter?  One solitary
Cake, in one corner of the Square, is quite sufficient excuse for
saying "THIS SQUARE IS OCCUPIED", and for marking it with a red
counter.

As to No. 7, we are in the same condition as with No. 5--we find
it PARTLY 'empty', but we do not know whether the other part is
empty or occupied: so we dare not mark this Square.

And as to No. 8, we have simply no information at all.

The result is

                     -------
                    |   | 1 |
                    |---|---|
                    |   |   |
                     -------


Our 'Conclusion', then, must be got out of the rather meager piece
of information that there is a red counter in the xy'-Square.
Hence our Conclusion is "some x are y' ", i.e. "some new Cakes are
not-nice (Cakes)": or, if you prefer to take y' as your Subject,
"some not-nice Cakes are new (Cakes)"; but the other looks neatest.

We will now write out the whole Syllogism, putting the symbol
&there4[*] for "therefore", and omitting "Cakes", for the sake of
brevity, at the end of each Proposition.

[*][NOTE from Brett:  The use of "&there4" is a rather arbitrary
selection.  There is no font available in general practice
which renders the "therefore" symbol correction (three dots in a
triangular formation).  This can be done, however, in HTML, so if
this document is read in a browser, then the symbol will be properly
recognized.  This is a poor man's excuse.]

          "Some new Cakes are unwholesome;
           No nice Cakes are unwholesome
           &there4 Some new Cakes are not-nice."

And you have now worked out, successfully, your first 'SYLLOGISM'.
Permit me to congratulate you, and to express the hope that it is
but the beginning of a long and glorious series of similar victories!

We will work out one other Syllogism--a rather harder one than the
last--and then, I think, you may be safely left to play the Game
by yourself, or (better) with any friend whom you can find, that
is able and willing to take a share in the sport.

Let us see what we can make of the two Premisses--


              "All Dragons are uncanny;
               All Scotchmen are canny."


Remember, I don't guarantee the Premisses to be FACTS.  In the
first place, I never even saw a Dragon: and, in the second place,
it isn't of the slightest consequence to us, as LOGICIANS, whether
our Premisses are true or false: all WE have to do is to make out
whether they LEAD LOGICALLY TO THE CONCLUSION, so that, if THEY
were true, IT would be true also.

You see, we must give up the "Cakes" now, or our cupboard will
be of no use to us.  We must take, as our 'Universe', some class
of things which will include Dragons and Scotchmen: shall we say
'Animals'?  And, as "canny" is evidently the Attribute belonging
to the 'Middle Terms', we will let m stand for "canny", x for
"Dragons", and y for "Scotchmen".  So that our two Premisses are,
in full,


   "All Dragon-Animals are uncanny (Animals);
   All Scotchman-Animals are canny (Animals)."


And these may be expressed, using letters for words, thus:--


                "All x are m';
                 All y are m."


The first Premiss consists, as you already know, of two parts:--


                 "Some x are m',"
             and "No x are m."


And the second also consists of two parts:--


                 "Some y are m,"
             and "No y are m'."


Let us take the negative portions first.

We have, then, to mark, on the larger Diagram, first, "no x are
m", and secondly, "no y are m'".  I think you will see, without
further explanation, that the two results, separately, are


       -----------           -----------
      |     |     |         |0    |     |
      |   --|--   |         |   --|--   |
      |  |0 | 0|  |         |  |  |  |  |
      |--|--|--|--|         |--|--|--|--|
      |  |  |  |  |         |  |  |  |  |
      |   --|--   |         |   --|--   |
      |     |     |         |0    |     |
       -----------           -----------



and that these two, when combined, give us


                    -----------
                   |0    |     |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |  |0 | 0|  |
                   |--|--|--|--|
                   |  |  |  |  |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |0    |     |
                    -----------


We have now to mark the two positive portions, "some x are m'"
and "some y are m".

The only two compartments, available for Things which are xm', are
No. 9 and No. 10.  Of these, No. 9 is already marked as 'empty';
so our red counter must go into No. 10.

Similarly, the only two, available for ym, are No. 11 and No. 13.
Of these, No. 11 is already marked as 'empty'; so our red counter
MUST go into No. 13.

The final result is


                    -----------
                   |0    |    1|
                   |   --|--   |
                   |  |0 | 0|  |
                   |--|--|--|--|
                   |  |1 |  |  |
                   |   --|--   |
                   |0    |     |
                    -----------



And now how much of this information can usefully be transferred
to the smaller Diagram?

Let us take its four compartments, one by one.

As to No. 5?  This, we see, is wholly 'empty'. (So mark it with a
grey counter.)

As to No. 6?  This, we see, is 'occupied'.  (So mark it with a red
counter.)

As to No. 7?  Ditto, ditto.

As to No. 8?  No information.

The smaller Diagram is now pretty liberally marked:--


                     -------
                    | 0 | 1 |
                    |---|---|
                    | 1 |   |
                     -------


And now what Conclusion can we read off from this?  Well, it is
impossible to pack such abundant information into ONE Proposition:
we shall have to indulge in TWO, this time.

First, by taking x as Subject, we get "all x are y'", that is,


"All Dragons are not-Scotchmen":


secondly, by taking y as Subject, we get "all y are x'", that is,


"All Scotchmen are not-Dragons".


Let us now write out, all together, our two Premisses and our brace
of Conclusions.


        "All Dragons are uncanny;
         All Scotchmen are canny.
         &there4  All Dragons are not-Scotchmen;
                  All Scotchmen are not-Dragons."


Let me mention, in conclusion, that you may perhaps meet with
logical treatises in which it is not assumed that any Thing EXISTS
at all, by "some x are y" is understood to mean "the Attributes x,
y are COMPATIBLE, so that a Thing can have both at once", and "no
x are y" to mean "the Attributes x, y are INCOMPATIBLE, so that
nothing can have both at once".

In such treatises, Propositions have quite different meanings
from what they have in our 'Game of Logic', and it will be well to
understand exactly what the difference is.

First take "some x are y".  Here WE understand "are" to mean "are,
as an actual FACT"--which of course implies that some x-Things EXIST.
But THEY (the writers of these other treatises) only understand
"are" to mean "CAN be", which does not at all imply that any EXIST.
So they mean LESS than we do: our meaning includes theirs (for of
course "some x ARE y" includes "some x CAN BE y"), but theirs does
NOT include ours.  For example, "some Welsh hippopotami are heavy"
would be TRUE, according to these writers (since the Attributes
"Welsh" and "heavy" are quite COMPATIBLE in a hippopotamus), but
it would be FALSE in our Game (since there are no Welsh hippopotami
to BE heavy).

Secondly, take "no x are y".  Here WE only understand "are" to
mean "are, as an actual FACT"--which does not at all imply that no
x CAN be y.  But THEY understand the Proposition to mean, not only
that none ARE y, but that none CAN POSSIBLY be y.  So they mean
more than we do: their meaning includes ours (for of course "no x
CAN be y" includes "no x ARE y"), but ours does NOT include theirs.
For example, "no Policemen are eight feet high" would be TRUE
in our Game (since, as an actual fact, no such splendid specimens
are ever found), but it would be FALSE, according to these writers
(since the Attributes "belonging to the Police Force" and "eight
feet high" are quite COMPATIBLE:  there is nothing to PREVENT a
Policeman from growing to that height, if sufficiently rubbed with
Rowland's Macassar Oil--which said to make HAIR grow, when rubbed
on hair, and so of course will make a POLICEMAN grow, when rubbed
on a Policeman).

Thirdly, take "all x are y", which consists of the two partial
Propositions "some x are y" and "no x are y'".  Here, of course,
the treatises mean LESS than we do in the FIRST part, and more than
we do in the SECOND.  But the two operations don't balance each
other--any more than you can console a man, for having knocked down
one of his chimneys, by giving him an extra door-step.

If you meet with Syllogisms of this kind, you may work them, quite
easily, by the system I have given you: you have only to make
'are' mean 'are CAPABLE of being', and all will go smoothly.  For
"some x are y" will become "some x are capable of being y", that
is, "the Attributes x, y are COMPATIBLE".  And "no x are y" will
become "no x are capable of being y", that is, "the Attributes
x, y are INCOMPATIBLE".  And, of course, "all x are y" will become
"some x are capable of being y, and none are capable of being y'",
that is, "the Attributes x, y are COMPATIBLE, and the Attributes
x, y' are INCOMPATIBLE."  In using the Diagrams for this system,
you must understand a red counter to mean "there may POSSIBLY be
something in this compartment," and a grey one to mean "there cannot
POSSIBLY be anything in this compartment."



3. Fallacies.


And so you think, do you, that the chief use of Logic, in real life,
is to deduce Conclusions from workable Premisses, and to satisfy
yourself that the Conclusions, deduced by other people, are correct?
I only wish it were!  Society would be much less liable to panics
and other delusions, and POLITICAL life, especially, would be a
totally different thing, if even a majority of the arguments, that
scattered broadcast over the world, were correct!  But it is all
the other way, I fear.  For ONE workable Pair of Premisses (I mean
a Pair that lead to a logical Conclusion) that you meet with in
reading your newspaper or magazine, you will probably find FIVE
that lead to no Conclusion at all: and, even when the Premisses
ARE workable, for ONE instance, where the writer draws a correct
Conclusion, there are probably TEN where he draws an incorrect one.

In the first case, you may say "the PREMISSES are fallacious": in
the second, "the CONCLUSION is fallacious."

The chief use you will find, in such Logical skill as this Game
may teach you, will be in detecting 'FALLACIES' of these two kinds.

The first kind of Fallacy--'Fallacious Premisses'--you will detect
when, after marking them on the larger Diagram, you try to transfer
the marks to the smaller.  You will take its four compartments, one
by one, and ask, for each in turn, "What mark can I place HERE?";
and in EVERY one the answer will be "No information!", showing that
there is NO CONCLUSION AT ALL.  For instance,


          "All soldiers are brave;
           Some Englishmen are brave.
            &there4 Some Englishmen are soldiers."


looks uncommonly LIKE a Syllogism, and might easily take in a
less experienced Logician.  But YOU are not to be caught by such
a trick!  You would simply set out the Premisses, and would then
calmly remark "Fallacious PREMISSES!": you wouldn't condescend to
ask what CONCLUSION the writer professed to draw--knowing that,
WHATEVER it is, it MUST be wrong.  You would be just as safe as
that wise mother was, who said "Mary, just go up to the nursery,
and see what Baby's doing, AND TELL HIM NOT TO DO IT!"

The other kind of Fallacy--'Fallacious Conclusion'--you will not
detect till you have marked BOTH Diagrams, and have read off the
correct Conclusion, and have compared it with the Conclusion which
the writer has drawn.

But mind, you mustn't say "FALLACIOUS Conclusion," simply because
it is not IDENTICAL with the correct one: it may be a PART of the
correct Conclusion, and so be quite correct, AS FAR AS IT GOES.  In
this case you would merely remark, with a pitying smile, "DEFECTIVE
Conclusion!" Suppose, of example, you were to meet with this
Syllogism:--


           "All unselfish people are generous;
            No misers are generous.
                 &there4 No misers are unselfish."


the Premisses of which might be thus expressed in letters:--


               "All x' are m;
                No y are m."


Here the correct Conclusion would be "All x' are y'" (that is,
"All unselfish people are not misers"), while the Conclusion, drawn
by the writer, is "No y are x'," (which is the same as "No x' are
y," and so is PART of "All x' are y'.")  Here you would simply say
"DEFECTIVE Conclusion!" The same thing would happen, if you were
in a confectioner's shop, and if a little boy were to come in, put
down twopence, and march off triumphantly with a single penny-bun.
You would shake your head mournfully, and would remark "Defective
Conclusion!  Poor little chap!"  And perhaps you would ask the
young lady behind the counter whether she would let YOU eat the
bun, which the little boy had paid for and left behind him: and
perhaps SHE would reply "Sha'n't!"

But if, in the above example, the writer had drawn the Conclusion
"All misers are selfish" (that is, "All y are x"), this would
be going BEYOND his legitimate rights (since it would assert the
EXISTENCE of y, which is not contained in the Premisses), and you
would very properly say "Fallacious Conclusion!"

Now, when you read other treatises on Logic, you will meet with
various kinds of (so-called) 'Fallacies' which are by no means
ALWAYS so.  For example, if you were to put before one of these
Logicians the Pair of Premisses


          "No honest men cheat;
           No dishonest men are trustworthy."


and were to ask him what Conclusion followed, he would probably say
"None at all!  Your Premisses offend against TWO distinct Rules, and
are as fallacious as they can well be!"  Then suppose you were bold
enough to say "The Conclusion is 'No men who cheat are trustworthy',"
I fear your Logical friend would turn away hastily--perhaps angry,
perhaps only scornful: in any case, the result would be unpleasant.
I ADVISE YOU NOT TO TRY THE EXPERIMENT!

"But why is this?" you will say.  "Do you mean to tell us that all
these Logicians are wrong?"  Far from it, dear Reader!  From THEIR
point of view, they are perfectly right.  But they do not include,
in their system, anything like ALL the possible forms of Syllogisms.

They have a sort of nervous dread of Attributes beginning with a
negative particle.  For example, such Propositions as "All not-x
are y," "No x are not-y," are quite outside their system.  And
thus, having (from sheer nervousness) excluded a quantity of very
useful forms, they have made rules which, though quite applicable
to the few forms which they allow of, are no use at all when you
consider all possible forms.

Let us not quarrel with them, dear Reader!  There is room enough in
the world for both of us.  Let us quietly take our broader system:
and, if they choose to shut their eyes to all these useful forms,
and to say "They are not Syllogisms at all!" we can but stand aside,
and let them Rush upon their Fate!  There is scarcely anything of
yours, upon which it is so dangerous to Rush, as your Fate.  You
may Rush upon your Potato-beds, or your Strawberry-beds, without
doing much harm: you may even Rush upon your Balcony (unless it
is a new house, built by contract, and with no clerk of the works)
and may survive the foolhardy enterprise: but if you once Rush upon
your FATE--why, you must take the consequences!





CHAPTER II.

CROSS QUESTIONS.

        "The Man in the Wilderness asked of me
         'How many strawberries grow in the sea?'"
                      __________





1. Elementary.

1.  What is an 'Attribute'?  Give examples.

2.  When is it good sense to put "is" or "are" between two names?
Give examples.

3.  When is it NOT good sense?  Give examples.

4.  When it is NOT good sense, what is the simplest agreement to
make, in order to make good sense?

5.  Explain 'Proposition', 'Term', 'Subject', and 'Predicate'.
Give examples.

6.  What are 'Particular' and 'Universal' Propositions?  Give
examples.

7.  Give a rule for knowing, when we look at the smaller Diagram,
what Attributes belong to the things in each compartment.

8.  What does "some" mean in Logic?  [See pp. 55, 6]

9.  In what sense do we use the word 'Universe' in this Game?

10.  What is a 'Double' Proposition?  Give examples.

11.  When is a class of Things said to be 'exhaustively' divided?
Give examples.

12.  Explain the phrase "sitting on the fence."

13.  What two partial Propositions make up, when taken together,
"all x are y"?

14.  What are 'Individual' Propositions?  Give examples.

15.  What kinds of Propositions imply, in this Game, the EXISTENCE
of their Subjects?

16.  When a Proposition contains more than two Attributes, these
Attributes may in some cases be re-arranged, and shifted from one
Term to the other.  In what cases may this be done?  Give examples.

__________


Break up each of the following into two partial
Propositions:

17.  All tigers are fierce.

18.  All hard-boiled eggs are unwholesome.

19.  I am happy.

20.  John is not at home.

__________

[See pp. 56, 7]

21.  Give a rule for knowing, when we look at the larger Diagram,
what Attributes belong to the Things contained in each compartment.

22.  Explain 'Premisses', 'Conclusion', and 'Syllogism'.  Give
examples.

23.  Explain the phrases 'Middle Term' and 'Middle Terms'.

24.  In marking a pair of Premisses on the larger Diagram, why is
it best to mark NEGATIVE Propositions before AFFIRMATIVE ones?

25.  Why is it of no consequence to us, as Logicians, whether the
Premisses are true or false?

26.  How can we work Syllogisms in which we are told that "some x
are y" is to be understood to mean "the Attribute x, y are COMPATIBLE",
and "no x are y" to mean "the Attributes x, y are INCOMPATIBLE"?

27.  What are the two kinds of 'Fallacies'?

28.  How may we detect 'Fallacious Premisses'?

29.  How may we detect a 'Fallacious Conclusion'?

30.  Sometimes the Conclusion, offered to us, is not identical with
the correct Conclusion, and yet cannot be fairly called 'Fallacious'.
When does this happen?  And what name may we give to such a
Conclusion?

[See pp. 57-59]




2.  Half of Smaller Diagram.


Propositions to be represented.


                        -----------
                       |     |     |
                       |     x     |
                       |     |     |
                        --y-----y'-

__________

1.  Some x are not-y.

2.  All x are not-y.

3.  Some x are y, and some are not-y.

4.  No x exist.

5.  Some x exist.

6.  No x are not-y.

7.  Some x are not-y, and some x exist.

__________

Taking x="judges"; y="just";

8.  No judges are just.

9.  Some judges are unjust.

10.  All judges are just.

__________

Taking x="plums"; y="wholesome";

11.  Some plums are wholesome.

12.  There are no wholesome plums.

13.  Plums are some of them wholesome, and some not.

14.  All plums are unwholesome.

[See pp. 59, 60]

                          -----
                         |     |
                         |     x
                         |     |
                         |--y--|
                         |     |
                         |     x'
                         |     |
                          -----

__________

Taking y="diligent students"; x="successful";

15.  No diligent students are unsuccessful.

16.  All diligent students are successful.

17.  No students are diligent.

18.  There are some diligent, but unsuccessful, students.

19.  Some students are diligent.

[See pp. 60, 1]




3.  Half of Smaller Diagram.



Symbols to be interpreted.

__________


                       -----------
                      |     |     |
                      |     x     |
                      |     |     |
                       --y-----y'-

__________


                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             1.  |   | 0 |      2.  | 0 | 0 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------


                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             3.  |   -   |      4.  | 0 | 1 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

__________

Taking x="good riddles"; y="hard";


                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             5.  | 1 |   |      6.  | 1 | 0 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             7.  | 0 | 0 |      8.  | 0 |   |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

__________

[See pp. 61, 2]

Taking x="lobster"; y="selfish";

                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             9.  |   | 1 |     10.  | 0 |   |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
            11.  | 0 | 1 |     12.  | 1 | 1 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

__________


                          -----
                         |     |
                         x     |
                         |     |
                         |--y'-|
                         |     |
                         x'    |
                         |     |
                          -----

Taking y="healthy people"; x="happy";

            ---          ---          ---          ---
           | 0 |        |   |        | 1 |        | 0 |
      13.  |---|   14.  |-1-|   15.  |---|   16.  |---|
           | 1 |        |   |        | 1 |        |   |
            ---          ---          ---          ---

[See p. 62]




4.  Smaller Diagram.



Propositions to be represented.

                         -----------
                        |     |     |
                        |     x     |
                        |--y--|--y'-|
                        |     x'    |
                        |     |     |
                         -----------

__________


1.  All y are x.

2.  Some y are not-x.

3.  No not-x are not-y.

4.  Some x are not-y.

5.  Some not-y are x.

6.  No not-x are y.

7.  Some not-x are not-y.

8.  All not-x are not-y.

9.  Some not-y exist.

10.  No not-x exist.

11.  Some y are x, and some are not-x.

12.  All x are y, and all not-y are not-x.


[See pp. 62, 3]

Taking "nations" as Universe; x="civilised";
y="warlike";

13.  No uncivilised nation is warlike.

14.  All unwarlike nations are uncivilised.

15.  Some nations are unwarlike.

16.  All warlike nations are civilised, and all civilised nations
are warlike.

17.  No nation is uncivilised.

__________

Taking "crocodiles" as Universe; x="hungry"; and
y="amiable";

18.  All hungry crocodiles are unamiable.

19.  No crocodiles are amiable when hungry.

20.  Some crocodiles, when not hungry, are amiable; but some
are not.

21.  No crocodiles are amiable, and some are hungry.

22.  All crocodiles, when not hungry, are amiable; and all
unamiable crocodiles are hungry.

23.  Some hungry crocodiles are amiable, and some that are
not hungry are unamiable.

[See pp. 63, 4]




5.  Smaller Diagram.



Symbols to be interpreted.

__________


                          -----------
                         |     |     |
                         |     x     |
                         |--y--|--y'-|
                         |     x'    |
                         |     |     |
                          -----------

                          __________


                  -------             -------
                 |   |   |           |   |   |
             1.  |---|---|       2.  |---|---|
                 | 1 |   |           |   | 0 |
                  -------             -------

                  -------             -------
                 |   | 1 |           |   |   |
             3.  |---|---|       4.  |---|---|
                 |   | 0 |           | 0 | 0 |
                  -------             -------

__________

Taking "houses" as Universe; x="built of brick"; and
y="two-storied"; interpret

                  -------             -------
                 | 0 |   |           |   |   |
             5.  |---|---|       6.  |---|---|
                 | 0 |   |           |   -   |
                  -------             ---|---

                  -------             -------
                 |   | 0 |           |   |   |
             7.  |---|---|       8.  |---|---|
                 |   |   |           | 0 | 1 |
                  -------             -------

[See p. 65]

Taking "boys" as Universe; x="fat"; and y="active";
interpret

                  -------             -------
                 | 1 | 1 |           |   | 0 |
             9.  |---|---|      10.  |---|---|
                 |   |   |           |   | 1 |
                  -------             -------

                  -------             -------
                 | 0 | 1 |           | 1 |   |
            11.  |---|---|      12.  |---|---|
                 |   | 0 |           | 0 | 1 |
                  -------             -------

__________

Taking "cats" as Universe; x="green-eyed"; and
y="good-tempered"; interpret

                  -------             -------
                 | 0 | 0 |           |   | 1 |
            13.  |---|---|      14.  |---|---|
                 |   | 0 |           | 1 |   |
                  -------             -------

                  -------             -------
                 | 1 |   |           | 0 | 1 |
            15.  |---|---|      16.  |---|---|
                 |   | 0 |           | 1 | 0 |
                  -------             -------

[See pp. 65, 6]




6.  Larger Diagram.



Propositions to be represented.

__________


                         -----------
                        |     |     |
                        |   --x--   |
                        |  |  |  |  |
                        |--y--m--y'-|
                        |  |  |  |  |
                        |   --x'-   |
                        |     |     |
                         -----------

__________


1.  No x are m.

2.  Some y are m'.

3.  All m are x'.

4.  No m' are y'.

5.  No m are x; All y are m.

6.  Some x are m; No y are m.

7.  All m are x'; No m are y.

8.  No x' are m; No y' are m'.

[See pp. 67,8]

Taking "rabbits" as Universe; m="greedy"; x="old"; and
y="black"; represent

9.  No old rabbits are greedy.

10.  Some not-greedy rabbits are black.

11.  All white rabbits are free from greediness.

12.  All greedy rabbits are young.

13.  No old rabbits are greedy; All black rabbits are greedy.

14.  All rabbits, that are not greedy, are black; No old
rabbits are free from greediness.

__________

Taking "birds" as Universe; m="that sing loud"; x="well-fed";
and y="happy"; represent

15.  All well-fed birds sing loud; No birds, that sing loud,
are unhappy.

16.  All birds, that do not sing loud, are unhappy; No well-fed
birds fail to sing loud.

__________

Taking "persons" as Universe; m="in the house"; x="John";
and y="having a tooth-ache"; represent

17.  John is in the house; Everybody in the house is suffering
from tooth-ache.

18.  There is no one in the house but John; Nobody, out of
the house, has a tooth-ache.

__________

[See pp. 68-70]

Taking "persons" as Universe; m="I"; x="that has taken a
walk"; y="that feels better"; represent

19.  I have been out for a walk; I feel much better.

__________

Choosing your own 'Universe' &c., represent

20.  I sent him to bring me a kitten; He brought me a kettle
by mistake.


[See pp. 70, 1]




7.  Both Diagrams to be employed.

__________


                -----------
               |     |     |      -----------
               |   --x--   |     |     |     |
               |  |  |  |  |     |     x     |
               |--y--m--y'-|     |--y--|--y'-|
               |  |  |  |  |     |     x'    |
               |   --x'-   |     |     |     |
               |     |     |      -----------
                -----------

__________


N.B.  In each Question, a small Diagram should be drawn, for x and
y only, and marked in accordance with the given large Diagram: and
then as many Propositions as possible, for x and y, should be read
off from this small Diagram.


               -----------              -----------
              |0    |     |            |     |     |
              |   --|--   |            |   --|--   |
              |  |0 | 0|  |            |  |0 | 1|  |
          1.  |--|--|--|--|        2.  |--|--|--|--|
              |  |1 |  |  |            |  |0 |  |  |
              |   --|--   |            |   --|--   |
              |0    |     |            |     |     |
               -----------              -----------

[See p. 72]

               -----------              -----------
              |     |     |            |     |    0|
              |   --|--   |            |   --|--   |
              |  |0 | 0|  |            |  |  |  |  |
          3.  |--|--|--|--|        4.  |--|--|--|--|
              |  |1 | 0|  |            |  |0 |  |  |
              |   --|--   |            |   --|--   |
              |     |     |            |     |    0|
               -----------              -----------

__________


Mark, in a large Diagram, the following pairs of Propositions from
the preceding Section: then mark a small Diagram in accordance with
it, &c.

     5.  No. 13. [see p. 49]    9.  No. 17.
     6.  No. 14.               10.  No. 18.
     7.  No. 15.               11.  No. 19. [see p. 50]
     8.  No. 16.               12.  No. 20.

__________

Mark, on a large Diagram, the following Pairs of Propositions: then
mark a small Diagram, &c.  These are, in fact, Pairs of PREMISSES
for Syllogisms: and the results, read off from the small Diagram,
are the CONCLUSIONS.

13.  No exciting books suit feverish patients; Unexciting
books make one drowsy.

14.  Some, who deserve the fair, get their deserts; None
but the brave deserve the fair.

15.  No children are patient; No impatient person can sit
still.

[See pp. 72-5]

16.  All pigs are fat; No skeletons are fat.

17.  No monkeys are soldiers; All monkeys are mischievous.

18.  None of my cousins are just; No judges are unjust.

19.  Some days are rainy; Rainy days are tiresome.

20.  All medicine is nasty; Senna is a medicine.

21.  Some Jews are rich; All Patagonians are Gentiles.

22.  All teetotalers like sugar; No nightingale drinks wine.

23.  No muffins are wholesome; All buns are unwholesome.

24.  No fat creatures run well; Some greyhounds run well.

25.  All soldiers march; Some youths are not soldiers.

26.  Sugar is sweet; Salt is not sweet.

27.  Some eggs are hard-boiled; No eggs are uncrackable.

28.  There are no Jews in the house; There are no Gentiles
in the garden.

[See pp. 75-82]

29.  All battles are noisy; What makes no noise may escape
notice.

30.  No Jews are mad; All Rabbis are Jews.

31.  There are no fish that cannot swim; Some skates are
fish.

32.  All passionate people are unreasonable; Some orators
are passionate.




[See pp. 82-84]





CHAPTER III.

CROOKED ANSWERS.

            "I answered him, as I thought good,
             'As many as red-herrings grow in the wood'."

__________






1.  Elementary.



1.  Whatever can be "attributed to", that is "said to belong to",
a Thing, is called an 'Attribute'.  For example, "baked", which
can (frequently) be attributed to "Buns", and "beautiful", which
can (seldom) be attributed to "Babies".

2.  When they are the Names of two Things (for example, "these
Pigs are fat Animals"), or of two Attributes (for example, "pink
is light red").

3.  When one is the Name of a Thing, and the other the Name of an
Attribute (for example, "these Pigs are pink"), since a Thing cannot
actually BE an Attribute.

4.  That the Substantive shall be supposed to be repeated at the
end of the sentence (for example, "these Pigs are pink (Pigs)").

5.  A 'Proposition' is a sentence stating that some, or none, or all,
of the Things belonging to a certain class, called the 'Subject',
are also Things belonging to a certain other class, called the
'Predicate'.  For example, "some new Cakes are not nice", that is
(written in full) "some new Cakes are not nice Cakes"; where the
class "new Cakes" is the Subject, and the class "not-nice Cakes"
is the Predicate.

6.  A Proposition, stating that SOME of the Things belonging to
its Subject are so-and-so, is called 'Particular'.  For example,
"some new Cakes are nice", "some new Cakes are not nice."

A Proposition, stating that NONE of the Things belonging to its
Subject, or that ALL of them, are so-and-so, is called 'Universal'.
For example, "no new Cakes are nice", "all new Cakes are not nice".

7.  The Things in each compartment possess TWO Attributes, whose
symbols will be found written on two of the EDGES of that compartment.

8.  "One or more."

9.  As a name of the class of Things to which the whole Diagram is
assigned.

10.  A Proposition containing two statements.  For example, "some
new Cakes are nice and some are not-nice."

11.  When the whole class, thus divided, is "exhausted" among the
sets into which it is divided, there being no member of it which
does not belong to some one of them.  For example, the class "new
Cakes" is "exhaustively" divided into "nice" and "not-nice" since
EVERY new Cake must be one or the other.

12.  When a man cannot make up his mind which of two parties he
will join, he is said to be "sitting on the fence"--not being able
to decide on which side he will jump down.

13.  "Some x are y" and "no x are y'".

14.  A Proposition, whose Subject is a single Thing, is called
'Individual'.  For example, "I am happy", "John is not at home".
These are Universal Propositions, being the same as "all the I's
that exist are happy", "ALL the Johns, that I am now considering,
are not at home".

15.  Propositions beginning with "some" or "all".

16.  When they begin with "some" or "no".  For example, "some
abc are def" may be re-arranged as "some bf are acde", each being
equivalent to "some abcdef exist".

17.  Some tigers are fierce, No tigers are not-fierce.

18.  Some hard-boiled eggs are unwholesome, No hard-boiled
eggs are wholesome.

19.  Some I's are happy, No I's are unhappy.

20.  Some Johns are not at home, No Johns are at home.

21.  The Things, in each compartment of the larger Diagram, possess
THREE Attributes, whose symbols will be found written at three of
the CORNERS of the compartment (except in the case of m', which is
not actually inserted in the Diagram, but is SUPPOSED to stand at
each of its four outer corners).

22.  If the Universe of Things be divided with regard to three
different Attributes; and if two Propositions be given, containing
two different couples of these Attributes; and if from these we
can prove a third Proposition, containing the two Attributes that
have not yet occurred together; the given Propositions are called
'the Premisses', the third one 'the Conclusion', and the whole set
'a Syllogism'.  For example, the Premisses might be "no m are x'"
and "all m' are y"; and it might be possible to prove from them
a Conclusion containing x and y.

23.  If an Attribute occurs in both Premisses, the Term containing
it is called 'the Middle Term'.  For example, if the Premisses are
"some m are x" and "no m are y'", the class of "m-Things" is 'the
Middle Term.'

If an Attribute occurs in one Premiss, and its contradictory in the
other, the Terms containing them may be called 'the Middle Terms'.
For example, if the Premisses are "no m are x'" and "all m' are
y", the two classes of "m-Things" and "m'-Things" may be called
'the Middle Terms'.

24.  Because they can be marked with CERTAINTY: whereas AFFIRMATIVE
Propositions (that is, those that begin with "some" or "all")
sometimes require us to place a red counter 'sitting on a fence'.

25.  Because the only question we are concerned with is whether the
Conclusion FOLLOWS LOGICALLY from the Premisses, so that, if THEY
were true, IT also would be true.

26.  By understanding a red counter to mean "this compartment CAN
be occupied", and a grey one to mean "this compartment CANNOT be
occupied" or "this compartment MUST be empty".

27.  'Fallacious Premisses' and 'Fallacious Conclusion'.

28.  By finding, when we try to transfer marks from the larger
Diagram to the smaller, that there is 'no information' for any of
its four compartments.

29.  By finding the correct Conclusion, and then observing that
the Conclusion, offered to us, is neither identical with it nor a
part of it.

30.  When the offered Conclusion is PART of the correct Conclusion.
In this case, we may call it a 'Defective Conclusion'.




2.  Half of Smaller Diagram.



Propositions represented.

__________


                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             1.  |   | 1 |      2.  | 0 | 1 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------


                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             3.  | 1 | 1 |      4.  | 0 | 0 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

                  -------            -------
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
             5.  |   1   |      6.  |   | 0 |
                 |   |   |          |   |   |
                  -------            -------

       -------
      |   |   |
  7.  | 1 | 1 |  It might be thought that the proper
      |   |   |
       -------     -------
                  |   |   |
Diagram would be  |   1 1 |, in order to express "some
                  |   |   |
                   -------
x exist": but this is really contained in "some x are y'."
To put a red counter on the division-line would only tell
us "ONE OF THE compartments is occupied", which we
know already, in knowing that ONE is occupied.
                          -------
                         |   |   |
  8.  No x are y.  i.e.  | 0 |   |
                         |   |   |
                          -------

                             -------
                            |   |   |
  9.  Some x are y'.  i.e.  |   | 1 |
                            |   |   |
                             -------

                           -------
                          |   |   |
 10.  All x are y.  i.e.  | 1 | 0 |
                          |   |   |
                           -------

                            -------
                           |   |   |
 11.  Some x are y.  i.e.  | 1 |   |
                           |   |   |
                            -------

                          -------
                         |   |   |
 12.  No x are y.  i.e.  | 0 |   |
                         |   |   |
                          -------

                                             -------
                                            |   |   |
 13.  Some x are y, and some are y'.  i.e.  | 1 | 1 |
                                            |   |   |
                                             -------

                            -------
                           |   |   |
 14.  All x are y'.  i.e.  | 0 | 1 |
                           |   |   |
                            -------
                          ---
                         |   |
 15. No y are x'.  i.e.  |---|
                         | 0 |
                          ---

                          ---
                         | 1 |
 16. All y are x.  i.e.  |---|
                         | 0 |
                          ---

                         ---
                        | 0 |
 17. No y exist.  i.e.  |---|
                        | 0 |
                         ---

                            ---
                           |   |
 18. Some y are x'.  i.e.  |---|
                           | 1 |
                            ---

                           ---
                          |   |
 15. Some y exist.  i.e.  |-1-|
                          |   |
                           ---




3.  Half of Smaller Diagram.



Symbols interpreted.

__________

1.  No x are y'.

2.  No x exist.

3.  Some x exist.

4.  All x are y'.

5.  Some x are y.  i.e. Some good riddles are hard.

6.  All x are y.  i.e. All good riddles are hard.

7.  No x exist.  i.e. No riddles are good.

8.  No x are y.  i.e. No good riddles are hard.

9.  Some x are y'.  i.e. Some lobsters are unselfish.

10.  No x are y.  i.e. No lobsters are selfish.

11.  All x are y'.  i.e. All lobsters are unselfish.

12.  Some x are y, and some are y'.  i.e. Some lobsters are
selfish, and some are unselfish.

13.  All y' are x'.  i.e. All invalids are unhappy.

14.  Some y' exist.  i.e. Some people are unhealthy.

15.  Some y' are x, and some are x'.  i.e. Some invalids are
happy, and some are unhappy.

16.  No y' exist.  i.e. Nobody is unhealthy.





4.  Smaller Diagram.



Propositions represented.

__________

                   -------               -------
                  | 1 |   |             |   |   |
              1.  |---|---|         2.  |---|---|
                  | 0 |   |             | 1 |   |
                   -------               -------

                   -------               -------
                  |   |   |             |   | 1 |
              3.  |---|---|         4.  |---|---|
                  |   | 0 |             |   |   |
                   -------               -------

                   -------               -------
                  |   | 1 |             |   |   |
              5.  |---|---|         6.  |---|---|
                  |   |   |             | 0 |   |
                   -------               -------

                   -------               -------
                  |   |   |             |   |   |
              7.  |---|---|         8.  |---|---|
                  |   | 1 |             | 0 | 1 |
                   -------               -------

                   -------               -------
                  |   |   |             |   |   |
              9.  |---|-1-|        10.  |---|---|
                  |   |   |             | 0 | 0 |
                   -------               -------

                   -------               -------
                  | 1 |   |             | 1 | 0 |
             11.  |---|---|        12.  |---|---|
                  | 1 |   |             |   | 1 |
                   -------               -------


                           -------
                          |   |   |
 13.  No x' are y.  i.e.  |---|---|
                          | 0 |   |
                           -------

                             -------
                            |   | 0 |
 14.  All y' are x'.  i.e.  |---|---|
                            |   | 1 |
                             -------


                             -------
                            |   |   |
 15.  Some y' exist.  i.e.  |---|-1-|
                            |   |   |
                             -------

                                            -------
                                           | 1 | 0 |
 16.  All y are x, and all x are y.  i.e.  |---|---|
                                           | 0 |   |
                                            -------
                           -------
                          |   |   |
 17.  No x' exist.  i.e.  |---|---|
                          | 0 | 0 |
                           -------

                            -------
                           | 0 | 1 |
 18.  All x are y'.  i.e.  |---|---|
                           |   |   |
                            -------

                          -------
                         | 0 |   |
 19.  No x are y.  i.e.  |---|---|
                         |   |   |
                          -------


                                              -------
                                             |   |   |
 20.  Some x' are y, and some are y'.  i.e.  |---|---|
                                             | 1 | 1 |
                                              -------

                                            -------
                                           | 0 | 1 |
 21.  No y exist, and some x exist.  i.e.  |---|---|
                                           | 0 |   |
                                            -------

                                              -------
                                             |   | 1 |
 22.  All x' are y, and all y' are x.  i.e.  |---|---|
                                             | 1 | 0 |
                                              -------

                                                -------
                                               | 1 |   |
 17.  Some x are y, and some x' are y'.  i.e.  |---|---|
                                               |   | 1 |
                                                -------





5.  Smaller Diagram.



Symbols interpreted.

__________


1.  Some y are not-x, or, Some not-x are y.

2.  No not-x are not-y, or, No not-y are not-x.

3.  No not-y are x.

4.  No not-x exist.  i.e.  No Things are not-x.

5.  No y exist.  i.e.  No houses are two-storied.

6.  Some x' exist.  i.e.  Some houses are not built of brick.

7.  No x are y'.  Or, no y' are x.  i.e.  No houses, built of
brick, are other than two-storied.  Or, no houses, that
are not two-storied, are built of brick.

8.  All x' are y'.  i.e.  All houses, that are not built of
brick, are not two-storied.

9.  Some x are y, and some are y'.  i.e.  Some fat boys are
active, and some are not.

10.  All y' are x'.  i.e.  All lazy boys are thin.

11.  All x are y', and all y' are x.  i.e.  All fat boys
are lazy, and all lazy ones are fat.

12.  All y are x, and all x' are y.  i.e.  All active boys
are fat, and all thin ones are lazy.

13.  No x exist, and no y' exist.  i.e.  No cats have green eyes,
and none have bad tempers.

14.  Some x are y', and some x' are y.  Or some y are x', and
some y' are x.  i.e.  Some green-eyed cats are bad-tempered,
and some, that have not green eyes, are good-tempered.
Or, some good-tempered cats have not green eyes, and some
bad-tempered ones have green eyes.

15.  Some x are y, and no x' are y'.  Or, some y are x, and
no y' are x'.  i.e.  Some green-eyed cats are good-tempered, and
none, that are not green-eyed, are bad-tempered.  Or, some
good-tempered cats have green eyes, and none, that are
bad-tempered, have not green eyes.

16.  All x are y', and all x' are y.  Or, all y are x', and all
y' are x.  i.e.  All green-eyed cats are bad-tempered and
all, that have not green eyes, are good-tempered.  Or, all
good-tempered ones have eyes that are not green, and all
bad-tempered ones have green eyes.




6.  Larger Diagram.



Propositions represented.

__________

             ---------------               ---------------
            |       |       |             |       |       |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |   | 0 | 0 |   |             |   |   |   |   |
        1.  |---|---|---|---|         2.  |-1-|---|---|---|
            |   |   |   |   |             |   |   |   |   |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |       |       |             |       |       |
             ---------------               ---------------


             ---------------               ---------------
            |       |       |             |       |     0 |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |   | 0 | 0 |   |             |   |   |   |   |
        3.  |---|---|---|---|         4.  |---|---|---|---|
            |   |   -   |   |             |   |   |   |   |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |       |       |             |       |     0 |
             ---------------               ---------------


             ---------------               ---------------
            | 0     |       |             |       |       |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |   | 0 | 0 |   |             |   | 0 | 1 |   |
        5.  |---|---|---|---|         6.  |---|---|---|---|
            |   | 1 |   |   |             |   | 0 |   |   |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            | 0     |       |             |       |       |
             ---------------               ---------------


             ---------------               ---------------
            |       |       |             |       |     0 |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |   | 0 | 0 |   |             |   |   |   |   |
        7.  |---|---|---|---|         8.  |---|---|---|---|
            |   | 0 | 1 |   |             |   | 0 | 0 |   |
            |    ---|---    |             |    ---|---    |
            |       |       |             |       |     0 |
             ---------------               ---------------


                          ---------------
                         |       |       |
                         |    ---|---    |
                         |   | 0 | 0 |   |
  9.  No x are m.  i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
                         |   | 0 |   |   |
                         |    ---|---    |
                         |       |       |
                          ---------------


                             ---------------
                            |       |       |
                            |    ---|---    |
                            |   |   |   |   |
 10.  Some m' are y.  i.e.  |-1-|---|---|---|
                            |   |   |   |   |
                            |    ---|---    |
                            |       |       |
                             ---------------


                             ---------------
                            |       |       |
                            |    ---|---    |
                            |   |   | 0 |   |
 11.  All y' are m'.  i.e.  |---|---|---|-1-|
                            |   |   | 0 |   |
                            |    ---|---    |
                            |       |       |
                             ---------------

                            ---------------
                           |       |       |
                           |    ---|---    |
                           |   | 0 | 0 |   |
 12.  All m are x'.  i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
                           |   |   1   |   |
                           |    ---|---    |
                           |       |       |
                            ---------------

                               ---------------
                              | 0     |       |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |   | 0 | 0 |   |
 13.  No x are m;       i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      All y are m.            |   | 1 |   |   |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              | 0     |       |
                               ---------------

                                ---------------
                               | 0     |     0 |
                               |    ---|---    |
                               |   |   |   |   |
 14.  All m' are y;      i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      No x are m'.             |   |   |   |   |
                               |    ---|---    |
                               | 1     |     0 |
                                ---------------


                               ---------------
                              | 0     |     0 |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |   | 1 | 0 |   |
 15.  All x are m;      i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      No m are y'.            |   |   | 0 |   |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |       |       |
                               ---------------

                                 ---------------
                                | 0     |     0 |
                                |    ---|---    |
                                |   |   |   |   |
 16.  All m' are y';      i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      No x are m'.              |   |   |   |   |
                                |    ---|---    |
                                | 0     |     1 |
                                 ---------------

                                ---------------
                               | 0     |     0 |
                               |    ---|---    |
                               |   | 1 | 0 |   |
 17.  All x are m;       i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      All m are y.             |   |   | 0 |   |
                               |    ---|---    |
[See remarks on No. 7, p. 60.] |       |       |
                                ---------------

                               ---------------
                              | 0     |       |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |   |   |   |   |
 18.  No x' are m;      i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      No m' are y.            |   | 0 | 0 |   |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              | 0     |       |
                               ---------------

                               ---------------
                              |       |       |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |   | 1 | 0 |   |
 19.  All m are x;      i.e.  |---|---|---|---|
      All m are y.            |   | 0 | 0 |   |
                              |    ---|---    |
                              |       |       |
                               ---------------

  20.  We had better take "persons" as Universe.  We
may choose "myself" as 'Middle Term', in which case
the Premisses will take the form

  I am a-person-who-sent-him-to-bring-a-kitten;
  I am a-person-to-whom-he-brought-a-kettle-by-mistake.

Or we may choose "he" as 'Middle Term', in which case the Premisses
will take the form

  He is a-person-whom-I-sent-to-bring-me-a-kitten;
  He is a-person-who-brought-me-a-kettle-by-mistake.

The latter form seems best, as the interest of the anecdote clearly
depends on HIS stupidity--not on what happened to ME.  Let us then
make m = "he"; x = "persons whom I sent, &c."; and y = "persons
who brought, &c."

  Hence, All m are x;
         All m are y.    and the required Diagram is


                      ---------------
                     |       |       |
                     |    ---|---    |
                     |   | 1 | 0 |   |
                     |---|---|---|---|
                     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
                     |    ---|---    |
                     |       |       |
                      ---------------




7.  Both Diagrams employed.

       -------
      | 0 |   |
  1.  |---|---|  i.e.  All y are x'.
      | 1 |   |
       -------

       -------
      |   | 1 |
  2.  |---|---|  i.e.  Some x are y'; or, Some y' are x.
      |   |   |
       -------

       -------
      |   |   |
  3.  |---|---|  i.e.  Some y are x'; or, Some x' are y.
      | 1 |   |
       -------

       -------
      |   |   |
  4.  |---|---|  i.e.  No x' are y'; or, No y' are x'.
      |   | 0 |
       -------

       -------
      | 0 |   |
  5.  |---|---|  i.e.  All y are x'.  i.e.  All black rabbits
      | 1 |   |        are young.
       -------

       -------
      |   |   |
  6.  |---|---|  i.e.  Some y are x'.  i.e. Some black
      | 1 |   |        rabbits are young.
       -------

       -------
      | 1 | 0 |
  7.  |---|---|  i.e.  All x are y.  i.e. All well-fed birds
      |   |   |        are happy.
       -------


       -------
      |   |   |  i.e.  Some x' are y'.  i.e.  Some birds,
  8.  |---|---|        that are not well-fed, are unhappy;
      |   | 1 |        or, Some unhappy birds are not
       -------         well-fed.


       -------
      | 1 | 0 |
  9.  |---|---|  i.e.  All x are y.  i.e.  John has got a
      |   |   |        tooth-ache.
       -------


       -------
      |   |   |
 10.  |---|---|  i.e.  No x' are y.  i.e.  No one, but John,
      | 0 |   |        has got a tooth-ache.
       -------


       -------
      | 1 |   |
 11.  |---|---|  i.e.  Some x are y.  i.e. Some one, who
      |   |   |        has taken a walk, feels better.
       -------


       -------
      | 1 |   |  i.e.  Some x are y.  i.e.  Some one,
 12.  |---|---|        whom I sent to bring me a kitten,
      |   |   |        brought me a kettle by mistake.
       -------

      ---------------
     |       |     0 |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
13.  |-1-|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       |   | 0 |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |     0 |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------


        Let "books" be Universe; m="exciting",
    x="that suit feverish patients"; y="that make
                     one drowsy".

        No m are x; &there4 No y' are x.
        All m' are y.

  i.e.  No books suit feverish patients, except such as make
        one drowsy.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 1 | 0 |   |
14.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   | 0 |   |       | 1 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------


Let "persons" be Universe; m="that deserve the fair";
      x="that get their deserts"; y="brave".

        Some m are x; &there4 Some y are x.
        No y' are m.

      i.e. Some brave persons get their deserts.

      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
15.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       | 0 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

        Let "persons" be Universe; m="patient";
         x="children"; y="that can sit still".

          No x are m; &there4 No x are y.
          No m' are y.

           i.e.  No children can sit still.


      ---------------
     | 0     |     0 |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 1 |   |
16.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 |   |   |       | 0 | 1 |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------


     Let "things" be Universe; m="fat"; x="pigs";
         y="skeletons".

          All x are m; &there4 All x are y'.
          No y are m.

           i.e.  All pigs are not-skeletons.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
17.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 1 | 0 |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------

      Let "creatures" be Universe; m="monkeys";
          x="soldiers"; y="mischievous".

           No m are x; &there4 Some y are x'.
           All m are y.

      i.e.  Some mischievous creatures are not soldiers.


      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
18.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       | 0 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "persons" be Universe; m="just";
         x="my cousins"; y="judges".

          No x are m; &there4 No x are y.
          No y are m'.

              i.e.  None of my cousins are judges.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 1 | 0 |   |
19.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       | 1 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "periods" be Universe; m="days";
            x="rainy"; y="tiresome".

         Some m are x; &there4 Some x are y.
         All xm are y.

              i.e.  Some rainy periods are tiresome.

N.B.  These are not legitimate Premisses, since the
Conclusion is really part of the second Premiss, so that the
first Premiss is superfluous.  This may be shown, in letters,
thus:--

"All xm are y" contains "Some xm are y", which
contains "Some x are y".  Or, in words, "All rainy days
are tiresome" contains "Some rainy days are tiresome",
which contains "Some rainy periods are tiresome".

Moreover, the first Premiss, besides being superfluous, is
actually contained in the second; since it is equivalent to
"Some rainy days exist", which, as we know, is implied in
the Proposition "All rainy days are tiresome".

Altogether, a most unsatisfactory Pair of Premisses!

      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 1 |   |   |
20.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |       | 1 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       | 0 |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "things" be Universe; m="medicine";
                x="nasty"; y="senna".

             All m are x; &there4 All y are x.
             All y are m.

                    i.e.  Senna is nasty.

                         [See remarks on No. 7, p 60.]

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 1 |   |
21.  |-1-|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 |   |   |       |   | 1 |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

        Let "persons" be Universe; m="Jews";
             x="rich"; y="Patagonians".

              Some m are x; &there4 Some x are y'.
              All y are m'.

  i.e.  Some rich persons are not Patagonians.

      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   |   -   |   |
22.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       | 0 |   |
      ---------------         -------

   Let "creatures" be Universe; m="teetotalers";
       x="that like sugar"; y="nightingales".

            All m are x; &there4 No y are x'.
            No y are m'.

        i.e.  No nightingales dislike sugar.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
23.  |-1-|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 |   |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

        Let "food" be Universe; m="wholesome";
                 x="muffins"; y="buns".

                      No x are m;
                      All y are m.

  There is 'no information' for the smaller Diagram; so
no Conclusion can be drawn.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
24.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 1 |   |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------

  Let "creatures" be Universe; m="that run well";
              x="fat"; y="greyhounds".

           No x are m; &there4 Some y are x'.
           Some y are m.

               i.e.  Some greyhounds are not fat.


      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   |   -   |   |
25.  |-1-|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "persons" be Universe; m="soldiers";
             x="that march"; y="youths".

                  All m are x;
                  Some y are m'.

  There is 'no information' for the smaller Diagram; so
no Conclusion can be drawn.

      ---------------
     | 0     |     0 |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 1 |   |
26.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 |   |   |       | 0 | 1 |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 1     |       |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------


          Let "food" be Universe; m="sweet";
               x="sugar"; y="salt".

          All x are m;     &there4      All x are y'.
          All y are m'.                 All y are x'.


                  i.e.   Sugar is not salt.
                         Salt is not sugar.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 1 | 0 |   |
27.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   | 0 |   |       | 1 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "Things" be Universe; m="eggs";
         x="hard-boiled"; y="crackable".

          Some m are x; &there4 Some x are y.
          No m are y'.

  i.e.  Some hard-boiled things can be cracked.

      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
28.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       | 0 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

Let "persons" be Universe; m="Jews"; x="that
  are in the house"; y="that are in the garden".

             No m are x; &there4 No x are y.
             No m' are y.

  i.e.  No persons, that are in the house, are also in
                      the garden.


      ---------------
     | 0     |     0 |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   |   -   |   |
29.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   |   |   |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 1     |     0 |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------


         Let "Things" be Universe; m="noisy";
        x="battles"; y="that may escape notice".

              All x are m; &there4 Some x' are y.
              All m' are y.

  i.e.  Some things, that are not battles, may escape notice.

      ---------------
     | 0     |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
30.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 1 |   |   |       | 0 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     | 0     |       |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------

         Let "persons" be Universe; m="Jews";
               x="mad"; y="Rabbis".

            No m are x; &there4 All y are x'.
            All y are m.

                   i.e.  All Rabbis are sane.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 1 |   |   |
31.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |       | 1 |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       |   |   |
      ---------------         -------

       Let "Things" be Universe; m="fish";
         x="that can swim"; y="skates".

          No m are x'; &there4 Some y are x.
          Some y are m.

            i.e.  Some skates can swim.

      ---------------
     |       |       |
     |    ---|---    |
     |   | 0 | 0 |   |
32.  |---|---|---|---|        -------
     |   | 1 |   |   |       |   |   |
     |    ---|---    |       |---|---|
     |       |       |       | 1 |   |
      ---------------         -------

  Let "people" be Universe; m="passionate";
        x="reasonable"; y="orators".

         All m are x'; &there4 Some y are x'.
         Some y are m.

       i.e.  Some orators are unreasonable.

                        [See remarks on No. 7, p. 60.]







CHAPTER IV.

HIT OR MISS.


         "Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
          Thou canst not hit it, my good man."

__________


1.  Pain is wearisome; No pain is eagerly wished for.

2.  No bald person needs a hair-brush; No lizards have hair.

3.  All thoughtless people do mischief; No thoughtful person
forgets a promise.

4.  I do not like John; Some of my friends like John.

5.  No potatoes are pine-apples; All pine-apples are nice.

6.  No pins are ambitious; No needles are pins.

7.  All my friends have colds; No one can sing who has a cold.

8.  All these dishes are well-cooked; Some dishes are unwholesome
if not well-cooked.

9.  No medicine is nice; Senna is a medicine.

10.  Some oysters are silent; No silent creatures are amusing.

11.  All wise men walk on their feet; All unwise men walk on
their hands.

12.  "Mind your own business; This quarrel is no business of
yours."

13.  No bridges are made of sugar; Some bridges are picturesque.

14.  No riddles interest me that can be solved; All these
riddles are insoluble.

15.  John is industrious; All industrious people are happy.

16.  No frogs write books; Some people use ink in writing
books.

17.  No pokers are soft; All pillows are soft.

18.  No antelope is ungraceful; Graceful animals delight the
eye.

19.  Some uncles are ungenerous; All merchants are generous.

20.  No unhappy people chuckle; No happy people groan.

21.  Audible music causes vibration in the air; Inaudible
music is not worth paying for.

22.  He gave me five pounds; I was delighted.

23.  No old Jews are fat millers; All my friends are old
millers.

24.  Flour is good for food; Oatmeal is a kind of flour.

25.  Some dreams are terrible; No lambs are terrible.

26.  No rich man begs in the street; All who are not rich
should keep accounts.

27.  No thieves are honest; Some dishonest people are found
out.

28.  All wasps are unfriendly; All puppies are friendly.

29.  All improbable stories are doubted; None of these
stories are probable.

30.  "He told me you had gone away."  "He never says one word
of truth."

31.  His songs never last an hour; A song, that lasts an
hour, is tedious.

32.  No bride-cakes are wholesome; Unwholesome food should
be avoided.

33.  No old misers are cheerful; Some old misers are thin.

34.  All ducks waddle; Nothing that waddles is graceful.

35.  No Professors are ignorant; Some ignorant people are
conceited.

36.  Toothache is never pleasant; Warmth is never unpleasant.

37.  Bores are terrible; You are a bore.

38.  Some mountains are insurmountable; All stiles can be
surmounted.

39.  No Frenchmen like plumpudding; All Englishmen like
plumpudding.

40.  No idlers win fame; Some painters are not idle.

41.  No lobsters are unreasonable; No reasonable creatures
expect impossibilities.

42.  No kind deed is unlawful; What is lawful may be done
without fear.

43.  No fossils can be crossed in love; Any oyster may be
crossed in love.

44.  "This is beyond endurance!" "Well, nothing beyond
endurance has ever happened to me."

45.  All uneducated men are shallow; All these students are
educated.

46.  All my cousins are unjust; No judges are unjust.

47.  No country, that has been explored, is infested
by dragons; Unexplored countries are fascinating.

48.  No misers are generous; Some old men are not generous.

49.  A prudent man shuns hyaenas; No banker is imprudent.

50.  Some poetry is original; No original work is producible
at will.

51.  No misers are unselfish; None but misers save egg-shells.

52.  All pale people are phlegmatic; No one, who is not
pale, looks poetical.

53.  All spiders spin webs; Some creatures, that do not spin
webs, are savage.

54.  None of my cousins are just; All judges are just.

55.  John is industrious; No industrious people are unhappy.

56.  Umbrellas are useful on a journey; What is useless on
a journey should be left behind.

57.  Some pillows are soft; No pokers are soft.

58.  I am old and lame; No old merchant is a lame gambler.

59.  No eventful journey is ever forgotten; Uneventful
journeys are not worth writing a book about.

60.  Sugar is sweet; Some sweet things are liked by children.

61.  Richard is out of temper; No one but Richard can ride
that horse.

62.  All jokes are meant to amuse; No Act of Parliament is
a joke.

63.  "I saw it in a newspaper." "All newspapers tell lies."

64.  No nightmare is pleasant; Unpleasant experiences are
not anxiously desired.

65.  Prudent travellers carry plenty of small change; Imprudent
travellers lose their luggage.

66.  All wasps are unfriendly; No puppies are unfriendly.

67.  He called here yesterday; He is no friend of mine.

68.  No quadrupeds can whistle; Some cats are quadrupeds.

69.  No cooked meat is sold by butchers; No uncooked meat
is served at dinner.

70.  Gold is heavy; Nothing but gold will silence him.

71.  Some pigs are wild; There are no pigs that are not fat.

72.  No emperors are dentists; All dentists are dreaded by
children.

73.  All, who are not old, like walking; Neither you nor I
are old.

74.  All blades are sharp; Some grasses are blades.

75.  No dictatorial person is popular; She is dictatorial.

76.  Some sweet things are unwholesome; No muffins are sweet.

77.  No military men write poetry; No generals are civilians.

78.  Bores are dreaded; A bore is never begged to prolong
his visit.

79.  All owls are satisfactory; Some excuses are unsatisfactory.

80.  All my cousins are unjust; All judges are just.

81.  Some buns are rich; All buns are nice.

82.  No medicine is nice; No pills are unmedicinal.

83.  Some lessons are difficult; What is difficult needs
attention.

84.  No unexpected pleasure annoys me; Your visit is an
unexpected pleasure.

85.  Caterpillars are not eloquent; Jones is eloquent.

86.  Some bald people wear wigs; All your children have
hair.

87.  All wasps are unfriendly; Unfriendly creatures are
always unwelcome.

88.  No bankrupts are rich; Some merchants are not bankrupts.

89.  Weasels sometimes sleep; All animals sometimes sleep.

90.  Ill-managed concerns are unprofitable; Railways are
never ill-managed.

91.  Everybody has seen a pig; Nobody admires a pig.

______________


Extract a Pair of Premisses out of each of the following: and
deduce the Conclusion, if there is one:--

92.  "The Lion, as any one can tell you who has been chased by them
as often as I have, is a very savage animal: and there are certain
individuals among them, though I will not guarantee it as a general
law, who do not drink coffee."

93.  "It was most absurd of you to offer it!  You might have known,
if you had had any sense, that no old sailors ever like gruel!"

"But I thought, as he was an uncle of yours--"

"An uncle of mine, indeed!  Stuff!"

"You may call it stuff, if you like.  All I know is, MY uncles are
all old men: and they like gruel like anything!"

"Well, then YOUR uncles are--"

94.  "Do come away!  I can't stand this squeezing any more.  No
crowded shops are comfortable, you know very well."

"Well, who expects to be comfortable, out shopping?"

"Why, I do, of course!  And I'm sure there are some shops, further
down the street, that are not crowded.  So--"

95.  "They say no doctors are metaphysical organists: and that lets
me into a little fact about YOU, you know."

"Why, how do you make THAT out?  You never heard me play the organ."

"No, doctor, but I've heard you talk about Browning's poetry: and
that showed me that you're METAPHYSICAL, at any rate.  So--"

___________________

Extract a Syllogism out of each of the following: and
test its correctness:--

96.  "Don't talk to me!  I've known more rich merchants than you
have: and I can tell you not ONE of them was ever an old miser
since the world began!"

"And what has that got to do with old Mr. Brown?"

"Why, isn't he very rich?"

"Yes, of course he is.  And what then?"

"Why, don't you see that it's absurd to call him a miserly merchant?
Either he's not a merchant, or he's not a miser!"

97.  "It IS so kind of you to enquire!  I'm really feeling a great
deal better to-day."

"And is it Nature, or Art, that is to have the credit of this happy
change?"

"Art, I think.  The Doctor has given me some of that patent medicine
of his."

"Well, I'll never call him a humbug again.  There's SOMEBODY, at
any rate, that feels better after taking his medicine!"

98.  "No, I don't like you one bit.  And I'll go and play with my
doll.  DOLLS are never unkind."

"So you like a doll better than a cousin?  Oh you little silly!"

"Of course I do!  COUSINS are never kind--at least no cousins I've
ever seen."

"Well, and what does THAT prove, I'd like to know!  If you mean
that cousins aren't dolls, who ever said they were?"

99.  "What are you talking about geraniums for?  You can't tell
one flower from another, at this distance!  I grant you they're
all RED flowers: it doesn't need a telescope to know THAT."

"Well, some geraniums are red, aren't they?"

"I don't deny it.  And what then?  I suppose you'll be telling me
some of those flowers are geraniums!"

"Of course that's what I should tell you, if you'd the sense to
follow an argument!  But what's the good of proving anything to
YOU, I should like to know?"

100.  "Boys, you've passed a fairly good examination, all things
considered.  Now let me give you a word of advice before I go.
Remember that all, who are really anxious to learn, work HARD."

"I thank you, Sir, in the name of my scholars!  And proud am I to
think there are SOME of them, at least, that are really ANXIOUS to
learn."

"Very glad to hear it: and how do you make it out to be so?"

"Why, Sir, I know how hard they work--some of them, that is.  Who
should know better?"

___________________

Extract from the following speech a series of Syllogisms, or
arguments having the form of Syllogisms: and test their correctness.

It is supposed to be spoken by a fond mother, in answer to a friend's
cautious suggestion that she is perhaps a LITTLE overdoing it, in
the way of lessons, with her children.

101.  "Well, they've got their own way to make in the world.  WE
can't leave them a fortune apiece.  And money's not to be had, as
YOU know, without money's worth: they must WORK if they want to
live.  And how are they to work, if they don't know anything?  Take
my word for it, there's no place for ignorance in THESE times!  And
all authorities agree that the time to learn is when you're young.
One's got no memory afterwards, worth speaking of.  A child will
learn more in an hour than a grown man in five.  So those, that
have to learn, must learn when they're young, if ever they're to
learn at all.  Of course that doesn't do unless children are HEALTHY:
I quite allow THAT.  Well, the doctor tells me no children are
healthy unless they've got a good colour in their cheeks.  And only
just look at my darlings!  Why, their cheeks bloom like peonies!
Well, now, they tell me that, to keep children in health, you
should never give them more than six hours altogether at lessons
in the day, and at least two half-holidays in the week.  And that's
EXACTLY our plan I can assure you!  We never go beyond six hours,
and every Wednesday and Saturday, as ever is, not one syllable of
lessons do they do after their one o'clock dinner!  So how you can
imagine I'm running any risk in the education of my precious pets
is more than I can understand, I promise you!"





FEEDING THE MIND


Breakfast, dinner, tea; in extreme cases, breakfast, luncheon, dinner,
tea, supper, and a glass of something hot at bedtime. What care we take
about feeding the lucky body! Which of us does as much for his mind? And
what causes the difference? Is the body so much the more important of the
two?

By no means: but life depends on the body being fed, whereas we can
continue to exist as animals (scarcely as men) though the mind be
utterly starved and neglected. Therefore Nature provides that, in case of
serious neglect of the body, such terrible consequences of discomfort and
pain shall ensue, as will soon bring us back to a sense of our duty: and
some of the functions necessary to life she does for us altogether,
leaving us no choice in the matter. It would fare but ill with many of us
if we were left to superintend our own digestion and circulation. 'Bless
me!' one would cry, 'I forgot to wind up my heart this morning! To think
that it has been standing still for the last three hours!' 'I can't walk
with you this afternoon,' a friend would say, 'as I have no less than
eleven dinners to digest. I had to let them stand over from last week,
being so busy, and my doctor says he will not answer for the consequences
if I wait any longer!'

Well, it is, I say, for us that the consequences of neglecting the body
can be clearly seen and felt; and it might be well for some if the mind
were equally visible and tangible--if we could take it, say, to the
doctor, and have its pulse felt.

'Why, what have you been doing with this mind lately? How have you fed it?
It looks pale, and the pulse is very slow.'

'Well, doctor, it has not had much regular food lately. I gave it a lot of
sugar-plums yesterday.'

'Sugar-plums! What kind?'

'Well, they were a parcel of conundrums, sir.'

'Ah, I thought so. Now just mind this: if you go on playing tricks like
that, you'll spoil all its teeth, and get laid up with mental indigestion.
You must have nothing but the plainest reading for the next few days. Take
care now! No novels on any account!'

       *       *       *       *       *

Considering the amount of painful experience many of us have had in
feeding and dosing the body, it would, I think, be quite worth our while
to try and translate some of the rules into corresponding ones for the
mind.

First, then, we should set ourselves to provide for our mind its _proper
kind_ of food. We very soon learn what will, and what will not, agree with
the body, and find little difficulty in refusing a piece of the tempting
pudding or pie which is associated in our memory with that terrible attack
of indigestion, and whose very name irresistibly recalls rhubarb and
magnesia; but it takes a great many lessons to convince us how
indigestible some of our favourite lines of reading are, and again and
again we make a meal of the unwholesome novel, sure to be followed by its
usual train of low spirits, unwillingness to work, weariness of
existence--in fact, by mental nightmare.

Then we should be careful to provide this wholesome food in _proper
amount_. Mental gluttony, or over-reading, is a dangerous propensity,
tending to weakness of digestive power, and in some cases to loss of
appetite: we know that bread is a good and wholesome food, but who would
like to try the experiment of eating two or three loaves at a sitting?

I have heard a physician telling his patient--whose complaint was merely
gluttony and want of exercise--that 'the earliest symptom of
hyper-nutrition is a deposition of adipose tissue,' and no doubt the fine
long words greatly consoled the poor man under his increasing load of
fat.

I wonder if there is such a thing in nature as a FAT MIND? I really think
I have met with one or two: minds which could not keep up with the slowest
trot in conversation; could not jump over a logical fence, to save their
lives; always got stuck fast in a narrow argument; and, in short, were fit
for nothing but to waddle helplessly through the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, again, though the food be wholesome and in proper amount, we know
that we must not consume _too many kinds at once_. Take the thirsty a
quart of beer, or a quart of cider, or even a quart of cold tea, and he
will probably thank you (though not so heartily in the last case!). But
what think you his feelings would be if you offered him a tray containing
a little mug of beer, a little mug of cider, another of cold tea, one of
hot tea, one of coffee, one of cocoa, and corresponding vessels of milk,
water, brandy-and-water, and butter-milk? The sum total might be a quart,
but would it be the same thing to the haymaker?

       *       *       *       *       *

Having settled the proper kind, amount, and variety of our mental food, it
remains that we should be careful to allow _proper intervals_ between meal
and meal, and not swallow the food hastily without mastication, so that it
may be thoroughly digested; both which rules, for the body, are also
applicable at once to the mind.

First, as to the intervals: these are as really necessary as they are for
the body, with this difference only, that while the body requires three or
four hours' rest before it is ready for another meal, the mind will in
many cases do with three or four minutes. I believe that the interval
required is much shorter than is generally supposed, and from personal
experience, I would recommend anyone, who has to devote several hours
together to one subject of thought, to try the effect of such a break, say
once an hour, leaving off for five minutes only each time, but taking care
to throw the mind absolutely 'out of gear' for those five minutes, and
to turn it entirely to other subjects. It is astonishing what an amount of
impetus and elasticity the mind recovers during those short periods of
rest.

And then, as to the mastication of the food, the mental process answering
to this is simply _thinking over_ what we read. This is a very much
greater exertion of mind than the mere passive taking in the contents of
our Author. So much greater an exertion is it, that, as Coleridge says,
the mind often 'angrily refuses' to put itself to such trouble--so much
greater, that we are far too apt to neglect it altogether, and go on
pouring in fresh food on the top of the undigested masses already lying
there, till the unfortunate mind is fairly swamped under the flood. But
the greater the exertion the more valuable, we may be sure, is the effect.
One hour of steady thinking over a subject (a solitary walk is as good an
opportunity for the process as any other) is worth two or three of reading
only. And just consider another effect of this thorough digestion of the
books we read; I mean the arranging and 'ticketing,' so to speak, of the
subjects in our minds, so that we can readily refer to them when we want
them. Sam Slick tells us that he has learnt several languages in his life,
but somehow 'couldn't keep the parcels sorted' in his mind. And many a
mind that hurries through book after book, without waiting to digest or
arrange anything, gets into that sort of condition, and the unfortunate
owner finds himself far from fit really to support the character all his
friends give him.

'A thoroughly well-read man. Just you try him in any subject, now. You
can't puzzle him.'

You turn to the thoroughly well-read man. You ask him a question, say, in
English history (he is understood to have just finished reading Macaulay).
He smiles good-naturedly, tries to look as if he knew all about it, and
proceeds to dive into his mind for the answer. Up comes a handful of very
promising facts, but on examination they turn out to belong to the wrong
century, and are pitched in again. A second haul brings up a fact much
more like the real thing, but, unfortunately, along with it comes a tangle
of other things--a fact in political economy, a rule in arithmetic, the
ages of his brother's children, and a stanza of Gray's 'Elegy,' and among
all these, the fact he wants has got hopelessly twisted up and entangled.
Meanwhile, every one is waiting for his reply, and, as the silence is
getting more and more awkward, our well-read friend has to stammer out
some half-answer at last, not nearly so clear or so satisfactory as an
ordinary schoolboy would have given. And all this for want of making up
his knowledge into proper bundles and ticketing them.

Do you know the unfortunate victim of ill-judged mental feeding when you
see him? Can you doubt him? Look at him drearily wandering round a
reading-room, tasting dish after dish--we beg his pardon, book after
book--keeping to none. First a mouthful of novel; but no, faugh! he has
had nothing but that to eat for the last week, and is quite tired of the
taste. Then a slice of science; but you know at once what the result of
that will be--ah, of course, much too tough for _his_ teeth. And so on
through the whole weary round, which he tried (and failed in) yesterday,
and will probably try and fail in to-morrow.

Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, in his very amusing book, 'The Professor at the
Breakfast Table,' gives the following rule for knowing whether a human
being is young or old: 'The crucial experiment is this--offer a bulky bun
to the suspected individual just ten minutes before dinner. If this is
easily accepted and devoured, the fact of youth is established.' He tells
us that a human being, 'if young, will eat anything at any hour of the day
or night.'

To ascertain the healthiness of the _mental_ appetite of a human animal,
place in its hands a short, well-written, but not exciting treatise on
some popular subject--a mental _bun_, in fact. If it is read with eager
interest and perfect attention, _and if the reader can answer questions on
the subject afterwards_, the mind is in first-rate working order. If it be
politely laid down again, or perhaps lounged over for a few minutes, and
then, 'I can't read this stupid book! Would you hand me the second volume
of "The Mysterious Murder"?' you may be equally sure that there is
something wrong in the mental digestion.

If this paper has given you any useful hints on the important subject of
reading, and made you see that it is one's duty no less than one's
interest to 'read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest' the good books that
fall in your way, its purpose will be fulfilled.


Some American writer has said "the snakes in this district may be divided
into one species--the venomous." The same principle applies here.
Postage-Stamp-Cases may be divided into one species, the "Wonderland."
Imitations of it will soon appear, no doubt: but they cannot include the
two Pictorial Surprises, which are copyright.

You don't see why I call them 'Surprises'? Well, take the Case in your
left-hand, and regard it attentively. You see Alice nursing the Duchess's
Baby? (An entirely new combination, by the way: it doesn't occur in the
book.) Now, with your right thumb and forefinger, lay hold of the little
book, and suddenly pull it out. _The Baby has turned into a Pig!_ If
_that_ doesn't surprise you, why, I suppose you wouldn't be surprised if
your own Mother-in-law suddenly turned into a Gyroscope!

This Case is _not_ intended to carry about in your pocket. Far from it.
People seldom want any other Stamps, on an emergency, than Penny-Stamps
for Letters, Sixpenny-Stamps for Telegrams, and a bit of Stamp-edging for
cut fingers (it makes capital sticking-plaster, and will stand three or
four washings, cautiously conducted): and all these are easily carried in
a purse or pocketbook. No, _this_ is meant to haunt your envelope-case, or
wherever you keep your writing-materials. What made me invent it was the
constantly wanting Stamps of other values, for foreign Letters, Parcel
Post, &c., and finding it very bothersome to get at the kind I wanted in
a hurry. Since I have possessed a "Wonderland Stamp Case", Life has been
bright and peaceful, and I have used no other. I believe the Queen's
laundress uses no other.

Each of the pockets will hold 6 stamps, comfortably. I would recommend you
to arrange the 6, before putting them in, something like a _bouquet_,
making them lean to the right and to the left alternately: thus there will
always be a free _corner_ to get hold of, so as to take them out, quickly
and easily, one by one: otherwise you will find them apt to come out two
or three at a time.

According to _my_ experience, the 5_d._, 9_d._, and 1_s._ Stamps are
hardly ever wanted, though I have constantly to replenish all the other
pockets. If your experience agrees with mine, you may find it convenient
to keep only a couple (say) of each of these 3 kinds, in the 1_s._
pocket, and to fill the other 2 pockets with extra 1_d._ stamps.




§ 2. _How to begin a Letter._


If the Letter is to be in answer to another, begin by getting out that
other letter and reading it through, in order to refresh your memory, as
to what it is you have to answer, and as to your correspondent's _present
address_ (otherwise you will be sending your letter to his regular address
in _London_, though he has been careful in writing to give you his
_Torquay_ address in full).

Next, Address and Stamp the Envelope. "What! Before writing the _Letter_?"
Most certainly. And I'll tell you what will happen if you don't. You will
go on writing till the last moment, and just in the middle of the last
sentence, you will become aware that 'time's up!' Then comes the hurried
wind-up--the wildly-scrawled signature--the hastily-fastened envelope,
which comes open in the post--the address, a mere hieroglyphic--the
horrible discovery that you've forgotten to replenish your Stamp-Case--the
frantic appeal, to every one in the house, to lend you a Stamp--the
headlong rush to the Post Office, arriving, hot and gasping, just after
the box has closed--and finally, a week afterwards, the return of the
Letter, from the Dead-Letter Office, marked "address illegible"!

Next, put your own address, _in full_, at the top of the note-sheet. It is
an aggravating thing----I speak from bitter experience----when a friend,
staying at some new address, heads his letter "Dover," simply, assuming
that you can get the rest of the address from his previous letter, which
perhaps you have destroyed.

Next, put the date _in full_. It is another aggravating thing, when you
wish, years afterwards, to arrange a series of letters, to find them dated
"Feb. 17", "Aug. 2", without any year to guide you as to which comes
first. And never, never, dear Madam (N.B. this remark is addressed to
ladies _only_: no _man_ would ever do such a thing), put "Wednesday",
simply, as the date!

"_That way madness lies._"




§ 3. _How to go on with a Letter._


Here is a golden Rule to begin with. _Write legibly._ The average temper
of the human race would be perceptibly sweetened, if everybody obeyed this
Rule! A great deal of the bad writing in the world comes simply from
writing _too quickly_. Of course you reply, "I do it to save _time_". A
very good object, no doubt: but what right have you to do it at your
friend's expense? Isn't _his_ time as valuable as yours? Years ago, I used
to receive letters from a friend----and very interesting letters
too----written in one of the most atrocious hands ever invented. It
generally took me about a _week_ to read one of his letters! I used to
carry it about in my pocket, and take it out at leisure times, to puzzle
over the riddles which composed it----holding it in different positions,
and at different distances, till at last the meaning of some hopeless
scrawl would flash upon me, when I at once wrote down the English under
it; and, when several had been thus guessed, the context would help one
with the others, till at last the whole series of hieroglyphics was
deciphered. If _all_ one's friends wrote like that, Life would be entirely
spent in reading their letters!

This Rule applies, specially, to names of people or places----and _most_
specially to _foreign names_. I got a letter once, containing some Russian
names, written in the same hasty scramble in which people often write
"yours sincerely". The _context_, of course, didn't help in the least: and
one spelling was just as likely as another, so far as _I_ knew: it was
necessary to write and tell my friend that I couldn't read any of them!

My second Rule is, don't fill _more_ than a page and a half with apologies
for not having written sooner!

The best subject, to _begin_ with, is your friend's last letter. Write
with the letter open before you. Answer his questions, and make any
remarks his letter suggests. _Then_ go on to what you want to say
yourself. This arrangement is more courteous, and pleasanter for the
reader, than to fill the letter with your own invaluable remarks, and then
hastily answer your friend's questions in a postscript. Your friend is
much more likely to enjoy your wit, _after_ his own anxiety for
information has been satisfied.

In referring to anything your friend has said in his letter, it is best to
_quote the exact words_, and not to give a summary of them in _your_
words. _A's_ impression, of what _B_ has said, expressed in _A's_ words,
will never convey to _B_ the meaning of his own words.

This is specially necessary when some point has arisen as to which the two
correspondents do not quite agree. There ought to be no opening for such
writing as "You are quite mistaken in thinking I said so-and-so. It was
not in the least my meaning, &c., &c.", which tends to make a
correspondence last for a lifetime.

A few more Rules may fitly be given here, for correspondence that has
unfortunately become _controversial_.

One is, _don't repeat yourself_. When once you have said your say, fully
and clearly, on a certain point, and have failed to convince your friend,
_drop that subject_: to repeat your arguments, all over again, will simply
lead to his doing the same; and so you will go on, like a Circulating
Decimal. _Did you ever know a Circulating Decimal come to an end?_

Another Rule is, when you have written a letter that you feel may possibly
irritate your friend, however necessary you may have felt it to so express
yourself, _put it aside till the next day_. Then read it over again, and
fancy it addressed to yourself. This will often lead to your writing it
all over again, taking out a lot of the vinegar and pepper, and putting in
honey instead, and thus making a _much_ more palatable dish of it! If,
when you have done your best to write inoffensively, you still feel that
it will probably lead to further controversy, _keep a copy of it_. There
is very little use, months afterwards, in pleading "I am almost sure I
never expressed myself as you say: to the best of my recollection I said
so-and-so". _Far_ better to be able to write "I did _not_ express myself
so: these are the words I used."

My fifth Rule is, if your friend makes a severe remark, either leave it
unnoticed, or make your reply distinctly _less_ severe: and if he makes a
friendly remark, tending towards 'making up' the little difference that
has arisen between you, let your reply be distinctly _more_ friendly. If,
in picking a quarrel, each party declined to go more than _three-eighths_
of the way, and if, in making friends, each was ready to go _five-eighths_
of the way--why, there would be more reconciliations than quarrels! Which
is like the Irishman's remonstrance to his gad-about daughter--"Shure,
you're _always_ goin' out! You go out _three_ times, for _wanst_ that you
come in!"

My sixth Rule (and my last remark about controversial correspondence) is,
_don't try to have the last word_! How many a controversy would be nipped
in the bud, if each was anxious to let the _other_ have the last word!
Never mind how telling a rejoinder you leave unuttered: never mind your
friend's supposing that you are silent from lack of anything to say: let
the thing drop, as soon as it is possible without discourtesy: remember
'speech is silvern, but silence is golden'! (N.B.--If you are a gentleman,
and your friend a lady, this Rule is superfluous: _you won't get the last
word_!)

My seventh Rule is, if it should ever occur to you to write, jestingly, in
_dispraise_ of your friend, be sure you exaggerate enough to make the
jesting _obvious_: a word spoken in _jest_, but taken as _earnest_, may
lead to very serious consequences. I have known it to lead to the
breaking-off of a friendship. Suppose, for instance, you wish to remind
your friend of a sovereign you have lent him, which he has forgotten to
repay--you might quite _mean_ the words "I mention it, as you seem to have
a conveniently bad memory for debts", in jest: yet there would be nothing
to wonder at if he took offence at that way of putting it. But, suppose
you wrote "Long observation of your career, as a pickpocket and a burglar,
has convinced me that my one lingering hope, for recovering that sovereign
I lent you, is to say 'Pay up, or I'll summons yer!'" he would indeed be a
matter-of-fact friend if he took _that_ as seriously meant!

My eighth Rule. When you say, in your letter, "I enclose cheque for £5",
or "I enclose John's letter for you to see", leave off writing for a
moment--go and get the document referred to--and _put it into the
envelope_. Otherwise, you are pretty certain to find it lying about,
_after the Post has gone_!

My ninth Rule. When you get to the end of a note-sheet, and find you have
more to say, take another piece of paper--a whole sheet, or a scrap, as
the case may demand: but, whatever you do, _don't cross_! Remember the old
proverb '_Cross-writing makes cross reading_'. "The _old_ proverb?" you
say, enquiringly. "_How_ old?" Well, not so _very_ ancient, I must
confess. In fact, I'm afraid I invented it while writing this paragraph!
Still, you know, 'old' is a _comparative_ term. I think you would be
_quite_ justified in addressing a chicken, just out of the shell, as "Old
boy!", _when compared_ with another chicken, that was only half-out!




§ 4. _How to end a Letter._


If doubtful whether to end with 'yours faithfully', or 'yours truly', or
'yours most truly', &c. (there are at least a dozen varieties, before you
reach 'yours affectionately'), refer to your correspondent's last letter,
and make your winding-up _at least as friendly as his_; in fact, even if a
shade _more_ friendly, it will do no harm!

A Postscript is a very useful invention: but it is _not_ meant (as so many
ladies suppose) to contain the real _gist_ of the letter: it serves rather
to throw into the shade any little matter we do _not_ wish to make a fuss
about. For example, your friend had promised to execute a commission for
you in town, but forgot it, thereby putting you to great inconvenience:
and he now writes to apologize for his negligence. It would be cruel, and
needlessly crushing, to make it the main subject of your reply. How much
more gracefully it comes in thus! "P.S. Don't distress yourself any more
about having omitted that little matter in town. I won't deny that it
_did_ put my plans out a little, at the time: but it's all right now. I
often forget things, myself: and 'those who live in glass-houses, mustn't
throw stones', you know!"

When you take your letters to the Post, _carry them in your hand_. If you
put them in your pocket you will take a long country-walk (I speak from
experience), passing the Post-Office _twice_, going and returning, and,
when you get home, will find them _still_ in your pocket.




§ 5. _On registering Correspondence._


Let me recommend you to keep a record of Letters Received and Sent. I have
kept one for many years, and have found it of the greatest possible
service, in many ways: it secures my _answering_ Letters, however long
they have to wait; it enables me to refer, for my own guidance, to the
details of previous correspondence, though the actual Letters may have
been destroyed long ago; and, most valuable feature of all, if any
difficulty arises, years afterwards, in connection with a half-forgotten
correspondence, it enables me to say, with confidence, "I did _not_ tell
you that he was 'an _invaluable_ servant in _every_ way', and that you
_couldn't_ 'trust him too much'. I have a _précis_ of my letter. What I
said was 'he is a _valuable_ servant in _many_ ways, but _don't_ trust him
too much'. So, if he's cheated you, you really must not hold _me_
responsible for it!"

I will now give you a few simple Rules for making, and keeping, a
Letter-Register.

Get a blank book, containing (say) 200 leaves, about 4 inches wide and 7
high. It should be _well_ fastened into its cover, as it will have to be
opened and shut hundreds of times. Have a line ruled, in red ink, down
each margin of every page, an inch off the edge (the margin should be wide
enough to contain a number of 5 digits, easily: _I_ manage with a 3/4 inch
margin: but, unless you write very small you will find an inch more
comfortable).

Write a _précis_ of each Letter, received or sent, in chronological
order. Let the entry of a 'received' Letter reach from the left-hand edge
to the right-hand marginal line; and the entry of a 'sent' Letter from the
left-hand marginal line to the right-hand edge. Thus the two kinds will be
quite distinct, and you can easily hunt through the 'received' Letters by
themselves, without being bothered with the 'sent' Letters; and _vice
versâ_.

Use the _right-hand_ pages only: and, when you come to the end of the
book, turn it upside-down, and begin at the other end, still using
right-hand pages. You will find this much more comfortable than using
left-hand pages.

You will find it convenient to write, at the top of every sheet of a
'received' Letter, its Register-Number in full.

I will now give a few (ideal) specimen pages of my Letter-Register, and
make a few remarks on them: after which I think you will find it easy
enough to manage one for yourself.

      29217|              /90.                ||
    -------+                                  ||
    (217)  |Ap. 1  (Tu.)   _Jones, Mrs._  am  ||27518
    sendg, |as present  from  self and Mr.    ||
    J., a  |white elephant.                   ||225
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (218)  |do.   _Wilkins & Co._  bill,   for||28743
    grand  |piano,  £175 10_s._ 6_d._      [pd||221, 2
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (219)  |do.  _Scareham, H._  [writes  from||
    'Grand | Hotel, Monte Carlo']  asking     ||
    to borr|ow  £50 for a few weeks (!)       ||[symbol]
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
  [symbol]||(220)  do.   _Scareham, H._  would| like to
          ||know  _object_,  for  wh  loan is | asked,
          ||and  _security_ offered.          |
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       218||(221) Ap. 3.  _Wilkins & Co._     ||in pre-
          ||vious  letter,  now  before  me,  || you
          ||undertook  to  supply  one  for   ||£120:
       246||decling to pay more.              ||
          ||----------------------------------+--------
     23514||(222) do.  _Cheetham & Sharp._    | have
     218  ||written    221--enclosing   previo|us let-
       228||ter--is law on my side?           |  [
    ------++----------------------------------++-------
    (223) ||Ap. 4.    _Manager,  Goods Statn_,||
    _G. N.||R._  White Elephant arrived,  ad- ||
    dresse||d  to you--send for it at once--  ||
    'very ||savage'.                          ||226
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29225 |               /90.               |
    ------++                                  |
       217||(225) Ap. 4. (F) _Jones,  Mrs._ th||anks,
          ||but no room for it at present,  am||send-
       230||ing it to Zoological Gardens.     ||
          ||----------------------------------++-------
       223||(226)   do.  _Manager,  Goods  Sta||tn, G._
          ||_N. R._ please  deliver, to bearer||of this
          ||note,  case  containg  White  Ele-||phant
          ||addressed to me.                  ||
          ||----------------------------------+--------
          ||(227)   do. _Director Zool. Garde |ns._ (en-
     223  ||closing  above  note  to R. W.  Ma|nager)
          ||call  for  valuable animal,  prese|nted to
       229||Gardens.                          |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (228)  |Ap.  8.  _Cheetham  &  Sharp._ you||222
     misquo|te  enclosed letter, limit named  ||
     is £18|0.                                ||237
    -------+----------------------------------||-------
    (229)  |Ap. 9. _Director,  Zoo.  Gardens._||227
    case de|livered  to  us  contained 1  doz.||  230
     Port--|consumed    at   Directors'   Ban-||
     quet--|many thanks.                      ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       225||(230)  do.  T _Jones, Mrs._ why   | call a
  [symbol]||doz. of Port a  'White Elephant'? |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (231)  |do.  T  _Jones, Mrs._ 'it was a   ||[symbol]
    joke'. |                                  ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29233 |                /90.              |
    -------+                                  |
          ||(233)  Ap. 10.  (Th)  _Page & Co._|orderg
          ||Macaulay's   Essays   and   "Jane |Eyre"
       242||(cheap edtn).                     |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (234)  |do.  _Aunt Jemima_--invitg  for   ||
    2 or 3 |days after the 15th.          [   || 236
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (235)  |do.  _Lon. and West. Bk._   have  ||
    recevd |£250, pd to yr  Acct  fm  Parkins ||
    & Co.  |Calcutta                      [en ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       234||(236)   do.   _Aunt   Jemima_--can|not
          ||possibly  come  this  month,  will|write
       239||when able.                        |   [
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       228||(237)   Ap.  11.  _Cheetham  and  |Co._ re-
       240||turn letter enclosed to you.      |    [×
          ||----------------------------------+--------
          ||(238)   do.   _Morton, Philip._ Co|uld you
          ||lend    me   Browning's   'Dramati|s Per-
       245||sonæ' for a day or 2?             |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (239)  |Ap.  14.   _Aunt Jemima_, leav-   ||236
    ing  ho|use at end of month : address     ||
    '136,  |Royal Avenue, Bath.'       [      ||
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (240)  |Ap. 15.  _Cheetham  and  Co._,    ||237
    returng|letter as reqd, bill 6/6/8. [     ||244
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29242 |               /90.               |
    -------+                                  |
    (242)  |Ap. 15.  (Tu)  _Page & Co._ bill  ||} 233
    for boo|ks, as ordered, 15/6        [     ||}
    -------+----------------------------------||}
    (243)  |do.  ¶  _do._ books               ||} 247
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       240||(244)   do.  _Cheetham and Co._  c|an un-
       248||derstand   the   6/8--what  is  £6|for?
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (245)  |Ap. 17.   ¶  _Morton, P._   'Dra- ||238
    matis  |Personæ', as asked for.     [retd ||249
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       221||(246)   do.   _Wilkins and Co._  w|ith
       250||bill,  175/10/6, and ch.  for  do.|   [en
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       243||(247)  do.   _Page and Co._  bill,| 15/6,
          ||postal [symbol]107258 for 15/- and|6 stps.
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (248)  |Ap. 18.  _Cheetham and Co._  it   ||244
    was a  |'clerical error' (!)              ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       245||(249)  Ap. 19.  _Morton, P._  retu|rng
          ||Browning with many thanks.        |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (250)  |do.  _Wilkins and Co._  receptd   ||246
    bill.  |                                  ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |

I begin each page by putting, at the top left-hand corner, the next
entry-number I am going to use, _in full_ (the last 3 digits of each
entry-number are enough afterwards); and I put the date of the year, at
the top, in the centre.

I begin each entry with the last 3 digits of the entry-number, enclosed in
an oval (this is difficult to reproduce in print, so I have put
round-parentheses here). Then, for the _first_ entry in each page, I put
the day of the month and the day of the week: afterwards, 'do.' is enough
for the month-day, till it changes: I do not repeat the week-day.

Next, if the entry is _not_ a letter, I put a symbol for 'parcel' (see
Nos. 243, 245) or 'telegram' (see Nos. 230, 231) as the case may be.

Next, the name of the person, underlined (indicated here by italics).

If an entry needs special further attention, I put [____ at the end: and,
when it has been attended to, I fill in the appropriate symbol, e.g. in
No. 218, it showed that the bill had to be _paid_; in No. 222, that an
answer was really _needed_ (the '×' means 'attended to'); in No. 234, that
I owed the old lady a visit; in No. 235, that the item had to be entered
in my account book; in No. 236, that I must not forget to write; in No.
239, that the address had to be entered in my address-book; in No. 245,
that the book had to be returned.

I give each entry the space of 2 lines, whether it fills them or not, in
order to have room for references. And, at the foot of each page I leave 2
or 3 lines _blank_ (often useful afterwards for entering omitted Letters)
and miss one or 2 numbers before I begin the next page.

At any odd moments of leisure, I 'make up' the entry-book, in various
ways, as follows:--

(1) I draw a _second_ line, at the right-hand end of the 'received'
entries, and at the left-hand end of the 'sent' entries. This I usually do
pretty well 'up to date'. In my Register the first line is _red_, the
second _blue_: here I distinguish them by making the first thin, and the
second _thick_.

(2) Beginning with the last entry, and going backwards, I read over the
names till I recognise one as having occurred already: I then link the two
entries together, by giving the one, that comes first in chronological
order, a 'foot-reference' (see Nos. 217, 225). I do not keep this
'up-to-date', but leave it till there are 4 or 5 pages to be done. I work
back till I come among entries that are all supplied with
'foot-references', when I once more glance through the last few pages, to
see if there are any entries not yet supplied with head-references:
_their_ predecessors may need a special search. If an entry is connected,
in subject, with another under a different name, I link them by
cross-references, distinguished from the head- and foot-references by
being written _further from the marginal line_ (see No. 229). When 2
consecutive entries have the same name, and are both of the same kind
(i.e. both 'received' or both 'sent') I bracket them (see Nos. 242, 243);
if of different kinds, I link them with the symbol used for Nos. 219, 220.

(3) Beginning at the earliest entry not yet done with, and going forwards,
I cross out every entry that has got a head- and foot-reference, and is
done with, by continuing the extra line _through_ it (see Nos. 221, 223,
225). Thus, wherever a _break_ occurs in this extra line, it shows there
is some matter still needing attention. I do not keep this anything like
'up to date', but leave it till there are 30 or 40 pages to look through
at a time. When the first page in the volume is thus completely crossed
out, I put a mark at the foot of the page to indicate this; and so with
pages 2, 3, &c. Hence, whenever I do this part of the 'making up', I need
not begin at the beginning of the volume, but only at the _earliest page
that has not got this mark_.

All this looks very complicated, when stated at full length: but you will
find it perfectly simple, when you have had a little practice, and will
come to regard the 'making-up' as a pleasant occupation for a rainy day,
or at any time that you feel disinclined for more severe mental work. In
the Game of Whist, Hoyle gives us one golden Rule, "When in doubt, win the
trick"--I find that Rule admirable for real life: when in doubt what to
do, I 'make-up' my Letter-Register!




[Illustration]




I--DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE


Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on the
bank, and of having nothing to do. Once or twice she had peeped into the
book her sister was reading, but it had no pictures or conversations in
it, "and what is the use of a book," thought Alice, "without pictures or
conversations?"

So she was considering in her own mind (as well as she could, for the
day made her feel very sleepy and stupid), whether the pleasure of
making a daisy-chain would be worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when suddenly a White Rabbit with pink eyes ran
close by her.

There was nothing so very remarkable in that, nor did Alice think it so
very much out of the way to hear the Rabbit say to itself, "Oh dear! Oh
dear! I shall be too late!" But when the Rabbit actually took a watch
out of its waistcoat-pocket and looked at it and then hurried on, Alice
started to her feet, for it flashed across her mind that she had never
before seen a rabbit with either a waistcoat-pocket, or a watch to take
out of it, and, burning with curiosity, she ran across the field after
it and was just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole, under
the hedge. In another moment, down went Alice after it!

[Illustration]

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way and then
dipped suddenly down, so suddenly that Alice had not a moment to think
about stopping herself before she found herself falling down what seemed
to be a very deep well.

Either the well was very deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had
plenty of time, as she went down, to look about her. First, she tried to
make out what she was coming to, but it was too dark to see anything;
then she looked at the sides of the well and noticed that they were
filled with cupboards and book-shelves; here and there she saw maps and
pictures hung upon pegs. She took down a jar from one of the shelves as
she passed. It was labeled "ORANGE MARMALADE," but, to her great
disappointment, it was empty; she did not like to drop the jar, so
managed to put it into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

Down, down, down! Would the fall never come to an end? There was nothing
else to do, so Alice soon began talking to herself. "Dinah'll miss me
very much to-night, I should think!" (Dinah was the cat.) "I hope
they'll remember her saucer of milk at tea-time. Dinah, my dear, I wish
you were down here with me!" Alice felt that she was dozing off, when
suddenly, thump! thump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and dry
leaves, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and she jumped up in a moment. She looked up,
but it was all dark overhead; before her was another long passage and
the White Rabbit was still in sight, hurrying down it. There was not a
moment to be lost. Away went Alice like the wind and was just in time to
hear it say, as it turned a corner, "Oh, my ears and whiskers, how late
it's getting!" She was close behind it when she turned the corner, but
the Rabbit was no longer to be seen.

She found herself in a long, low hall, which was lit up by a row of
lamps hanging from the roof. There were doors all 'round the hall, but
they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side
and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle,
wondering how she was ever to get out again.

Suddenly she came upon a little table, all made of solid glass. There
was nothing on it but a tiny golden key, and Alice's first idea was that
this might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the
locks were too large, or the key was too small, but, at any rate, it
would not open any of them. However, on the second time 'round, she came
upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a
little door about fifteen inches high. She tried the little golden key
in the lock, and to her great delight, it fitted!

[Illustration]

Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not
much larger than a rat-hole; she knelt down and looked along the passage
into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of
that dark hall and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and
those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the
doorway. "Oh," said Alice, "how I wish I could shut up like a telescope!
I think I could, if I only knew how to begin."

Alice went back to the table, half hoping she might find another key on
it, or at any rate, a book of rules for shutting people up like
telescopes. This time she found a little bottle on it ("which certainly
was not here before," said Alice), and tied 'round the neck of the
bottle was a paper label, with the words "DRINK ME" beautifully printed
on it in large letters.

"No, I'll look first," she said, "and see whether it's marked '_poison_'
or not," for she had never forgotten that, if you drink from a bottle
marked "poison," it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or
later. However, this bottle was _not_ marked "poison," so Alice ventured
to taste it, and, finding it very nice (it had a sort of mixed flavor of
cherry-tart, custard, pineapple, roast turkey, toffy and hot buttered
toast), she very soon finished it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What a curious feeling!" said Alice. "I must be shutting up like a
telescope!"

And so it was indeed! She was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going
through the little door into that lovely garden.

After awhile, finding that nothing more happened, she decided on going
into the garden at once; but, alas for poor Alice! When she got to the
door, she found she had forgotten the little golden key, and when she
went back to the table for it, she found she could not possibly reach
it: she could see it quite plainly through the glass and she tried her
best to climb up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery,
and when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

"Come, there's no use in crying like that!" said Alice to herself rather
sharply. "I advise you to leave off this minute!" She generally gave
herself very good advice (though she very seldom followed it), and
sometimes she scolded herself so severely as to bring tears into her
eyes.

Soon her eye fell on a little glass box that was lying under the table:
she opened it and found in it a very small cake, on which the words "EAT
ME" were beautifully marked in currants. "Well, I'll eat it," said
Alice, "and if it makes me grow larger, I can reach the key; and if it
makes me grow smaller, I can creep under the door: so either way I'll
get into the garden, and I don't care which happens!"

She ate a little bit and said anxiously to herself, "Which way? Which
way?" holding her hand on the top of her head to feel which way she was
growing; and she was quite surprised to find that she remained the same
size. So she set to work and very soon finished off the cake.

[Illustration]




II--THE POOL OF TEARS


"Curiouser and curiouser!" cried Alice (she was so much surprised that
for the moment she quite forgot how to speak good English). "Now I'm
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Good-by, feet! Oh,
my poor little feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings
for you now, dears? I shall be a great deal too far off to trouble
myself about you."

Just at this moment her head struck against the roof of the hall; in
fact, she was now rather more than nine feet high, and she at once took
up the little golden key and hurried off to the garden door.

Poor Alice! It was as much as she could do, lying down on one side, to
look through into the garden with one eye; but to get through was more
hopeless than ever. She sat down and began to cry again.

She went on shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool all
'round her and reaching half down the hall.

After a time, she heard a little pattering of feet in the distance and
she hastily dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the White
Rabbit returning, splendidly dressed, with a pair of white kid-gloves in
one hand and a large fan in the other. He came trotting along in a
great hurry, muttering to himself, "Oh! the Duchess, the Duchess! Oh!
_won't_ she be savage if I've kept her waiting!"

When the Rabbit came near her, Alice began, in a low, timid voice, "If
you please, sir--" The Rabbit started violently, dropped the white
kid-gloves and the fan and skurried away into the darkness as hard as he
could go.

[Illustration]

Alice took up the fan and gloves and she kept fanning herself all the
time she went on talking. "Dear, dear! How queer everything is to-day!
And yesterday things went on just as usual. _Was_ I the same when I got
up this morning? But if I'm not the same, the next question is, 'Who in
the world am I?' Ah, _that's_ the great puzzle!"

As she said this, she looked down at her hands and was surprised to see
that she had put on one of the Rabbit's little white kid-gloves while
she was talking. "How _can_ I have done that?" she thought. "I must be
growing small again." She got up and went to the table to measure
herself by it and found that she was now about two feet high and was
going on shrinking rapidly. She soon found out that the cause of this
was the fan she was holding and she dropped it hastily, just in time to
save herself from shrinking away altogether.

"That _was_ a narrow escape!" said Alice, a good deal frightened at the
sudden change, but very glad to find herself still in existence. "And
now for the garden!" And she ran with all speed back to the little door;
but, alas! the little door was shut again and the little golden key was
lying on the glass table as before. "Things are worse than ever,"
thought the poor child, "for I never was so small as this before,
never!"

As she said these words, her foot slipped, and in another moment,
splash! she was up to her chin in salt-water. Her first idea was that
she had somehow fallen into the sea. However, she soon made out that she
was in the pool of tears which she had wept when she was nine feet high.

[Illustration]

Just then she heard something splashing about in the pool a little way
off, and she swam nearer to see what it was: she soon made out that it
was only a mouse that had slipped in like herself.

"Would it be of any use, now," thought Alice, "to speak to this mouse?
Everything is so out-of-the-way down here that I should think very
likely it can talk; at any rate, there's no harm in trying." So she
began, "O Mouse, do you know the way out of this pool? I am very tired
of swimming about here, O Mouse!" The Mouse looked at her rather
inquisitively and seemed to her to wink with one of its little eyes, but
it said nothing.

"Perhaps it doesn't understand English," thought Alice. "I dare say it's
a French mouse, come over with William the Conqueror." So she began
again: "Où est ma chatte?" which was the first sentence in her French
lesson-book. The Mouse gave a sudden leap out of the water and seemed to
quiver all over with fright. "Oh, I beg your pardon!" cried Alice
hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal's feelings. "I quite
forgot you didn't like cats."

"Not like cats!" cried the Mouse in a shrill, passionate voice. "Would
_you_ like cats, if you were me?"

"Well, perhaps not," said Alice in a soothing tone; "don't be angry
about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah. I think you'd
take a fancy to cats, if you could only see her. She is such a dear,
quiet thing." The Mouse was bristling all over and she felt certain it
must be really offended. "We won't talk about her any more, if you'd
rather not."

"We, indeed!" cried the Mouse, who was trembling down to the end of its
tail. "As if _I_ would talk on such a subject! Our family always _hated_
cats--nasty, low, vulgar things! Don't let me hear the name again!"

[Illustration: Alice at the Mad Tea Party.]

"I won't indeed!" said Alice, in a great hurry to change the subject of
conversation. "Are you--are you fond--of--of dogs? There is such a nice
little dog near our house, I should like to show you! It kills all the
rats and--oh, dear!" cried Alice in a sorrowful tone. "I'm afraid I've
offended it again!" For the Mouse was swimming away from her as hard as
it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool as it went.

So she called softly after it, "Mouse dear! Do come back again, and we
won't talk about cats, or dogs either, if you don't like them!" When the
Mouse heard this, it turned 'round and swam slowly back to her; its face
was quite pale, and it said, in a low, trembling voice, "Let us get to
the shore and then I'll tell you my history and you'll understand why it
is I hate cats and dogs."

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite crowded with the
birds and animals that had fallen into it; there were a Duck and a Dodo,
a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures. Alice led the
way and the whole party swam to the shore.

[Illustration]




III--A CAUCUS-RACE AND A LONG TALE


They were indeed a queer-looking party that assembled on the bank--the
birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their fur clinging close
to them, and all dripping wet, cross and uncomfortable.

[Illustration]

The first question, of course, was how to get dry again. They had a
consultation about this and after a few minutes, it seemed quite natural
to Alice to find herself talking familiarly with them, as if she had
known them all her life.

At last the Mouse, who seemed to be a person of some authority among
them, called out, "Sit down, all of you, and listen to me! _I'll_ soon
make you dry enough!" They all sat down at once, in a large ring, with
the Mouse in the middle.

"Ahem!" said the Mouse with an important air. "Are you all ready? This
is the driest thing I know. Silence all 'round, if you please! 'William
the Conqueror, whose cause was favored by the pope, was soon submitted
to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had been of late much
accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin and Morcar, the Earls of
Mercia and Northumbria'--"

"Ugh!" said the Lory, with a shiver.

"--'And even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found it
advisable'--"

"Found _what_?" said the Duck.

"Found _it_," the Mouse replied rather crossly; "of course, you know
what 'it' means."

"I know what 'it' means well enough, when _I_ find a thing," said the
Duck; "it's generally a frog or a worm. The question is, what did the
archbishop find?"

The Mouse did not notice this question, but hurriedly went on, "'--found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer him the
crown.'--How are you getting on now, my dear?" it continued, turning to
Alice as it spoke.

"As wet as ever," said Alice in a melancholy tone; "it doesn't seem to
dry me at all."

"In that case," said the Dodo solemnly, rising to its feet, "I move that
the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more energetic
remedies--"

"Speak English!" said the Eaglet. "I don't know the meaning of half
those long words, and, what's more, I don't believe you do either!"

"What I was going to say," said the Dodo in an offended tone, "is that
the best thing to get us dry would be a Caucus-race."

"What _is_ a Caucus-race?" said Alice.

[Illustration]

"Why," said the Dodo, "the best way to explain it is to do it." First it
marked out a race-course, in a sort of circle, and then all the party
were placed along the course, here and there. There was no "One, two,
three and away!" but they began running when they liked and left off
when they liked, so that it was not easy to know when the race was over.
However, when they had been running half an hour or so and were quite
dry again, the Dodo suddenly called out, "The race is over!" and they
all crowded 'round it, panting and asking, "But who has won?"

This question the Dodo could not answer without a great deal of thought.
At last it said, "_Everybody_ has won, and _all_ must have prizes."

"But who is to give the prizes?" quite a chorus of voices asked.

"Why, _she_, of course," said the Dodo, pointing to Alice with one
finger; and the whole party at once crowded 'round her, calling out, in
a confused way, "Prizes! Prizes!"

Alice had no idea what to do, and in despair she put her hand into her
pocket and pulled out a box of comfits (luckily the salt-water had not
got into it) and handed them 'round as prizes. There was exactly one
a-piece, all 'round.

The next thing was to eat the comfits; this caused some noise and
confusion, as the large birds complained that they could not taste
theirs, and the small ones choked and had to be patted on the back.
However, it was over at last and they sat down again in a ring and
begged the Mouse to tell them something more.

"You promised to tell me your history, you know," said Alice, "and why
it is you hate--C and D," she added in a whisper, half afraid that it
would be offended again.

"Mine is a long and a sad tale!" said the Mouse, turning to Alice and
sighing.

"It _is_ a long tail, certainly," said Alice, looking down with wonder
at the Mouse's tail, "but why do you call it sad?" And she kept on
puzzling about it while the Mouse was speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:--

    "Fury said to
      a mouse, That
         he met in the
            house, 'Let
              us both go
                to law: _I_
                 will prosecute
               _you_.--
                 Come, I'll
              take no denial:
             We
           must have
        the trial;
     For really
    this morning
    I've
    nothing
    to do.'
    Said the
     mouse to
      the cur,
       'Such a
        trial, dear
           sir, With
               no jury
                or judge,
                   would
                  be wasting
                our
             breath.'
         'I'll be
        judge,
       I'll be
      jury,'
     said
    cunning
    old
     Fury;
      'I'll
       try
        the
         whole
          cause,
          and
         condemn
       you to
    death.'"

"You are not attending!" said the Mouse to Alice, severely. "What are
you thinking of?"

"I beg your pardon," said Alice very humbly, "you had got to the fifth
bend, I think?"

"You insult me by talking such nonsense!" said the Mouse, getting up and
walking away.

"Please come back and finish your story!" Alice called after it. And the
others all joined in chorus, "Yes, please do!" But the Mouse only shook
its head impatiently and walked a little quicker.

"I wish I had Dinah, our cat, here!" said Alice. This caused a
remarkable sensation among the party. Some of the birds hurried off at
once, and a Canary called out in a trembling voice, to its children,
"Come away, my dears! It's high time you were all in bed!" On various
pretexts they all moved off and Alice was soon left alone.

"I wish I hadn't mentioned Dinah! Nobody seems to like her down here and
I'm sure she's the best cat in the world!" Poor Alice began to cry
again, for she felt very lonely and low-spirited. In a little while,
however, she again heard a little pattering of footsteps in the distance
and she looked up eagerly.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




IV--THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL


It was the White Rabbit, trotting slowly back again and looking
anxiously about as it went, as if it had lost something; Alice heard it
muttering to itself, "The Duchess! The Duchess! Oh, my dear paws! Oh, my
fur and whiskers! She'll get me executed, as sure as ferrets are
ferrets! Where _can_ I have dropped them, I wonder?" Alice guessed in a
moment that it was looking for the fan and the pair of white kid-gloves
and she very good-naturedly began hunting about for them, but they were
nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to have changed since her swim in
the pool, and the great hall, with the glass table and the little door,
had vanished completely.

Very soon the Rabbit noticed Alice, and called to her, in an angry tone,
"Why, Mary Ann, what _are_ you doing out here? Run home this moment and
fetch me a pair of gloves and a fan! Quick, now!"

"He took me for his housemaid!" said Alice, as she ran off. "How
surprised he'll be when he finds out who I am!" As she said this, she
came upon a neat little house, on the door of which was a bright brass
plate with the name "W. RABBIT" engraved upon it. She went in without
knocking and hurried upstairs, in great fear lest she should meet the
real Mary Ann and be turned out of the house before she had found the
fan and gloves.

By this time, Alice had found her way into a tidy little room with a
table in the window, and on it a fan and two or three pairs of tiny
white kid-gloves; she took up the fan and a pair of the gloves and was
just going to leave the room, when her eyes fell upon a little bottle
that stood near the looking-glass. She uncorked it and put it to her
lips, saying to herself, "I do hope it'll make me grow large again, for,
really, I'm quite tired of being such a tiny little thing!"

Before she had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing
against the ceiling, and had to stoop to save her neck from being
broken. She hastily put down the bottle, remarking, "That's quite
enough--I hope I sha'n't grow any more."

Alas! It was too late to wish that! She went on growing and growing and
very soon she had to kneel down on the floor. Still she went on growing,
and, as a last resource, she put one arm out of the window and one foot
up the chimney, and said to herself, "Now I can do no more, whatever
happens. What _will_ become of me?"

[Illustration]

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full effect
and she grew no larger. After a few minutes she heard a voice outside
and stopped to listen.

"Mary Ann! Mary Ann!" said the voice. "Fetch me my gloves this moment!"
Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs. Alice knew it was
the Rabbit coming to look for her and she trembled till she shook the
house, quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large
as the Rabbit and had no reason to be afraid of it.

Presently the Rabbit came up to the door and tried to open it; but as
the door opened inwards and Alice's elbow was pressed hard against it,
that attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say to itself, "Then I'll
go 'round and get in at the window."

"_That_ you won't!" thought Alice; and after waiting till she fancied
she heard the Rabbit just under the window, she suddenly spread out her
hand and made a snatch in the air. She did not get hold of anything,
but she heard a little shriek and a fall and a crash of broken glass,
from which she concluded that it was just possible it had fallen into a
cucumber-frame or something of that sort.

Next came an angry voice--the Rabbit's--"Pat! Pat! Where are you?" And
then a voice she had never heard before, "Sure then, I'm here! Digging
for apples, yer honor!"

"Here! Come and help me out of this! Now tell me, Pat, what's that in
the window?"

"Sure, it's an arm, yer honor!"

"Well, it's got no business there, at any rate; go and take it away!"

There was a long silence after this and Alice could only hear whispers
now and then, and at last she spread out her hand again and made another
snatch in the air. This time there were _two_ little shrieks and more
sounds of broken glass. "I wonder what they'll do next!" thought Alice.
"As for pulling me out of the window, I only wish they _could_!"

She waited for some time without hearing anything more. At last came a
rumbling of little cart-wheels and the sound of a good many voices all
talking together. She made out the words: "Where's the other ladder?
Bill's got the other--Bill! Here, Bill! Will the roof bear?--Who's to go
down the chimney?--Nay, _I_ sha'n't! _You_ do it! Here, Bill! The master
says you've got to go down the chimney!"

Alice drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could and waited till
she heard a little animal scratching and scrambling about in the chimney
close above her; then she gave one sharp kick and waited to see what
would happen next.

The first thing she heard was a general chorus of "There goes Bill!"
then the Rabbit's voice alone--"Catch him, you by the hedge!" Then
silence and then another confusion of voices--"Hold up his head--Brandy
now--Don't choke him--What happened to you?"

Last came a little feeble, squeaking voice, "Well, I hardly know--No
more, thank ye. I'm better now--all I know is, something comes at me
like a Jack-in-the-box and up I goes like a sky-rocket!"

After a minute or two of silence, they began moving about again, and
Alice heard the Rabbit say, "A barrowful will do, to begin with."

"A barrowful of _what_?" thought Alice. But she had not long to doubt,
for the next moment a shower of little pebbles came rattling in at the
window and some of them hit her in the face. Alice noticed, with some
surprise, that the pebbles were all turning into little cakes as they
lay on the floor and a bright idea came into her head. "If I eat one of
these cakes," she thought, "it's sure to make _some_ change in my size."

So she swallowed one of the cakes and was delighted to find that she
began shrinking directly. As soon as she was small enough to get through
the door, she ran out of the house and found quite a crowd of little
animals and birds waiting outside. They all made a rush at Alice the
moment she appeared, but she ran off as hard as she could and soon found
herself safe in a thick wood.

[Illustration: "The Duchess tucked her arm affectionately into
Alice's."]

"The first thing I've got to do," said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, "is to grow to my right size again; and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I suppose I
ought to eat or drink something or other, but the great question is
'What?'"

Alice looked all around her at the flowers and the blades of grass, but
she could not see anything that looked like the right thing to eat or
drink under the circumstances. There was a large mushroom growing near
her, about the same height as herself. She stretched herself up on
tiptoe and peeped over the edge and her eyes immediately met those of a
large blue caterpillar, that was sitting on the top, with its arms
folded, quietly smoking a long hookah and taking not the smallest notice
of her or of anything else.

[Illustration]




V--ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR


At last the Caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth and addressed
Alice in a languid, sleepy voice.

"Who are _you_?" said the Caterpillar.

[Illustration]

Alice replied, rather shyly, "I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at
least I know who I _was_ when I got up this morning, but I think I must
have changed several times since then."

"What do you mean by that?" said the Caterpillar, sternly. "Explain
yourself!"

"I can't explain _myself_, I'm afraid, sir," said Alice, "because I'm
not myself, you see--being so many different sizes in a day is very
confusing." She drew herself up and said very gravely, "I think you
ought to tell me who _you_ are, first."

"Why?" said the Caterpillar.

As Alice could not think of any good reason and the Caterpillar seemed
to be in a _very_ unpleasant state of mind, she turned away.

"Come back!" the Caterpillar called after her. "I've something important
to say!" Alice turned and came back again.

"Keep your temper," said the Caterpillar.

"Is that all?" said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as she
could.

"No," said the Caterpillar.

It unfolded its arms, took the hookah out of its mouth again, and said,
"So you think you're changed, do you?"

"I'm afraid, I am, sir," said Alice. "I can't remember things as I
used--and I don't keep the same size for ten minutes together!"

"What size do you want to be?" asked the Caterpillar.

"Oh, I'm not particular as to size," Alice hastily replied, "only one
doesn't like changing so often, you know. I should like to be a _little_
larger, sir, if you wouldn't mind," said Alice. "Three inches is such a
wretched height to be."

"It is a very good height indeed!" said the Caterpillar angrily, rearing
itself upright as it spoke (it was exactly three inches high).

In a minute or two, the Caterpillar got down off the mushroom and
crawled away into the grass, merely remarking, as it went, "One side
will make you grow taller, and the other side will make you grow
shorter."

"One side of _what_? The other side of _what_?" thought Alice to
herself.

"Of the mushroom," said the Caterpillar, just as if she had asked it
aloud; and in another moment, it was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute, trying
to make out which were the two sides of it. At last she stretched her
arms 'round it as far as they would go, and broke off a bit of the edge
with each hand.

"And now which is which?" she said to herself, and nibbled a little of
the right-hand bit to try the effect. The next moment she felt a violent
blow underneath her chin--it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, as she was
shrinking rapidly; so she set to work at once to eat some of the other
bit. Her chin was pressed so closely against her foot that there was
hardly room to open her mouth; but she did it at last and managed to
swallow a morsel of the left-hand bit....

"Come, my head's free at last!" said Alice; but all she could see, when
she looked down, was an immense length of neck, which seemed to rise
like a stalk out of a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

"Where _have_ my shoulders got to? And oh, my poor hands, how is it I
can't see you?" She was delighted to find that her neck would bend
about easily in any direction, like a serpent. She had just succeeded in
curving it down into a graceful zigzag and was going to dive in among
the leaves, when a sharp hiss made her draw back in a hurry--a large
pigeon had flown into her face and was beating her violently with its
wings.

[Illustration]

"Serpent!" cried the Pigeon.

"I'm _not_ a serpent!" said Alice indignantly. "Let me alone!"

"I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've tried
hedges," the Pigeon went on, "but those serpents! There's no pleasing
them!"

Alice was more and more puzzled.

"As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs," said the Pigeon,
"but I must be on the look-out for serpents, night and day! And just as
I'd taken the highest tree in the wood," continued the Pigeon, raising
its voice to a shriek, "and just as I was thinking I should be free of
them at last, they must needs come wriggling down from the sky! Ugh,
Serpent!"

"But I'm _not_ a serpent, I tell you!" said Alice. "I'm a--I'm a--I'm a
little girl," she added rather doubtfully, as she remembered the number
of changes she had gone through that day.

"You're looking for eggs, I know _that_ well enough," said the Pigeon;
"and what does it matter to me whether you're a little girl or a
serpent?"

"It matters a good deal to _me_," said Alice hastily; "but I'm not
looking for eggs, as it happens, and if I was, I shouldn't want
_yours_--I don't like them raw."

"Well, be off, then!" said the Pigeon in a sulky tone, as it settled
down again into its nest. Alice crouched down among the trees as well as
she could, for her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and
every now and then she had to stop and untwist it. After awhile she
remembered that she still held the pieces of mushroom in her hands, and
she set to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until she had
succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual height.

It was so long since she had been anything near the right size that it
felt quite strange at first. "The next thing is to get into that
beautiful garden--how _is_ that to be done, I wonder?" As she said this,
she came suddenly upon an open place, with a little house in it about
four feet high. "Whoever lives there," thought Alice, "it'll never do to
come upon them _this_ size; why, I should frighten them out of their
wits!" She did not venture to go near the house till she had brought
herself down to nine inches high.




VI--PIG AND PEPPER


For a minute or two she stood looking at the house, when suddenly a
footman in livery came running out of the wood (judging by his face
only, she would have called him a fish)--and rapped loudly at the door
with his knuckles. It was opened by another footman in livery, with a
round face and large eyes like a frog.

[Illustration]

The Fish-Footman began by producing from under his arm a great letter,
and this he handed over to the other, saying, in a solemn tone, "For the
Duchess. An invitation from the Queen to play croquet." The
Frog-Footman repeated, in the same solemn tone, "From the Queen. An
invitation for the Duchess to play croquet." Then they both bowed low
and their curls got entangled together.

When Alice next peeped out, the Fish-Footman was gone, and the other was
sitting on the ground near the door, staring stupidly up into the sky.
Alice went timidly up to the door and knocked.

"There's no sort of use in knocking," said the Footman, "and that for
two reasons. First, because I'm on the same side of the door as you are;
secondly, because they're making such a noise inside, no one could
possibly hear you." And certainly there _was_ a most extraordinary noise
going on within--a constant howling and sneezing, and every now and then
a great crash, as if a dish or kettle had been broken to pieces.

"How am I to get in?" asked Alice.

"_Are_ you to get in at all?" said the Footman. "That's the first
question, you know."

Alice opened the door and went in. The door led right into a large
kitchen, which was full of smoke from one end to the other; the Duchess
was sitting on a three-legged stool in the middle, nursing a baby; the
cook was leaning over the fire, stirring a large caldron which seemed to
be full of soup.

"There's certainly too much pepper in that soup!" Alice said to herself,
as well as she could for sneezing. Even the Duchess sneezed
occasionally; and as for the baby, it was sneezing and howling
alternately without a moment's pause. The only two creatures in the
kitchen that did _not_ sneeze were the cook and a large cat, which was
grinning from ear to ear.

"Please would you tell me," said Alice, a little timidly, "why your cat
grins like that?"

"It's a Cheshire-Cat," said the Duchess, "and that's why."

"I didn't know that Cheshire-Cats always grinned; in fact, I didn't know
that cats _could_ grin," said Alice.

"You don't know much," said the Duchess, "and that's a fact."

Just then the cook took the caldron of soup off the fire, and at once
set to work throwing everything within her reach at the Duchess and the
baby--the fire-irons came first; then followed a shower of saucepans,
plates and dishes. The Duchess took no notice of them, even when they
hit her, and the baby was howling so much already that it was quite
impossible to say whether the blows hurt it or not.

"Oh, _please_ mind what you're doing!" cried Alice, jumping up and down
in an agony of terror.

"Here! You may nurse it a bit, if you like!" the Duchess said to Alice,
flinging the baby at her as she spoke. "I must go and get ready to play
croquet with the Queen," and she hurried out of the room.

Alice caught the baby with some difficulty, as it was a queer-shaped
little creature and held out its arms and legs in all directions. "If I
don't take this child away with me," thought Alice, "they're sure to
kill it in a day or two. Wouldn't it be murder to leave it behind?" She
said the last words out loud and the little thing grunted in reply.

"If you're going to turn into a pig, my dear," said Alice, "I'll have
nothing more to do with you. Mind now!"

Alice was just beginning to think to herself, "Now, what am I to do with
this creature, when I get it home?" when it grunted again so violently
that Alice looked down into its face in some alarm. This time there
could be _no_ mistake about it--it was neither more nor less than a pig;
so she set the little creature down and felt quite relieved to see it
trot away quietly into the wood.

Alice was a little startled by seeing the Cheshire-Cat sitting on a
bough of a tree a few yards off. The Cat only grinned when it saw her.
"Cheshire-Puss," began Alice, rather timidly, "would you please tell me
which way I ought to go from here?"

"In _that_ direction," the Cat said, waving the right paw 'round, "lives
a Hatter; and in _that_ direction," waving the other paw, "lives a March
Hare. Visit either you like; they're both mad."

"But I don't want to go among mad people," Alice remarked.

"Oh, you can't help that," said the Cat; "we're all mad here. Do you
play croquet with the Queen to-day?"

"I should like it very much," said Alice, "but I haven't been invited
yet."

"You'll see me there," said the Cat, and vanished.

Alice had not gone much farther before she came in sight of the house of
the March Hare; it was so large a house that she did not like to go near
till she had nibbled some more of the left-hand bit of mushroom.




VII--A MAD TEA-PARTY


There was a table set out under a tree in front of the house, and the
March Hare and the Hatter were having tea at it; a Dormouse was sitting
between them, fast asleep.

The table was a large one, but the three were all crowded together at
one corner of it. "No room! No room!" they cried out when they saw Alice
coming. "There's _plenty_ of room!" said Alice indignantly, and she sat
down in a large arm-chair at one end of the table.

The Hatter opened his eyes very wide on hearing this, but all he said
was "Why is a raven like a writing-desk?"

"I'm glad they've begun asking riddles--I believe I can guess that," she
added aloud.

"Do you mean that you think you can find out the answer to it?" said the
March Hare.

"Exactly so," said Alice.

"Then you should say what you mean," the March Hare went on.

"I do," Alice hastily replied; "at least--at least I mean what I
say--that's the same thing, you know."

"You might just as well say," added the Dormouse, which seemed to be
talking in its sleep, "that 'I breathe when I sleep' is the same thing
as 'I sleep when I breathe!'"

"It _is_ the same thing with you," said the Hatter, and he poured a
little hot tea upon its nose. The Dormouse shook its head impatiently
and said, without opening its eyes, "Of course, of course; just what I
was going to remark myself."

[Illustration]

"Have you guessed the riddle yet?" the Hatter said, turning to Alice
again.

"No, I give it up," Alice replied. "What's the answer?"

"I haven't the slightest idea," said the Hatter.

"Nor I," said the March Hare.

Alice gave a weary sigh. "I think you might do something better with the
time," she said, "than wasting it in asking riddles that have no
answers."

"Take some more tea," the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly.

"I've had nothing yet," Alice replied in an offended tone, "so I can't
take more."

"You mean you can't take _less_," said the Hatter; "it's very easy to
take _more_ than nothing."

At this, Alice got up and walked off. The Dormouse fell asleep instantly
and neither of the others took the least notice of her going, though she
looked back once or twice; the last time she saw them, they were
trying to put the Dormouse into the tea-pot.

[Illustration: The Trial of the Knave of Hearts.]

"At any rate, I'll never go _there_ again!" said Alice, as she picked
her way through the wood. "It's the stupidest tea-party I ever was at in
all my life!" Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees
had a door leading right into it. "That's very curious!" she thought. "I
think I may as well go in at once." And in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall and close to the little
glass table. Taking the little golden key, she unlocked the door that
led into the garden. Then she set to work nibbling at the mushroom (she
had kept a piece of it in her pocket) till she was about a foot high;
then she walked down the little passage; and _then_--she found herself
at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright flower-beds and the
cool fountains.




VIII--THE QUEEN'S CROQUET GROUND


A large rose-tree stood near the entrance of the garden; the roses
growing on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it, busily
painting them red. Suddenly their eyes chanced to fall upon Alice, as
she stood watching them. "Would you tell me, please," said Alice, a
little timidly, "why you are painting those roses?"

Five and Seven said nothing, but looked at Two. Two began, in a low
voice, "Why, the fact is, you see, Miss, this here ought to have been a
_red_ rose-tree, and we put a white one in by mistake; and, if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off, you know. So
you see, Miss, we're doing our best, afore she comes, to--" At this
moment, Five, who had been anxiously looking across the garden, called
out, "The Queen! The Queen!" and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many footsteps
and Alice looked 'round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs, with their hands and feet at the
corners: next the ten courtiers; these were ornamented all over with
diamonds. After these came the royal children; there were ten of them,
all ornamented with hearts. Next came the guests, mostly Kings and
Queens, and among them Alice recognized the White Rabbit. Then followed
the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King's crown on a crimson velvet
cushion; and last of all this grand procession came THE KING AND THE
QUEEN OF HEARTS.

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely, "Who is this?" She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

"My name is Alice, so please Your Majesty," said Alice very politely;
but she added to herself, "Why, they're only a pack of cards, after
all!"

"Can you play croquet?" shouted the Queen. The question was evidently
meant for Alice.

"Yes!" said Alice loudly.

"Come on, then!" roared the Queen.

"It's--it's a very fine day!" said a timid voice to Alice. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

"Very," said Alice. "Where's the Duchess?"

"Hush! Hush!" said the Rabbit. "She's under sentence of execution."

"What for?" said Alice.

"She boxed the Queen's ears--" the Rabbit began.

"Get to your places!" shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other. However, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began.

Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in her
life; it was all ridges and furrows. The croquet balls were live
hedgehogs, and the mallets live flamingos and the soldiers had to double
themselves up and stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The players all played at once, without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short time,
the Queen was in a furious passion and went stamping about and shouting,
"Off with his head!" or "Off with her head!" about once in a minute.

"They're dreadfully fond of beheading people here," thought Alice; "the
great wonder is that there's anyone left alive!"

She was looking about for some way of escape, when she noticed a curious
appearance in the air. "It's the Cheshire-Cat," she said to herself;
"now I shall have somebody to talk to."

"How are you getting on?" said the Cat.

"I don't think they play at all fairly," Alice said, in a rather
complaining tone; "and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear
oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular."

"How do you like the Queen?" said the Cat in a low voice.

"Not at all," said Alice.

[Illustration]

Alice thought she might as well go back and see how the game was going
on. So she went off in search of her hedgehog. The hedgehog was engaged
in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed to Alice an excellent
opportunity for croqueting one of them with the other; the only
difficulty was that her flamingo was gone across to the other side of
the garden, where Alice could see it trying, in a helpless sort of way,
to fly up into a tree. She caught the flamingo and tucked it away under
her arm, that it might not escape again.

Just then Alice ran across the Duchess (who was now out of prison). She
tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's and they walked off together.
Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper. She was a
little startled, however, when she heard the voice of the Duchess close
to her ear. "You're thinking about something, my dear, and that makes
you forget to talk."

"The game's going on rather better now," Alice said, by way of keeping
up the conversation a little.

"'Tis so," said the Duchess; "and the moral of that is--'Oh, 'tis love,
'tis love that makes the world go 'round!'"

"Somebody said," Alice whispered, "that it's done by everybody minding
his own business!"

"Ah, well! It means much the same thing," said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder, as she added "and the moral of
_that_ is--'Take care of the sense and the sounds will take care of
themselves.'"

To Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's arm that was linked into hers
began to tremble. Alice looked up and there stood the Queen in front of
them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm!

"Now, I give you fair warning," shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke, "either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time. Take your choice!" The Duchess took her choice, and
was gone in a moment.

"Let's go on with the game," the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was too
much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

All the time they were playing, the Queen never left off quarreling with
the other players and shouting, "Off with his head!" or "Off with her
head!" By the end of half an hour or so, all the players, except the
King, the Queen and Alice, were in custody of the soldiers and under
sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and walked away with
Alice.

Alice heard the King say in a low voice to the company generally, "You
are all pardoned."

Suddenly the cry "The Trial's beginning!" was heard in the distance, and
Alice ran along with the others.




IX--WHO STOLE THE TARTS?


The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it. "I wish they'd get the
trial done," Alice thought, "and hand 'round the refreshments!"

The judge, by the way, was the King and he wore his crown over his great
wig. "That's the jury-box," thought Alice; "and those twelve creatures
(some were animals and some were birds) I suppose they are the jurors."

Just then the White Rabbit cried out "Silence in the court!"

"Herald, read the accusation!" said the King.

[Illustration]

On this, the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, then
unrolled the parchment-scroll and read as follows:

    "The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a summer day;
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts
      And took them quite away!"

"Call the first witness," said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three
blasts on the trumpet and called out, "First witness!"

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one hand
and a piece of bread and butter in the other.

"You ought to have finished," said the King. "When did you begin?"

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm in arm with the Dormouse. "Fourteenth of March, I _think_ it
was," he said.

"Give your evidence," said the King, "and don't be nervous, or I'll have
you executed on the spot."

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all; he kept shifting from
one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and, in his
confusion, he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the bread
and butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation--she was
beginning to grow larger again.

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread and butter and went
down on one knee. "I'm a poor man, Your Majesty," he began.

"You're a _very_ poor _speaker_," said the King.

"You may go," said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court.

"Call the next witness!" said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess's cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand and the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

"Give your evidence," said the King.

"Sha'n't," said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said, in a low voice,
"Your Majesty must cross-examine _this_ witness."

"Well, if I must, I must," the King said. "What are tarts made of?"

"Pepper, mostly," said the cook.

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion and by the time they
had settled down again, the cook had disappeared.

"Never mind!" said the King, "call the next witness."

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list. Imagine her
surprise when he read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name "Alice!"




X--ALICE'S EVIDENCE


"Here!" cried Alice. She jumped up in such a hurry that she tipped over
the jury-box, upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd
below.

"Oh, I _beg_ your pardon!" she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay.

"The trial cannot proceed," said the King, "until all the jurymen are
back in their proper places--_all_," he repeated with great emphasis,
looking hard at Alice.

"What do you know about this business?" the King said to Alice.

"Nothing whatever," said Alice.

The King then read from his book: "Rule forty-two. _All persons more
than a mile high to leave the court_."

"_I'm_ not a mile high," said Alice.

"Nearly two miles high," said the Queen.

[Illustration]

"Well, I sha'n't go, at any rate," said Alice.

The King turned pale and shut his note-book hastily. "Consider your
verdict," he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

"There's more evidence to come yet, please Your Majesty," said the White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry. "This paper has just been picked
up. It seems to be a letter written by the prisoner to--to somebody." He
unfolded the paper as he spoke and added, "It isn't a letter, after all;
it's a set of verses."

"Please, Your Majesty," said the Knave, "I didn't write it and they
can't prove that I did; there's no name signed at the end."

"You _must_ have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your
name like an honest man," said the King. There was a general clapping of
hands at this.

"Read them," he added, turning to the White Rabbit.

There was dead silence in the court whilst the White Rabbit read out the
verses.

"That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet," said the
King.

"_I_ don't believe there's an atom of meaning in it," ventured Alice.

"If there's no meaning in it," said the King, "that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. Let the jury consider
their verdict."

"No, no!" said the Queen. "Sentence first--verdict afterwards."

"Stuff and nonsense!" said Alice loudly. "The idea of having the
sentence first!"

"Hold your tongue!" said the Queen, turning purple.

"I won't!" said Alice.

"Off with her head!" the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

"Who cares for _you_?" said Alice (she had grown to her full size by
this time). "You're nothing but a pack of cards!"



At this, the whole pack rose up in the air and came flying down upon
her; she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

"Wake up, Alice dear!" said her sister. "Why, what a long sleep you've
had!"

"Oh, I've had such a curious dream!" said Alice. And she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about. Alice got up and ran off,
thinking while she ran, as well she might, what a wonderful dream it had
been.
