The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Blockade Runners, by Jules Verne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Blockade Runners

Author: Jules Verne

Posting Date: March 22, 2013 [EBook #8992]
Release Date: September, 2005
First Posted: August 30, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLOCKADE RUNNERS ***




Produced by Norman M. Wolcott







The Blockade Runners by Jules Verne


[Redactor's Note: _The Blockade Runners_ (number V008 in the T&M
numerical listing of Verne's works) is a translation of _Les forceurs
de blocus_ (1871). _The Blockade Runners_, a novella, was included
along with _A Floating City_ in the first english and french editions
of this work. This translation, which follows that of Sampson and Low
(UK) and Scribners (US) is by "N. D'Anvers", pseudonymn for Mrs. Arthur
Bell (d. 1933) who also translated other Verne books. It is also
included in the fifteen volume Parke edition of the works of Jules
Verne (1911). There is another translation by Henry Frith which was
published by Routledge (1876).

Both of these stories are about ships; _Floating City_ about the
largest ship of the time, the _Great Eastern_, and _Blockade Runners_
about one of the fastest, the _Dolphin_.

This text version was prepared from public domain sources by Norman M.
Wolcott, 2003, nwolcott2@post.harvard.edu]





The Blockade Runners

Table of Contents




  I  THE _DOLPHIN_
  II  GETTING UNDER SAIL
  III  THINGS ARE NOT WHAT THEY SEEM
  IV  CROCKSTON'S TRICK
  V  THE SHOT FROM THE _IROQUOIS,_ AND MISS JENNY'S ARGUMENTS
  VI  SULLIVAN ISLAND CHANNEL
  VII  A SOUTHERN GENERAL
  VIII  THE ESCAPE
  IX  BETWEEN TWO FIRES
  X  ST. MUNGO





THE BLOCKADE RUNNERS




Chapter I

THE _DOLPHIN_

The Clyde was the first river whose waters were lashed into foam by a
steam-boat. It was in 1812 when the steamer called the _Comet_ ran
between Glasgow and Greenock, at the speed of six miles an hour. Since
that time more than a million of steamers or packet-boats have plied
this Scotch river, and the inhabitants of Glasgow must be as familiar
as any people with the wonders of steam navigation.

However, on the 3rd of December, 1862, an immense crowd, composed of
shipowners, merchants, manufacturers, workmen, sailors, women, and
children, thronged the muddy streets of Glasgow, all going in the
direction of Kelvin Dock, the large shipbuilding premises belonging to
Messrs. Tod & MacGregor. This last name especially proves that the
descendants of the famous Highlanders have become manufacturers, and
that they have made workmen of all the vassals of the old clan
chieftains.

Kelvin Dock is situated a few minutes' walk from the town, on the right
bank of the Clyde. Soon the immense timber-yards were thronged with
spectators; not a part of the quay, not a wall of the wharf, not a
factory roof showed an unoccupied place; the river itself was covered
with craft of all descriptions, and the heights of Govan, on the left
bank, swarmed with spectators.

There was, however, nothing extraordinary in the event about to take
place; it was nothing but the launching of a ship, and this was an
everyday affair with the people of Glasgow. Had the _Dolphin_,
then--for that was the name of the ship built by Messrs. Tod &
MacGregor--some special peculiarity? To tell the truth, it had none.

It was a large ship, about 1,500 tons, in which everything combined to
obtain superior speed. Her engines, of 500 horse-power, were from the
workshops of Lancefield Forge; they worked two screws, one on either
side the stern-post, completely independent of each other. As for the
depth of water the _Dolphin_ would draw, it must be very
inconsiderable; connoisseurs were not deceived, and they concluded
rightly that this ship was destined for shallow straits. But all these
particulars could not in any way justify the eagerness of the people:
taken altogether, the _Dolphin_ was nothing more or less than an
ordinary ship. Would her launching present some mechanical difficulty
to be overcome? Not any more than usual. The Clyde had received many a
ship of heavier tonnage, and the launching of the _Dolphin_ would take
place in the usual manner.

In fact, when the water was calm, the moment the ebb-tide set in, the
workmen began to operate. Their mallets kept perfect time falling on
the wedges meant to raise the ship's keel: soon a shudder ran through
the whole of her massive structure; although she had only been slightly
raised, one could see that she shook, and then gradually began to glide
down the well greased wedges, and in a few moments she plunged into the
Clyde. Her stern struck the muddy bed of the river, then she raised
herself on the top of a gigantic wave, and, carried forward by her
start, would have been dashed against the quay of the Govan
timber-yards, if her anchors had not restrained her.

The launch had been perfectly successful, the _Dolphin_ swayed quietly
on the waters of the Clyde, all the spectators clapped their hands when
she took possession of her natural element, and loud hurrahs arose from
either bank.

But wherefore these cries and this applause? Undoubtedly the most eager
of the spectators would have been at a loss to explain the reason of
his enthusiasm. What was the cause, then, of the lively interest
excited by this ship? Simply the mystery which shrouded her
destination; it was not known to what kind of commerce she was to be
appropriated, and in questioning different groups the diversity of
opinion on this important subject was indeed astonishing.

However, the best informed, at least those who pretended to be so,
agreed in saying that the steamer was going to take part in the
terrible war which was then ravaging the United States of America, but
more than this they did not know, and whether the _Dolphin_ was a
privateer, a transport ship, or an addition to the Federal marine was
what no one could tell.

"Hurrah!" cried one, affirming that the _Dolphin_ had been built for
the Southern States.

"Hip! hip! hip!" cried another, swearing that never had a faster boat
crossed to the American coasts.

Thus its destination was unknown, and in order to obtain any reliable
information one must be an intimate friend, or, at any rate, an
acquaintance of Vincent Playfair & Co., of Glasgow.

A rich, powerful, intelligent house of business was that of Vincent
Playfair & Co., in a social sense, an old and honourable family,
descended from those tobacco lords who built the finest quarters of the
town. These clever merchants, by an act of the Union, had founded the
first Glasgow warehouse for dealing in tobacco from Virginia and
Maryland. Immense fortunes were realised; mills and foundries sprang up
in all parts, and in a few years the prosperity of the city attained
its height.

The house of Playfair remained faithful to the enterprising spirit of
its ancestors, it entered into the most daring schemes, and maintained
the honour of English commerce. The principal, Vincent Playfair, a man
of fifty, with a temperament essentially practical and decided,
although somewhat daring, was a genuine shipowner. Nothing affected him
beyond commercial questions, not even the political side of the
transactions, otherwise he was a perfectly loyal and honest man.

However, he could not lay claim to the idea of building and fitting up
the _Dolphin_; she belonged to his nephew, James Playfair, a fine young
man of thirty, the boldest skipper of the British merchant marine.

It was one day at the Tontine coffee-room under the arcades of the town
hall, that James Playfair, after having impatiently scanned the
American journal, disclosed to his uncle an adventurous scheme.

"Uncle Vincent," said he, coming to the point at once, "there are two
millions of pounds to be gained in less than a month."

"And what to risk?" asked Uncle Vincent.

"A ship and a cargo."

"Nothing else?"

"Nothing, except the crew and the captain, and that does not reckon for
much."

"Let us see," said Uncle Vincent.

"It is all seen," replied James Playfair. "You have read the _Tribune_,
the _New York Herald, The Times_, the _Richmond Inquirer_, the
_American Review_?"

"Scores of times, nephew."

"You believe, like me, that the war of the United States will last a
long time still?"

"A very long time."

"You know how much this struggle will affect the interests of England,
and especially those of Glasgow?"

"And more especially still the house of Playfair & Co.," replied Uncle
Vincent.

"Theirs especially," added the young Captain.

"I worry myself about it every day, James, and I cannot think without
terror of the commercial disasters which this war may produce; not but
that the house of Playfair is firmly established, nephew; at the same
time it has correspondents which may fail. Ah! those Americans,
slave-holders or Abolitionists, I have no faith in them!"

If Vincent Playfair was wrong in thus speaking with respect to the
great principles of humanity, always and everywhere superior to
personal interests, he was, nevertheless, right from a commercial point
of view. The most important material was failing at Glasgow, the cotton
famine became every day more threatening, thousands of workmen were
reduced to living upon public charity. Glasgow possessed 25,000 looms,
by which 625,000 yards of cotton were spun daily; that is to say, fifty
millions of pounds yearly. From these numbers it may be guessed what
disturbances were caused in the commercial part of the town when the
raw material failed altogether. Failures were hourly taking place, the
manufactories were closed, and the workmen were dying of starvation.

It was the sight of this great misery which had put the idea of his
bold enterprise into James Playfair's head.

"I will go for cotton, and will get it, cost what it may."

But, as he also was a merchant as well as his uncle Vincent, he
resolved to carry out his plan by way of exchange, and to make his
proposition under the guise of a commercial enterprise.

"Uncle Vincent," said he, "this is my idea."

"Well, James?"

"It is simply this: we will have a ship built of superior sailing
qualities and great bulk."

"That is quite possible."

"We will load her with ammunition of war, provisions, and clothes."

"Just so."

"I will take the command of this steamer, I will defy all the ships of
the Federal marine for speed, and I will run the blockade of one of the
southern ports."

"You must make a good bargain for your cargo with the Confederates, who
will be in need of it," said his uncle.

"And I shall return laden with cotton."

"Which they will give you for nothing."

"As you say, Uncle. Will it answer?"

"It will; but shall you be able to get there?"

"I shall, if I have a good ship."

"One can be made on purpose. But the crew?"

"Oh, I will find them. I do not want many men; enough to work with,
that is all. It is not a question of fighting with the Federals, but
distancing them."

"They shall be distanced," said Uncle Vincent, in a peremptory tone;
"but now, tell me, James, to what port of the American coast do you
think of going?"

"Up to now, Uncle, ships have run the blockade of New Orleans,
Wilmington, and Savannah, but I think of going straight to Charleston;
no English boat has yet been able to penetrate into the harbour, except
the _Bermuda_. I will do like her, and, if my ship draws but very
little water, I shall be able to go where the Federalists will not be
able to follow."

"The fact is," said Uncle Vincent, "Charleston is overwhelmed with
cotton; they are even burning it to get rid of it."

"Yes," replied James; "besides, the town is almost invested; Beauregard
is running short of provisions, and he will pay me a golden price for
my cargo!"

"Well, nephew, and when will you start?"

"In six months; I must have the long winter nights to aid me."

"It shall be as you wish, nephew."

"It is settled, then, Uncle?"

"Settled!"

"Shall it be kept quiet?"

"Yes; better so."

And this is how it was that five months later the steamer _Dolphin_ was
launched from the Kelvin Dock timber-yards, and no one knew her real
destination.




Chapter II

GETTING UNDER SAIL

The _Dolphin_ was rapidly equipped, her rigging was ready, and there
was nothing to do but fit her up. She carried three schooner-masts, an
almost useless luxury; in fact, the _Dolphin_ did not rely on the wind
to escape the Federalists, but rather on her powerful engines.

Towards the end of December a trial of the steamer was made in the gulf
of the Clyde. Which was the more satisfied, builder or captain, it is
impossible to say. The new steamer shot along wonderfully, and the
patent log showed a speed of seventeen miles an hour, a speed which as
yet no English, French, or American boat had ever obtained. The
_Dolphin_ would certainly have gained by several lengths in a sailing
match with the fastest opponent.

The loading was begun on the 25th of December, the steamer having
ranged along the steamboat-quay a little below Glasgow Bridge, the last
which stretches across the Clyde before its mouth. Here the wharfs were
heaped with a heavy cargo of clothes, ammunition, and provisions which
were rapidly carried to the hold of the _Dolphin_. The nature of this
cargo betrayed the mysterious destination of the ship, and the house of
Playfair could no longer keep it secret; besides, the _Dolphin_ must
not be long before she started. No American cruiser had been signalled
in English waters; and, then, when the question of getting the crew
came, how was it possible to keep silent any longer? They could not
embark them, even, without informing the men whither they were bound,
for, after all, it was a matter of life and death, and when one risks
one's life, at least it is satisfactory to know how and wherefore.

However, this prospect hindered no one; the pay was good, and everyone
had a share in the speculation, so that a great number of the finest
sailors soon presented themselves. James Playfair was only embarrassed
which to choose, but he chose well, and in twenty-four hours his
muster-roll bore the names of thirty sailors who would have done honour
to her Majesty's yacht.

The departure was settled for the 3rd of January; on the 31st of
December the _Dolphin_ was ready, her hold full of ammunition and
provisions, and nothing was keeping her now.

The skipper went on board on the 2nd of January, and was giving a last
look round his ship with a captain's eye, when a man presented himself
at the fore part of the _Dolphin_, and asked to speak with the Captain.
One of the sailors led him on to the poop.

He was a strong, hearty-looking fellow, with broad shoulders and ruddy
face, the simple expression of which ill-concealed a depth of wit and
mirth. He did not seem to be accustomed to a seafaring life, and looked
about him with the air of a man little used to being on board a ship;
however, he assumed the manner of a Jack-tar, looking up at the rigging
of the _Dolphin_, and waddling in true sailor fashion.

When he had reached the Captain, he looked fixedly at him, and said,
"Captain James Playfair?"

"The same," replied the skipper. "What do you want with me?"

"To join your ship."

"There is no room; the crew is already complete."

"Oh, one man, more or less, will not be in the way; quite the contrary."

"You think so?" said James Playfair, giving a sidelong glance at his
questioner.

"I am sure of it," replied the sailor.

"But who are you?" asked the Captain.

"A rough sailor, with two strong arms, which, I can tell you, are not
to be despised on board a ship, and which I now have the honour of
putting at your service."

"But there are other ships besides the _Dolphin_, and other captains
besides James Playfair. Why do you come here?"

"Because it is on board the _Dolphin_ that I wish to serve, and under
the orders of Captain James Playfair."

"I do not want you."

"There is always need of a strong man, and if to prove my strength you
will try me with three or four of the strongest fellows of your crew, I
am ready."

"That will do," replied James Playfair. "And what is your name?"

"Crockston, at your service."

The Captain made a few steps backwards in order to get a better view of
the giant who presented himself in this odd fashion. The height, the
build, and the look of the sailor did not deny his pretensions to
strength.

"Where have you sailed?" asked Playfair of him.

"A little everywhere."

"And do you know where the _Dolphin_ is bound for?"

"Yes; and that is what tempts me."

"Ah, well! I have no mind to let a fellow of your stamp escape me. Go
and find the first mate, and get him to enrol you."

Having said this, the Captain expected to see the man turn on his heels
and run to the bows, but he was mistaken. Crockston did not stir.

"Well! did you hear me?" asked the Captain.

"Yes, but it is not all," replied the sailor. "I have something else to
ask you."

"Ah! You are wasting my time," replied James, sharply; "I have not a
moment to lose in talking."

"I shall not keep you long," replied Crockston; "two words more and
that is all; I was going to tell you that I have a nephew."

"He has a fine uncle, then," interrupted James Playfair.

"Hah! Hah!" laughed Crockston.

"Have you finished?" asked the Captain, very impatiently.

"Well, this is what I have to say, when one takes the uncle, the nephew
comes into the bargain."

"Ah! indeed!"

"Yes, that is the custom, the one does not go without the other."

"And what is this nephew of yours?"

"A lad of fifteen whom I am going to train to the sea; he is willing to
learn, and will make a fine sailor some day."

"How now, Master Crockston," cried James Playfair; "do you think the
_Dolphin_ is a training-school for cabin-boys?"

"Don't let us speak ill of cabin-boys: there was one of them who became
Admiral Nelson, and another Admiral Franklin."

"Upon my honour, friend," replied James Playfair, "you have a way of
speaking which I like; bring your nephew, but if I don't find the uncle
the hearty fellow he pretends to be, he will have some business with
me. Go, and be back in an hour."

Crockston did not want to be told twice; he bowed awkwardly to the
Captain of the _Dolphin_, and went on to the quay. An hour afterwards
he came on board with his nephew, a boy of fourteen or fifteen, rather
delicate and weakly looking, with a timid and astonished air, which
showed that he did not possess his uncle's self-possession and vigorous
corporeal qualities. Crockston was even obliged to encourage him by
such words as these:

"Come," said he, "don't be frightened, they are not going to eat us,
besides, there is yet time to return."

"No, no," replied the young man, "and may God protect us!"

The same day the sailor Crockston and his nephew were inscribed in the
muster-roll of the _Dolphin_.

The next morning, at five o'clock, the fires of the steamer were well
fed, the deck trembled under the vibrations of the boiler, and the
steam rushed hissing through the escape-pipes. The hour of departure
had arrived.

A considerable crowd, in spite of the early hour, flocked on the quays
and on Glasgow Bridge; they had come to salute the bold steamer for the
last time. Vincent Playfair was there to say good-bye to Captain James,
but he conducted himself on this occasion like a Roman of the good old
times. His was a heroic countenance, and the two loud kisses with which
he gratified his nephew were the indication of a strong mind.

"Go, James," said he to the young Captain, "go quickly, and come back
quicker still; above all, don't abuse your position. Sell at a good
price, make a good bargain, and you will have your uncle's esteem."

On this recommendation, borrowed from the manual of the perfect
merchant, the uncle and nephew separated, and all the visitors left the
boat.

At this moment Crockston and John Stiggs stood together on the
forecastle, while the former remarked to his nephew, "This is well,
this is well; before two o'clock we shall be at sea, and I have a good
opinion of a voyage which begins like this."

For reply the novice pressed Crockston's hand.

James Playfair then gave the orders for departure.

"Have we pressure on?" he asked of his mate.

"Yes, Captain," replied Mr. Mathew.

"Well, then, weigh anchor."

This was immediately done, and the screws began to move. The _Dolphin_
trembled, passed between the ships in the port, and soon disappeared
from the sight of the people, who shouted their last hurrahs.

The descent of the Clyde was easily accomplished, one might almost say
that this river had been made by the hand of man, and even by the hand
of a master. For sixty years, thanks to the dredges and constant
dragging, it has gained fifteen feet in depth, and its breadth has been
tripled between the quays and the town. Soon the forests of masts and
chimneys were lost in the smoke and fog; the noise of the foundry
hammers and the hatchets of the timber-yards grew fainter in the
distance. After the village of Partick had been passed the factories
gave way to country houses and villas. The _Dolphin_, slackening her
speed, sailed between the dykes which carry the river above the shores,
and often through a very narrow channel, which, however, is only a
small inconvenience for a navigable river, for, after all, depth is of
more importance than width. The steamer, guided by one of those
excellent pilots from the Irish sea, passed without hesitation between
floating buoys, stone columns, and _biggings_, surmounted with
lighthouses, which mark the entrance to the channel. Beyond the town of
Renfrew, at the foot of Kilpatrick hills, the Clyde grew wider. Then
came Bouling Bay, at the end of which opens the mouth of the canal
which joints Edinburgh to Glasgow. Lastly, at the height of four
hundred feet from the ground, was seen the outline of Dumbarton Castle,
almost indiscernible through the mists, and soon the harbour-boats of
Glasgow were rocked on the waves which the _Dolphin_ caused. Some miles
farther on Greenock, the birthplace of James Watt, was passed: the
_Dolphin_ now found herself at the mouth of the Clyde, and at the
entrance of the gulf by which it empties its waters into the Northern
Ocean. Here the first undulations of the sea were felt, and the steamer
ranged along the picturesque coast of the Isle of Arran. At last the
promontory of Cantyre, which runs out into the channel, was doubled;
the Isle of Rattelin was hailed, the pilot returned by a shore-boat to
his cutter, which was cruising in the open sea; the _Dolphin_,
returning to her Captain's authority, took a less frequented route
round the north of Ireland, and soon, having lost sight of the last
European land, found herself in the open ocean.




Chapter III

THINGS ARE NOT WHAT THEY SEEM

The _Dolphin_ had a good crew, not fighting men, or boarding sailors,
but good working men, and that was all she wanted. These brave,
determined fellows were all, more or less, merchants; they sought a
fortune rather than glory; they had no flag to display, no colours to
defend with cannon; in fact, all the artillery on board consisted of
two small swivel signal-guns.

The _Dolphin_ shot bravely across the water, and fulfilled the utmost
expectations of both builder and captain. Soon she passed the limit of
British seas; there was not a ship in sight; the great ocean route was
free; besides, no ship of the Federal marine would have a right to
attack her beneath the English flag. Followed she might be, and
prevented from forcing the blockade, and precisely for this reason had
James Playfair sacrificed everything to the speed of his ship, in order
not to be pursued.

Howbeit a careful watch was kept on board, and, in spite of the extreme
cold, a man was always in the rigging ready to signal the smallest sail
that appeared on the horizon. When evening came, Captain James gave the
most precise orders to Mr. Mathew.

"Don't leave the man on watch too long in the rigging; the cold may
seize him, and in that case it is impossible to keep a good look-out;
change your men often."

"I understand, Captain," replied Mr. Mathew.

"Try Crockston for that work; the fellow pretends to have excellent
sight; it must be put to trial; put him on the morning watch, he will
have the morning mists to see through. If anything particular happens
call me."

This said, James Playfair went to his cabin. Mr. Mathew called
Crockston, and told him the Captain's orders.

"To-morrow, at six o'clock," said he, "you are to relieve watch of the
main masthead."

For reply, Crockston gave a decided grunt, but Mr. Mathew had hardly
turned his back when the sailor muttered some incomprehensible words,
and then cried:

"What on earth did he say about the mainmast?"

At this moment his nephew, John Stiggs, joined him on the forecastle.

"Well, my good Crockston," said he.

"It's all right, all right," said the seaman, with a forced smile;
"there is only one thing, this wretched boat shakes herself like a dog
coming out of the water, and it makes my head confused."

"Dear Crockston, and it is for my sake."

"For you and him," replied Crockston, "but not a word about that, John.
Trust in God, and He will not forsake you."

So saying, John Stiggs and Crockston went to the sailor's berth, but
the sailor did not lie down before he had seen the young novice
comfortably settled in the narrow cabin which he had got for him.

The next day, at six o'clock in the morning, Crockston got up to go to
his place; he went on deck, where the first officer ordered him to go
up into the rigging, and keep good watch.

At these words the sailor seemed undecided what to do; then, making up
his mind, he went towards the bows of the _Dolphin_.

"Well, where are you off to now?" cried Mr. Mathew.

"Where you sent me," answered Crockston.

"I told you to go to the mainmast."

"And I am going there," replied the sailor, in an ununconcerned tone,
continuing his way to the poop.

"Are you a fool?" cried Mr. Mathew, impatiently; "you are looking for
the bars of the main on the foremast. You are like a cockney, who
doesn't know how to twist a cat-o'-nine-tails, or make a splice. On
board what ship can you have been, man? The mainmast, stupid, the
mainmast!"

The sailors who had run up to hear what was going on burst out laughing
when they saw Crockston's disconcerted look, as he went back to the
forecastle.

"So," said he, looking up the mast, the top of which was quite
invisible through the morning mists; "so, am I to climb up here?"

"Yes," replied Mr. Mathew, "and hurry yourself! By St. Patrick, a
Federal ship would have time to get her bowsprit fast in our rigging
before that lazy fellow could get to his post. Will you go up?"

Without a word, Crockston got on the bulwarks with some difficulty;
then he began to climb the rigging with most visible awkwardness, like
a man who did not know how to make use of his hands or feet. When he
had reached the topgallant, instead of springing lightly on to it, he
remained motionless, clinging to the ropes, as if he had been seized
with giddiness. Mr. Mathew, irritated by his stupidity, ordered him to
come down immediately.

"That fellow there," said he to the boatswain, "has never been a sailor
in his life. Johnston, just go and see what he has in his bundle."

The boatswain made haste to the sailor's berth.

In the meantime Crockston was with difficulty coming down again, but,
his foot having slipped, he slid down the rope he had hold of, and fell
heavily on the deck.

"Clumsy blockhead! land-lubber!" cried Mr. Mathew, by way of
consolation. "What did you come to do on board the _Dolphin!_ Ah! you
entered as an able seaman, and you cannot even distinguish the main
from the foremast! I shall have a little talk with you."

Crockston made no attempt to speak; he bent his back like a man
resigned to anything he might have to bear; just then the boatswain
returned.

"This," said he to the first officer, "is all that I have found; a
suspicious portfolio with letters."

"Give them here," said Mr. Mathew. "Letters with Federal stamps! Mr.
Halliburtt, of Boston! An Abolitionist! a Federalist! Wretch! you are
nothing but a traitor, and have sneaked on board to betray us! Never
mind, you will be paid for your trouble with the cat-o'-nine-tails!
Boatswain, call the Captain, and you others just keep an eye on that
rogue there."

Crockston received these compliments with a hideous grimace, but he did
not open his lips. They had fastened him to the capstan, and he could
move neither hand nor foot.

A few minutes later James Playfair came out of his cabin and went to
the forecastle, where Mr. Mathew immediately acquainted him with the
details of the case.

"What have you to say?" asked James Playfair, scarcely able to restrain
his anger.

"Nothing," replied Crockston.

"And what did you come on board my ship for?"

"Nothing."

"And what do you expect from me now?"

"Nothing."

"Who are you? An American, as letters seem to prove?" Crockston did not
answer.

"Boatswain," said James Playfair, "fifty lashes with the
cat-o'-nine-tails to loosen his tongue. Will that be enough, Crockston?"

"It will remain to be seen," replied John Stiggs' uncle without moving
a muscle.

"Now then, come along, men," said the boatswain.

At this order, two strong sailors stripped Crockston of his woollen
jersey; they had already seized the formidable weapon, and laid it
across the prisoner's shoulders, when the novice, John Stiggs, pale and
agitated, hurried on deck.

"Captain!" exclaimed he.

"Ah! the nephew!" remarked James Playfair.

"Captain," repeated the novice, with a violent effort to steady his
voice, "I will tell you what Crockston does not want to say. I will
hide it no longer; yes, he is American, and so am I; we are both
enemies of the slave-holders, but not traitors come on board to betray
the _Dolphin_ into the hands of the Federalists."

"What did you come to do, then?" asked the Captain, in a severe tone,
examining the novice attentively. The latter hesitated a few seconds
before replying, then he said, "Captain, I should like to speak to you
in private."

Whilst John Stiggs made this request, James Playfair did not cease to
look carefully at him; the sweet young face of the novice, his
peculiarly gentle voice, the delicacy and whiteness of his hands,
hardly disguised by paint, the large eyes, the animation of which could
not bide their tenderness--all this together gave rise to a certain
suspicion in the Captain's mind. When John Stiggs had made his request,
Playfair glanced fixedly at Crockston, who shrugged his shoulders; then
he fastened a questioning look on the novice, which the latter could
not withstand, and said simply to him, "Come."

John Stiggs followed the Captain on to the poop, and then James
Playfair, opening the door of his cabin, said to the novice, whose
cheeks were pale with emotion, "Be so kind as to walk in, miss."

John, thus addressed, blushed violently, and two tears rolled
involuntarily down his cheeks.

"Don't be alarmed, miss," said James Playfair, in a gentle voice, "but
be so good as to tell me how I come to have the honour of having you on
board?"

The young girl hesitated a moment, then, reassured by the Captain's
look, she made up her mind to speak.

"Sir," said she, "I wanted to join my father at Charleston; the town is
besieged by land and blockaded by sea. I knew not how to get there,
when I heard that the _Dolphin_ meant to force the blockade. I came on
board your ship, and I beg you to forgive me if I acted without your
consent, which you would have refused me."

"Certainly," said James Playfair.

"I did well, then, not to ask you," resumed the young girl, with a
firmer voice.

The Captain crossed his arms, walked round his cabin, and then came
back.

"What is your name?" said he.

"Jenny Halliburtt."

"Your father, if I remember rightly the address on the letters, is he
not from Boston?"

"Yes, sir."

"And a Northerner is thus in a southern town in the thickest of the
war?"

"My father is a prisoner; he was at Charleston when the first shot of
the Civil War was fired, and the troops of the Union driven from Fort
Sumter by the Confederates. My father's opinions exposed him to the
hatred of the slavist part, and by the order of General Beauregard he
was imprisoned. I was then in England, living with a relation who has
just died, and left alone, with no help but that of Crockston, our
faithful servant, I wished to go to my father and share his prison with
him."

"What was Mr. Halliburtt, then?" asked James Playfair.

"A loyal and brave journalist," replied Jenny proudly, "one of the
noblest editors of the _Tribune_, and the one who was the boldest in
defending the cause of the negroes."

"An Abolitionist," cried the Captain angrily; "one of those men who,
under the vain pretence of abolishing slavery, have deluged their
country with blood and ruin."

"Sir!" replied Jenny Halliburtt, growing pale, "you are insulting my
father; you must not forget that I stand alone to defend him."

The young Captain blushed scarlet; anger mingled with shame struggled
in his breast; perhaps he would have answered the young girl, but he
succeeded in restraining himself, and, opening the door of the cabin,
he called "Boatswain!"

The boatswain came to him directly.

"This cabin will henceforward belong to Miss Jenny Halliburtt. Have a
cot made ready for me at the end of the poop; that's all I want."

The boatswain looked with a stupefied stare at the young novice
addressed in a feminine name, but on a sign from James Playfair he went
out.

"And now, miss, you are at home," said the young Captain of the
_Dolphin_. Then he retired.




Chapter IV

CROCKSTON'S TRICK

It was not long before the whole crew knew Miss Halliburtt's story,
which Crockston was no longer hindered from telling. By the Captain's
orders he was released from the capstan, and the cat-o'-nine-tails
returned to its Place.

"A pretty animal," said Crockston, "especially when it shows its
velvety paws."

As soon as he was free, he went down to the sailors' berths, found a
small portmanteau, and carried it to Miss Jenny; the young girl was now
able to resume her feminine attire, but she remained in her cabin, and
did not again appear on deck.

As for Crockston, it was well and duly agreed that, as he was no more a
sailor than a horse-guard, he should be exempt from all duty on board.

In the meanwhile the _Dolphin_, with her twin screws cutting the waves,
sped rapidly across the Atlantic, and there was nothing now to do but
keep a strict look-out. The day following the discovery of Miss Jenny's
identity, James Playfair paced the deck at the poop with a rapid step;
he had made no attempt to see the young girl and resume the
conversation of the day before.

Whilst he was walking to and fro, Crockston passed him several times,
looking at him askant with a satisfied grin. He evidently wanted to
speak to the Captain, and at last his persistent manner attracted the
attention of the latter, who said to him, somewhat impatiently:

"How now, what do you want? You are turning round me like a swimmer
round a buoy: when are you going to leave off?"

"Excuse me, Captain," answered Crockston, winking, "I wanted to speak
to you."

"Speak, then."

"Oh, it is nothing very much. I only wanted to tell you frankly that
you are a good fellow at bottom."

"Why at bottom?"

"At bottom and surface also."

"I don't want your compliments."

"I am not complimenting you. I shall wait to do that when you have gone
to the end."

"To what end?"

"To the end of your task."

"Ah! I have a task to fulfil?"

"Decidedly, you have taken the young girl and myself on board; good!
You have given up your cabin to Miss Halliburtt; good! You released me
from the cat-o'-nine-tails; nothing could be better. You are going to
take us straight to Charleston; that's delightful, but it is not all."

"How not all?" cried James Playfair, amazed at Crockston's boldness.

"No, certainly not," replied the latter, with a knowing look, "the
father is prisoner there."

"Well, what about that?"

"Well, the father must be rescued."

"Rescue Miss Halliburtt's father?"

"Most certainly, and it is worth risking something for such a noble man
and courageous citizen as he."

"Master Crockston," said James Playfair, frowning, "I am not in the
humour for your jokes, so have a care what you say."

"You misunderstand me, Captain," said the American. "I am not joking in
the least, but speaking quite seriously. What I have proposed may at
first seem very absurd to you; when you have thought it over, you will
see that you cannot do otherwise."

"What, do you mean that I must deliver Mr. Halliburtt?"

"Just so. You can demand his release of General Beauregard, who will
not refuse you."

"But if he does refuse me?"

"In that case," replied Crockston, in a deliberate tone, "we must use
stronger measures, and carry off the prisoner by force."

"So," cried James Playfair, who was beginning to get angry, "so, not
content with passing through the Federal fleets and forcing the
blockade of Charleston, I must run out to sea again from under the
cannon of the forts, and this to deliver a gentleman I know nothing of,
one of those Abolitionists whom I detest, one of those journalists who
shed ink instead of their blood!"

"Oh, it is but a cannon-shot more or less!" added Crockston.

"Master Crockston," said James Playfair, "mind what I say: if ever you
mention this affair again to me, I will send you to the hold for the
rest of the passage, to teach you manners."

Thus saying, the Captain dismissed the American, who went off
murmuring, "Ah, well, I am not altogether displeased with this
conversation: at any rate, the affair is broached; it will do, it will
do!"

James Playfair had hardly meant it when he said an Abolitionist whom I
detest; he did not in the least side with the Federals, but he did not
wish to admit that the question of slavery was the predominant reason
for the civil war of the United States, in spite of President Lincoln's
formal declaration. Did he, then, think that the Southern States, eight
out of thirty-six, were right in separating when they had been
voluntarily united? Not so; he detested the Northerners, and that was
all; he detested them as brothers separated from the common
family--true Englishmen--who had thought it right to do what he, James
Playfair, disapproved of with regard to the United States: these were
the political opinions of the Captain of the _Dolphin_. But, more than
this, the American war interfered with him personally, and he had a
grudge against those who had caused this war; one can understand, then,
how he would receive a proposition to deliver an Abolitionist, thus
bringing down on him the Confederates, with whom he pretended to do
business.

However, Crockston's insinuation did not fail to disturb him; he cast
the thought from him, but it returned unceasingly to his mind, and when
Miss Jenny came on deck the next day for a few minutes, he dared not
look her in the face.

And really it was a great pity, for this young girl, with the fair hair
and sweet, intelligent face, deserved to be looked at by a young man of
thirty. But James felt embarrassed in her presence; he felt that this
charming creature who had been educated in the school of misfortune
possessed a strong and generous soul; he understood that his silence
towards her inferred a refusal to acquiesce in her dearest wishes;
besides, Miss Jenny never looked out for James Playfair, neither did
she avoid him. Thus for the first few days they spoke little or not at
all to each other. Miss Halliburtt scarcely ever left her cabin, and it
is certain she would never have addressed herself to the Captain of the
_Dolphin_ if it had not been for Crockston's strategy, which brought
both parties together.

The worthy American was a faithful servant of the Halliburtt family; he
had been brought up in his master's house, and his devotion knew no
bounds. His good sense equalled his courage and energy, and, as has
been seen, he had a way of looking things straight in the face. He was
very seldom discouraged, and could generally find a way out of the most
intricate dangers with a wonderful skill.

This honest fellow had taken it into his head to deliver Mr.
Halliburtt, to employ the Captain's ship, and the Captain himself for
this purpose, and to return with him to England. Such was his
intention, so long as the young girl had no other object than to rejoin
her father and share his captivity. It was this Crockston tried to make
the Captain understand, as we have seen, but the enemy had not yet
surrendered; on the contrary.

"Now," said he, "it is absolutely necessary that Miss Jenny and the
Captain come to an understanding; if they are going to be sulky like
this all the passage we shall get nothing done. They must speak,
discuss; let them dispute even, so long as they talk, and I'll be
hanged if during their conversation James Playfair does not propose
himself what he refused me to-day."

But when Crockston saw that the young girl and the young man avoided
each other, he began to be perplexed.

"We must look sharp," said he to himself, and the morning of the fourth
day he entered Miss Halliburtt's cabin, rubbing his hands with an air
of perfect satisfaction.

"Good news!" cried he, "good news! You will never guess what the
Captain has proposed to me. A very noble young man he is. Now try."

"Ah!" replied Jenny, whose heart beat violently, "has he proposed to--"

"To deliver Mr. Halliburtt, to carry him off from the Confederates, and
bring him to England."

"Is it true?" cried Jenny.

"It is as I say, miss. What a good-hearted man this James Playfair is!
These English are either all good or all bad. Ah! he may reckon on my
gratitude, and I am ready to cut myself in pieces if it would please
him."

Jenny's joy was profound on hearing Crockston's words. Deliver her
father! She had never dared to think of such a plan, and the Captain of
the _Dolphin_ was going to risk his ship and crew!

"That's what he is," added Crockston; "and this, Miss Jenny, is well
worth an acknowledgment from you."

"More than an acknowledgment," cried the young girl; "a lasting
friendship!"

And immediately she left the cabin to find James Playfair, and express
to him the sentiments which flowed from her heart.

"Getting on by degrees," muttered the American.

James Playfair was pacing to and fro on the poop, and, as may be
thought, he was very much surprised, not to say amazed, to see the
young girl come up to him, her eyes moist with grateful tears, and,
holding out her hand to him, saying:

"Thank you, sir, thank you for your kindness, which I should never have
dared to expect from a stranger."

"Miss," replied the Captain, as if he understood nothing of what she
was talking, and could not understand, "I do not know--"

"Nevertheless, sir, you are going to brave many dangers, perhaps
compromise your interests for me, and you have done so much already in
offering me on board an hospitality to which I have no right whatever--"

"Pardon me, Miss Jenny," interrupted James Playfair, "but I protest
again I do not understand your words. I have acted towards you as any
well-bred man would towards a lady, and my conduct deserves neither so
many thanks nor so much gratitude."

"Mr. Playfair," said Jenny, "it is useless to pretend any longer;
Crockston has told me all!"

"Ah!" said the Captain, "Crockston has told you all; then I understand
less than ever the reason for your leaving your cabin, and saying these
words which--"

Whilst speaking the Captain felt very much embarrassed; he remembered
the rough way in which he had received the American's overtures, but
Jenny, fortunately for him, did not give him time for further
explanation; she interrupted him, holding out her hand and saying:

"Mr. James, I had no other object in coming on board your ship except
to go to Charleston, and there, however cruel the slave-holders may be,
they will not refuse to let a poor girl share her father's prison; that
was all. I had never thought of a return as possible; but, since you
are so generous as to wish for my father's deliverance, since you will
attempt everything to save him, be assured you have my deepest
gratitude."

James did not know what to do or what part to assume; he bit his lip;
he dared not take the hand offered him; he saw perfectly that Crockston
had compromised him, so that escape was impossible. At the same time he
had no thoughts of delivering Mr. Halliburtt, and getting complicated
in a disagreeable business: but how dash to the ground the hope which
had arisen in this poor girl's heart? How refuse the hand which she
held out to him with a feeling of such profound friendship? How change
to tears of grief the tears of gratitude which filled her eyes?

So the young man tried to reply evasively, in a manner which would
ensure his liberty of action for the future.

"Miss Jenny," said he, "rest assured I will do everything in my power
for--"

And he took the little hand in both of his, but with the gentle
pressure he felt his heart melt and his head grow confused: words to
express his thoughts failed him. He stammered out some incoherent words:

"Miss--Miss Jenny--for you--"

Crockston, who was watching him, rubbed his hands, grinning and
repeating to himself:

"It will come! it will come! it has come!"

How James Playfair would have managed to extricate himself from his
embarrassing position no one knows, but fortunately for him, if not for
the _Dolphin_, the man on watch was heard crying:

"Ahoy, officer of the watch!"

"What now?" asked Mr. Mathew.

"A sail to windward!"

James Playfair, leaving the young girl, immediately sprang to the
shrouds of the mainmast.




Chapter V

THE SHOT FROM THE _IROQUOIS,_ AND MISS JENNY'S ARGUMENTS

Until now the navigation of the _Dolphin_ had been very fortunate. Not
one ship had been signalled before the sail hailed by the man on watch.

The _Dolphin_ was then in 32° 51' lat., and 57° 43' W. longitude. For
forty-eight hours a fog, which now began to rise, had covered the
ocean. If this mist favoured the _Dolphin_ by hiding her course, it
also prevented any observations at a distance being made, and, without
being aware of it, she might be sailing side by side, so to speak, with
the ships she wished most to avoid.

Now this is just what had happened, and when the ship was signalled she
was only three miles to windward.

When James Playfair had reached the cross-trees, he saw distinctly,
through an opening in the mist, a large Federal corvette in full
pursuit of the _Dolphin_.

After having carefully examined her, the Captain came down on deck
again, and called to the first officer.

"Mr. Mathew," said he, "what do you think of this ship?"

"I think, Captain, that it is a Federal cruiser, which suspects our
intentions."

"There is no possible doubt of her nationality," said James Playfair.
"Look!"

At this moment the starry flag of the North United States appeared on
the gaff-yards of the corvette, and the latter asserted her colours
with a cannon-shot.

"An invitation to show ours," said Mr. Mathew. "Well, let us show them;
there is nothing to be ashamed of."

"What's the good?" replied James Playfair. "Our flag will hardly
protect us, and it will not hinder those people from paying us a visit.
No; let us go ahead."

"And go quickly," replied Mr. Mathew, "for, if my eyes do not deceive
me, I have already seen that corvette lying off Liverpool, where she
went to watch the ships in building: my name is not Mathew, if that is
not the _Iroquois_ on her taffrail."

"And is she fast?"

"One of the fastest vessels of the Federal marine."

"What guns does she carry?"

"Eight."

"Pooh!"

"Oh, don't shrug your shoulders, Captain," said Mr. Mathew, in a
serious tone; "two out of those eight guns are rifled, one is a
sixty-pounder on the forecastle, and the other a hundred-pounder on
deck."

"Upon my soul!" exclaimed James Playfair, "they are Parrott's, and will
carry three miles."

"Yes, and farther than that, Captain."

"Ah, well! Mr. Mathew, let their guns be sixty or only four-pounders,
and let them carry three miles or five hundred yards, it is all the
same if we can go fast enough to avoid their shot. We will show this
_Iroquois_ how a ship can go when she is built on purpose to go. Have
the fires drawn forward, Mr. Mathew."

The first officer gave the Captain's orders to the engineer, and soon
volumes of black smoke curled from the steamer's chimneys.

This proceeding did not seem to please the corvette, for she made the
_Dolphin_ the signal to lie to, but James Playfair paid no attention to
this warning, and did not change his ship's course.

"Now," said he, "we shall see what the _Iroquois_ will do; here is a
fine opportunity for her to try her guns. Go ahead full speed!"

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Mathew; "she will not be long in saluting us."

Returning to the poop, the Captain saw Miss Halliburtt sitting quietly
near the bulwarks.

"Miss Jenny," said he, "we shall probably be chased by that corvette
you see to windward, and as she will speak to us with shot, I beg to
offer you my arm to take you to your cabin again."

"Thank you, very much, Mr. Playfair," replied the young girl, looking
at him, "but I am not afraid of cannon-shots."

"However, miss, in spite of the distance, there may be some danger."

"Oh, I was not brought up to be fearful; they accustom us to everything
in America, and I assure you that the shot from the _Iroquois_ will not
make me lower my head."

"You are brave, Miss Jenny."

"Let us admit, then, that I am brave, and allow me to stay by you."

"I can refuse you nothing, Miss Halliburtt," replied the Captain,
looking at the young girl's calm face.

These words were hardly uttered when they saw a line of white smoke
issue from the bulwarks of the corvette; before the report had reached
the _Dolphin_ a projectile whizzed through the air in the direction of
the steamer.

At about twenty fathoms from the _Dolphin_ the shot, the speed of which
had sensibly lessened, skimmed over the surface of the waves, marking
its passage by a series of water-jets; then, with another burst, it
rebounded to a certain height, passed over the _Dolphin_, grazing the
mizzen-yards on the starboard side, fell at thirty fathoms beyond, and
was buried in the waves.

"By Jove!" exclaimed James Playfair, "we must get along; another slap
like that is not to be waited for."

"Oh!" exclaimed Mr. Mathew, "they will take some time to reload such
pieces."

"Upon my honour, it is an interesting sight," said Crockston, who, with
arms crossed, stood perfectly at his ease looking at the scene.

"Ah! that's you," cried James Playfair, scanning the American from head
to foot.

"It is me, Captain," replied the American, undisturbed. "I have come to
see how these brave Federals fire; not badly, in truth, not badly."

The Captain was going to answer Crockston sharply, but at this moment a
second shot struck the sea on the starboard side.

"Good!" cried James Playfair, "we have already gained two cables on
this _Iroquois_. Your friends sail like a buoy; do you hear, Master
Crockston?"

"I will not say they don't," replied the American, "and for the first
time in my life it does not fail to please me."

A third shot fell still farther astern, and in less than ten minutes
the _Dolphin_ was out of range of the corvette's guns.

"So much for patent-logs, Mr. Mathew," said James Playfair; "thanks to
those shot we know how to rate our speed. Now have the fires lowered;
it is not worth while to waste our coal uselessly."

"It is a good ship that you command," said Miss Halliburtt to the young
Captain.

"Yes, Miss Jenny, my good _Dolphin_ makes her seventeen knots, and
before the day is over we shall have lost sight of that corvette."

James Playfair did not exaggerate the sailing qualities of his ship,
and the sun had not set before the masts of the American ship had
disappeared below the horizon.

This incident allowed the Captain to see Miss Halliburtt's character in
a new light; besides, the ice was broken, henceforward, during the
whole of the voyage; the interviews between the Captain and his
passenger were frequent and prolonged; he found her to be a young girl,
calm, strong, thoughtful, and intelligent, speaking with great ease,
having her own ideas about everything, and expressing her thoughts with
a conviction which unconsciously penetrated James Playfair's heart.

She loved her country, she was zealous in the great cause of the Union,
and expressed herself on the civil war in the United States with an
enthusiasm of which no other woman would have been capable. Thus it
happened, more than once, that James Playfair found it difficult to
answer her, even when questions purely mercantile arose in connection
with the war: Miss Jenny attacked them none the less vigorously, and
would come to no other terms whatever. At first James argued a great
deal, and tried to uphold the Confederates against the Federals, to
prove that the Secessionists were in the right, and that if the people
were united voluntarily they might separate in the same manner. But the
young girl would not yield on this point; she demonstrated that the
question of slavery was predominant in the struggle between the North
and South Americans, that it was far more a war in the cause of morals
and humanity than politics, and James could make no answer. Besides,
during these discussions, which he listened to attentively, it is
difficult to say whether he was more touched by Miss Halliburtt's
arguments or the charming manner in which she spoke; but at last he was
obliged to acknowledge, among other things, that slavery was the
principal feature in the war, that it must be put an end to decisively,
and the last horrors of barbarous times abolished.

It has been said that the political opinions of the Captain did not
trouble him much. He would have sacrificed his most serious opinion
before such enticing arguments and under like circumstances; he made a
good bargain of his ideas for the same reason, but at last he was
attacked in his tenderest point; this was the question of the traffic
in which the _Dolphin_ was being employed, and, consequently, the
ammunition which was being carried to the Confederates.

"Yes, Mr. James," said Miss Halliburtt, "gratitude does not hinder me
from speaking with perfect frankness; on the contrary, you are a brave
seaman, a clever merchant, the house of Playfair is noted for its
respectability; but in this case it fails in its principles, and
follows a trade unworthy of it."

"How!" cried James, "the house of Playfair ought not to attempt such a
commercial enterprise?"

"No! it is taking ammunition to the unhappy creatures in revolt against
the government of their country, and it is lending arms to a bad cause."

"Upon my honour, Miss Jenny, I will not discuss the right of the
Confederates with you; I will only answer you with one word: I am a
merchant, and as such I only occupy myself with the interests of my
house; I look for gain wherever there is an opportunity of getting it."

"That is precisely what is to be blamed, Mr. James," replied the young
girl; "profit does not excuse it; thus, when you supply arms to the
Southerners, with which to continue a criminal war, you are quite as
guilty as when you sell opium to the Chinese, which stupefies them."

"Oh, for once, Miss Jenny, this is too much, and I cannot admit--"

"No; what I say is just, and when you consider it, when you understand
the part you are playing, when you think of the results for which you
are responsible, you will yield to me in this point, as in so many
others."

James Playfair was dumfounded at these words; he left the young girl, a
prey to angry thoughts, for he felt his powerlessness to answer; then
he sulked like a child for half an hour, and an hour later he returned
to the singular young girl who could overwhelm him with convincing
arguments with quite a pleasant smile.

In short, however it may have come about, and although he would not
acknowledge it to himself, Captain James Playfair belonged to himself
no longer; he was no longer commander-in-chief on board his own ship.

Thus, to Crockston's great joy, Mr. Halliburtt's affairs appeared to be
in a good way; the Captain seemed to have decided to undertake
everything in his power to deliver Miss Jenny's father, and for this he
would be obliged to compromise the _Dolphin_, his cargo, his crew, and
incur the displeasure of his worthy Uncle Vincent.




Chapter VI

SULLIVAN ISLAND CHANNEL

Two days after the meeting with the _Iroquois_, the _Dolphin_ found
herself abreast of the Bermudas, where she was assailed by a violent
squall. These isles are frequently visited by hurricanes, and are
celebrated for shipwrecks. It is here that Shakespeare has placed the
exciting scene of his drama, _The Tempest_, in which Ariel and Caliban
dispute for the empire of the floods.

The squall was frightful; James Playfair thought once of running for
one of the Bermudas, where the English had a military post: it would
have been a sad waste of time, and therefore especially to be
regretted; happily the _Dolphin_ behaved herself wonderfully well in
the storm, and, after flying a whole day before the tempest, she was
able to resume her course towards the American coast.

But if James Playfair had been pleased with his ship, he had not been
less delighted with the young girl's bravery; Miss Halliburtt had
passed the worst hours of the storm at his side, and James knew that a
profound, imperious, irresistible love had taken possession of his
whole being.

"Yes," said he, "this brave girl is mistress on board; she turns me
like the sea a ship in distress--I feel that I am foundering! What will
Uncle Vincent say? Ah! poor nature, I am sure that if Jenny asked me to
throw all this cursed cargo into the sea, I should do it without
hesitating, for love of her."

Happily for the firm of Playfair & Co., Miss Halliburtt did not demand
this sacrifice; nevertheless, the poor Captain had been taken captive,
and Crockston, who read his heart like an open book, rubbed his hands
gleefully.

"We will hold him fast!" he muttered to himself, "and before a week has
passed my master will be quietly installed in one of the best cabins of
the _Dolphin_."

As for Miss Jenny, did she perceive the feelings which she inspired?
Did she allow herself to share them? No one could say, and James
Playfair least of all; the young girl kept a perfect reserve, and her
secret remained deeply buried in her heart.

But whilst love was making such progress in the heart of the young
Captain, the _Dolphin_ sped with no less rapidity towards Charleston.

On the 13th of January, the watch signalled land ten miles to the west.
It was a low-lying coast, and almost blended with the line of the sea
in the distance. Crockston was examining the horizon attentively, and
about nine o'clock in the morning he cried:

"Charleston lighthouse!"

Now that the bearings of the _Dolphin_ were set, James Playfair had but
one thing to do, to decide by which channel he would run into
Charleston Bay.

"If we meet with no obstacles," said he, "before three o'clock we shall
be in safety in the docks of the port."

The town of Charleston is situated on the banks of an estuary seven
miles long and two broad, called Charleston Harbour, the entrance to
which is rather difficult. It is enclosed between Morris Island on the
south and Sullivan Island on the north. At the time when the _Dolphin_
attempted to force the blockade Morris Island already belonged to the
Federal troops, and General Gillmore had caused batteries to be erected
overlooking the harbour. Sullivan Island, on the contrary, was in the
hands of the Confederates, who were also in possession of Moultrie
Fort, situated at the extremity of the island; therefore it would be
advantageous to the _Dolphin_ to go as close as possible to the
northern shores to avoid the firing from the forts on Morris Island.

Five channels led into the estuary, Sullivan Island Channel, the
Northern Channel, the Overall Channel, the Principal Channel, and
lastly, the Lawford Channel; but it was useless for strangers, unless
they had skilful pilots on board, or ships drawing less than seven feet
of water, to attempt this last; as for Northern and Overall Channels,
they were in range of the Federalist batteries, so that it was no good
thinking of them. If James Playfair could have had his choice, he would
have taken his steamer through the Principal Channel, which was the
best, and the bearings of which were easy to follow; but it was
necessary to yield to circumstances, and to decide according to the
event. Besides, the Captain of the _Dolphin_ knew perfectly all the
secrets of this bay, its dangers, the depths of its water at low tide,
and its currents, so that he was able to steer his ship with the
greatest safety as soon as he entered one of these narrow straits. The
great question was to get there.

Now this work demanded an experienced seaman, and one who knew exactly
the qualities of the _Dolphin_.

In fact, two Federal frigates were now cruising in the Charleston
waters. Mr. Mathew soon drew James Playfair's attention to them.

"They are preparing to ask us what we want on these shores," said he.

"Ah, well! we won't answer them," replied the Captain, "and they will
not get their curiosity satisfied."

In the meanwhile the cruisers were coming on full steam towards the
_Dolphin_, who continued her course, taking care to keep out of range
of their guns. But in order to gain time James Playfair made for the
south-west, wishing to put the enemies' ships off their guard; the
latter must have thought that the _Dolphin_ intended to make for Morris
Island Channel. Now there they had batteries and guns, a single shot
from which would have been enough to sink the English ship; so the
Federals allowed the _Dolphin_ to run towards the south-west,
contenting themselves by observing her without following closely.

Thus for an hour the respective situations of the ships did not change,
for James Playfair, wishing to deceive the cruisers as to the course of
the _Dolphin_, had caused the fires to be moderated, so that the speed
was decreased. However, from the thick volumes of smoke which escaped
from the chimneys, it might have been thought that he was trying to get
his maximum pressure, and, consequently his maximum of rapidity.

"They will be slightly astonished presently," said James Playfair,
"when they see us slip through their fingers!"

In fact, when the Captain saw that he was near enough to Morris Island,
and before a line of guns, the range of which he did not know, he
turned his rudder quickly, and the ship resumed her northerly course,
leaving the cruisers two miles to windward of her; the latter, seeing
this manoeuvre, understood the steamer's object, and began to pursue
her in earnest, but it was too late. The _Dolphin_ doubled her speed
under the action of the screws, and distanced them rapidly. Going
nearer to the coast, a few shell were sent after her as an acquittal of
conscience, but the Federals were outdone, for their projectiles did
not reach half-way. At eleven o'clock in the morning, the steamer
ranging near Sullivan Island, thanks to her small draft, entered the
narrow strait full steam; there she was in safety, for no Federalist
cruiser dared follow her in this channel, the depth of which, on an
average, was only eleven feet at low tide.

"How!" cried Crockston, "and is that the only difficulty?"

"Oh! oh! Master Crockston," said James Playfair, "the difficulty is not
in entering, but in getting out again."

"Nonsense!" replied the American, "that does not make me at all uneasy;
with a boat like the _Dolphin_ and a Captain like Mr. James Playfair,
one can go where one likes, and come out in the same manner."

Nevertheless, James Playfair, with telescope in his hand, was
attentively examining the route to be followed. He had before him
excellent coasting guides, with which he could go ahead without any
difficulty or hesitation.

Once his ship was safely in the narrow channel which runs the length of
Sullivan Island, James steered bearing towards the middle of Fort
Moultrie as far as the Pickney Castle, situated on the isolated island
of Shute's Folly; on the other side rose Fort Johnson, a little way to
the north of Fort Sumter.

At this moment the steamer was saluted by some shot which did not reach
her, from the batteries on Morris Island. She continued her course
without any deviation, passed before Moultrieville, situated at the
extremity of Sullivan Island, and entered the bay.

Soon Fort Sumter on the left protected her from the batteries of the
Federalists.

This fort, so celebrated in the civil war, is situated three miles and
a half from Charleston, and about a mile from each side of the bay: it
is nearly pentagonal in form, built on an artificial island of
Massachusetts granite; it took ten years to construct and cost more
than 900,000 dollars.

It was from this fort, on the 13th of April, 1861, that Anderson and
the Federal troops were driven, and it was against it that the first
shot of the Confederates was fired. It is impossible to estimate the
quantity of iron and lead which the Federals showered down upon it.
However, it resisted for almost three years, but a few months after the
passage of the _Dolphin_ it fell beneath General Gillmore's three
hundred-pounders on Morris Island.

But at this time it was in all its strength, and the Confederate flag
floated proudly above it.

Once past the fort, the town of Charleston appeared, lying between
Ashley and Cooper Rivers.

James Playfair threaded his way through the buoys which mark the
entrance of the channel, leaving behind the Charleston lighthouse,
visible above Morris Island. He had hoisted the English flag, and made
his way with wonderful rapidity through the narrow channels. When he
had passed the quarantine buoy, he advanced freely into the centre of
the bay. Miss Halliburtt was standing on the poop, looking at the town
where her father was kept prisoner, and her eyes filled with tears.

At last the steamer's speed was moderated by the Captain's orders; the
_Dolphin_ ranged along the end of the south and east batteries, and was
soon moored at the quay of the North Commercial Wharf.




Chapter VII

A SOUTHERN GENERAL

The _Dolphin_, on arriving at the Charleston quay, had been saluted by
the cheers of a large crowd. The inhabitants of this town, strictly
blockaded by sea, were not accustomed to visits from European ships.
They asked each other, not without astonishment, what this great
steamer, proudly bearing the English flag, had come to do in their
waters; but when they learned the object of her voyage, and why she had
just forced the passage Sullivan, when the report spread that she
carried a cargo of smuggled ammunition, the cheers and joyful cries
were redoubled.

James Playfair, without losing a moment, entered into negotiation with
General Beauregard, the military commander of the town. The latter
eagerly received the young Captain of the _Dolphin_, who had arrived in
time to provide the soldiers with the clothes and ammunition they were
so much in want of. It was agreed that the unloading of the ship should
take place immediately, and numerous hands came to help the English
sailors.

Before quitting his ship James Playfair had received from Miss
Halliburtt the most pressing injunctions with regard to her father, and
the Captain had placed himself entirely at the young girl's service.

"Miss Jenny," he had said, "you may rely on me; I will do the utmost in
my power to save your father, but I hope this business will not present
many difficulties. I shall go and see General Beauregard to-day, and,
without asking him at once for Mr. Halliburtt's liberty, I shall learn
in what situation he is, whether he is on bail or a prisoner."

"My poor father!" replied Jenny, sighing; "he little thinks his
daughter is so near him. Oh that I could fly into his arms!"

"A little patience, Miss Jenny; you will soon embrace your father. Rely
upon my acting with the most entire devotion, but also with prudence
and consideration."

This is why James Playfair, after having delivered the cargo of the
_Dolphin_ up to the General, and bargained for an immense stock of
cotton, faithful to his promise, turned the conversation to the events
of the day.

"So," said he, "you believe in the triumph of the slave-holders?"

"I do not for a moment doubt of our final success, and, as regards
Charleston, Lee's army will soon relieve it: besides, what do you
expect from the Abolitionists? Admitting that which will never be, that
the commercial towns of Virginia, the two Carolinas, Georgia, Alabama,
fall under their power, what then? Will they be masters of a country
they can never occupy? No, certainly not; and for my part, if they are
ever victorious, they shall pay dearly for it."

"And you are quite sure of your soldiers?" asked the Captain. "You are
not afraid that Charleston will grow weary of a siege which is ruining
her?"

"No, I do not fear treason; besides, the traitors would be punished
remorselessly, and I would destroy the town itself by sword or fire if
I discovered the least Unionist movement. Jefferson Davis confided
Charleston to me, and you may be sure that Charleston is in safe hands."

"Have you any Federal prisoners?" asked James Playfair, coming to the
interesting object of the conversation.

"Yes, Captain," replied the General, "it was at Charleston that the
first shot of separation was fired. The Abolitionists who were here
attempted to resist, and, after being defeated, they have been kept as
prisoners of war."

"And have you many?"

"About a hundred."

"Free in the town?"

"They were until I discovered a plot formed by them: their chief
succeeded in establishing a communication with the besiegers, who were
thus informed of the situation of affairs in the town. I was then
obliged to lock up these dangerous guests, and several of them will
only leave their prison to ascend the slope of the citadel, where ten
confederate balls will reward them for their federalism."

"What! to be shot!" cried the young man, shuddering involuntarily.

"Yes, and their chief first of all. He is a very dangerous man to have
in a besieged town. I have sent his letters to the President at
Richmond, and before a week is passed his sentence will be irrevocably
passed."

"Who is this man you speak of?" asked James Playfair, with an assumed
carelessness.

"A journalist from Boston, a violent Abolitionist with the confounded
spirit of Lincoln."

"And his name?"

"Jonathan Halliburtt."

"Poor wretch!" exclaimed James, suppressing his emotion. "Whatever he
may have done, one cannot help pitying him. And you think that he will
be shot?"

"I am sure of it," replied Beauregard. "What can you expect? War is
war; one must defend oneself as best one can."

"Well, it is nothing to me," said the Captain. "I shall be far enough
away when this execution takes place."

"What! you are thinking of going away already."

"Yes, General, business must be attended to; as soon as my cargo of
cotton is on board I shall be out to sea again. I was fortunate enough
to enter the bay, but the difficulty is in getting out again. The
_Dolphin_ is a good ship; she can beat any of the Federal vessels for
speed, but she does not pretend to distance cannon-balls, and a shell
in her hull or engine would seriously affect my enterprise."

"As you please, Captain," replied Beauregard; "I have no advice to give
you under such circumstances. You are doing your business, and you are
right. I should act in the same manner were I in your place; besides, a
stay at Charleston is not very pleasant, and a harbour where shells are
falling three days out of four is not a safe shelter for your ship; so
you will set sail when you please; but can you tell me what is the
number and the force of the Federal vessels cruising before Charleston?"

James Playfair did his best to answer the General, and took leave of
him on the best of terms; then he returned to the _Dolphin_ very
thoughtful and very depressed from what he had just heard.

"What shall I say to Miss Jenny? Ought I to tell her of Mr.
Halliburtt's terrible situation? Or would it be better to keep her in
ignorance of the trial which is awaiting her? Poor child!"

He had not gone fifty steps from the governor's house when he ran
against Crockston. The worthy American had been watching for him since
his departure.

"Well, Captain?"

James Playfair looked steadily at Crockston, and the latter soon
understood he had no favourable news to give him.

"Have you seen Beauregard?" he asked.

"Yes," replied James Playfair.

"And have you spoken to him about Mr. Halliburtt?"

"No, it was he who spoke to me about him."

"Well, Captain?"

"Well, I may as well tell you everything, Crockston."

"Everything, Captain."

"General Beauregard has told me that your master will be shot within a
week."

At this news anyone else but Crockston would have grown furious or
given way to bursts of grief, but the American, who feared nothing,
only said, with almost a smile on his lips:

"Pooh! what does it matter?"

"How! what does it matter?" cried James Playfair. "I tell you that Mr.
Halliburtt will be shot within a week, and you answer, what does it
matter?"

"And I mean it--if in six days he is on board the _Dolphin_, and if in
seven days the _Dolphin_ is on the open sea."

"Right!" exclaimed the Captain, pressing Crockston's hand. "I
understand, my good fellow, you have got some pluck; and for myself, in
spite of Uncle Vincent, I would throw myself overboard for Miss Jenny."

"No one need be thrown overboard," replied the American, "only the fish
would gain by that: the most important business now is to deliver Mr.
Halliburtt."

"But you must know that it will be difficult to do so."

"Pooh!" exclaimed Crockston.

"It is a question of communicating with a prisoner strictly guarded."

"Certainly."

"And to bring about an almost miraculous escape."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Crockston; "a prisoner thinks more of escaping
than his guardian thinks of keeping him; that's why, thanks to our
help, Mr. Halliburtt will be saved."

"You are right, Crockston."

"Always right."

"But now what will you do? There must be some plan: and there are
precautions to be taken."

"I will think about it."

"But when Miss Jenny learns that her father is condemned to death, and
that the order for his execution may come any day--"

"She will know nothing about it, that is all."

"Yes, it will be better for her and for us to tell her nothing."

"Where is Mr. Halliburtt imprisoned?" asked Crockston.

"In the citadel," replied James Playfair.

"Just so! . . . On board now?"

"On board, Crockston!"




Chapter VIII

THE ESCAPE

Miss Jenny, sitting at the poop of the _Dolphin_, was anxiously waiting
the Captain's return; when the latter went up to her she could not
utter a word, but her eyes questioned James Playfair more eagerly than
her lips could have done. The latter, with Crockston's help, informed
the young girl of the facts relating to her father's imprisonment. He
said that he had carefully broached the subject of the prisoners of war
to Beauregard, but, as the General did not seem disposed at all in
their favour, he had thought it better to say no more about it, but
think the matter over again.

"Since Mr. Halliburtt is not free in the town, his escape will be more
difficult; but I will finish my task, and I promise you, Miss Jenny,
that the _Dolphin_ shall not leave Charleston without having your
father on board."

"Thank you, Mr. James; I thank you with my whole heart."

At these words James Playfair felt a thrill of joy through his whole
being.

He approached the young girl with moist eyes and quivering lips;
perhaps he was going to make an avowal of the sentiments he could no
longer repress, when Crockston interfered:

"This is no time for grieving," said he; "we must go to work, and
consider what to do."

"Have you any plan, Crockston?" asked the young girl.

"I always have a plan," replied the American: "it is my peculiarity."

"But a good one?" said James Playfair.

"Excellent! and all the ministers in Washington could not devise a
better; it is almost as good as if Mr. Halliburtt was already on board."

Crockston spoke with such perfect assurance, at the same time with such
simplicity, that it must have been the most incredulous person who
could doubt his words.

"We are listening, Crockston," said James Playfair.

"Good! You, Captain, will go to General Beauregard, and ask a favour of
him which he will not refuse you."

"And what is that?"

"You will tell him that you have on board a tiresome subject, a scamp
who has been very troublesome during the voyage, and excited the crew
to revolt. You will ask of him permission to shut him up in the
citadel; at the same time, on the condition that he shall return to the
ship on her departure, in order to be taken back to England, to be
delivered over to the justice of his country."

"Good!" said James Playfair, half smiling, "I will do all that, and
Beauregard will grant my request very willingly."

"I am perfectly sure of it," replied the American.

"But," resumed Playfair, "one thing is wanting."

"What is that?"

"The scamp."

"He is before you, Captain."

"What, the rebellious subject?"

"Is myself; don't trouble yourself about that."

"Oh! you brave, generous heart," cried Jenny, pressing the American's
rough hands between her small white palms.

"Go, Crockston," said James Playfair; "I understand you, my friend; and
I only regret one thing--that is, that I cannot take your place."

"Everyone his part," replied Crockston; "if you put yourself in my
place you would be very much embarrassed, which I shall not be; you
will have enough to do later on to get out of the harbour under the
fire of the Feds and Rebs, which, for my part, I should manage very
badly."

"Well, Crockston, go on."

"Once in the citadel--I know it--I shall see what to do, and rest
assured I shall do my best; in the meanwhile, you will be getting your
cargo on board."

"Oh, business is now a very unimportant detail," said the Captain.

"Not at all! And what would your Uncle Vincent say to that? We must
join sentiment with work; it will prevent suspicion; but do it quickly.
Can you be ready in six days?"

"Yes."

"Well, let the _Dolphin_ be ready to start on the 22nd."

"She shall be ready."

"On the evening of the 22nd of January, you understand, send a gig with
your best men to White Point, at the end of the town; wait there till
nine o'clock, and then you will see Mr. Halliburtt and your servant."

"But how will you manage to effect Mr. Halliburtt's deliverance, and
also escape yourself?"

"That's my look-out."

"Dear Crockston, you are going to risk your life then, to save my
father!"

"Don't be uneasy, Miss Jenny, I shall risk absolutely nothing, you may
believe me."

"Well," asked James Playfair, "when must I have you locked up?"

"To-day--you understand--I demoralise your crew; there is no time to be
lost."

"Would you like any money? It may be of use to you in the citadel."

"Money to buy the gaoler! Oh, no, it would be a poor bargain; when one
goes there the gaoler keeps the money and the prisoner! No, I have
surer means than that; however, a few dollars may be useful; one must
be able to drink, if needs be."

"And intoxicate the gaoler."

"No, an intoxicated gaoler would spoil everything. No, I tell you I
have an idea; let me work it out."

"Here, my good fellow, are ten dollars."

"It is too much, but I will return what is over."

"Well, then, are you ready?"

"Quite ready to be a downright rogue."

"Let us go to work, then."

"Crockston," said the young girl, in a faltering voice, "you are the
best man on earth."

"I know it," replied the American, laughing good-humouredly. "By the
by, Captain, an important item."

"What is that?"

"If the General proposes to hang your rebel--you know that military men
like sharp work--"

"Well, Crockston?"

"Well, you will say that you must think about it."

"I promise you I will."

The same day, to the great astonishment of the crew, who were not in
the secret, Crockston, with his feet and hands in irons, was taken on
shore by a dozen sailors, and half an hour after, by Captain James
Playfair's request, he was led through the streets of the town, and, in
spite of his resistance, was imprisoned in the citadel.

During this and the following days the unloading of the _Dolphin_ was
rapidly accomplished; the steam cranes lifted out the European cargo to
make room for the native goods. The people of Charleston, who were
present at this interesting work, helped the sailors, whom they held in
great respect, but the Captain did not leave the brave fellows much
time for receiving compliments; he was constantly behind them, and
urged them on with a feverish activity, the reason of which the sailors
could not suspect.

Three days later, on the 18th of January, the first bales of cotton
began to be packed in the hold: although James Playfair troubled
himself no more about it, the firm of Playfair and Co. were making an
excellent bargain, having obtained the cotton which encumbered the
Charleston wharves at very far less than its value.

In the meantime no news had been heard of Crockston. Jenny, without
saying anything about it, was a prey to incessant fears; her pale face
spoke for her, and James Playfair endeavoured his utmost to ease her
mind.

"I have all confidence in Crockston," said he; "he is a devoted
servant, as you must know better than I do, Miss Jenny. You must make
yourself quite at ease; believe me, in three days you will be folded in
your father's arms."

"Ah! Mr. James," cried the young girl, "how can I ever repay you for
such devotion? How shall we ever be able to thank you?"

"I will tell you when we are in English seas," replied the young
Captain.

Jenny raised her tearful face to him for a moment, then her eyelids
drooped, and she went back to her cabin.

James Playfair hoped that the young girl would know nothing of her
father's terrible situation until he was in safety, but she was
apprised of the truth by the involuntary indiscretion of a sailor.

The reply from the Richmond cabinet had arrived by a courier who had
been able to pass the line of outposts; the reply contained Jonathan
Halliburtt's death-warrant. The news of the approaching execution was
not long in spreading through the town, and it was brought on board by
one of the sailors of the _Dolphin_; the man told the Captain, without
thinking that Miss Halliburtt was within hearing; the young girl
uttered a piercing cry, and fell unconscious on the deck. James
Playfair carried her to her cabin, but the most assiduous care was
necessary to restore her to life.

When she opened her eyes again, she saw the young Captain, who, with a
finger on his lips, enjoined absolute silence. With difficulty she
repressed the outburst of her grief, and James Playfair, leaning
towards her, said gently:

"Jenny, in two hours your father will be in safety near you, or I shall
have perished in endeavouring to save him!"

Then he left the cabin, saying to himself, "And now he must be carried
off at any price, since I must pay for his liberty with my own life and
those of my crew."

The hour for action had arrived, the loading of the cotton cargo had
been finished since morning; in two hours the ship would be ready to
start.

James Playfair had left the North Commercial Wharf and gone into the
roadstead, so that he was ready to make use of the tide, which would be
high at nine o'clock in the evening.

It was seven o'clock when James left the young girl, and began to make
preparations for departure. Until the present time the secret had been
strictly kept between himself, Crockston, and Jenny; but now he thought
it wise to inform Mr. Mathew of the situation of affairs, and he did so
immediately.

"Very well, sir," replied Mr. Mathew, without making the least remark,
"and nine o'clock is the time?"

"Nine o'clock, and have the fires lit immediately, and the steam got
up."

"It shall be done, Captain."

"The _Dolphin_ may remain at anchor; we will cut our moorings and sheer
off, without losing a moment."

"Just so."

"Have a lantern placed at the mainmast-head; the night is dark, and
will be foggy; we must not risk losing our way in returning. You had
better have the bell for starting rung at nine o'clock."

"Your orders shall be punctually attended to, Captain."

"And now, Mr. Mathew, have a shore-boat manned with six of our best
men. I am going to set out directly for White Point. I leave Miss Jenny
in your charge, and may God protect us!"

"May God protect us!" repeated the first officer.

Then he immediately gave the necessary orders for the fires to be
lighted, and the shore-boat provided with men. In a few minutes the
boat was ready, and James Playfair, after bidding Jenny good-bye,
stepped into it, whilst at the same time he saw volumes of black smoke
issuing from the chimneys of the ship, and losing itself in the fog.

The darkness was profound; the wind had fallen, and in the perfect
silence the waters seemed to slumber in the immense harbour, whilst a
few uncertain lights glimmered through the mist. James Playfair had
taken his place at the rudder, and with a steady hand he guided his
boat towards White Point. It was a distance of about two miles; during
the day James had taken his bearings perfectly, so that he was able to
make direct for Charleston Point.

Eight o'clock struck from the church of St. Philip when the shore-boat
ran aground at White Point.

There was an hour to wait before the exact time fixed by Crockston; the
quay was deserted, with the exception of the sentinel pacing to and fro
on the south and east batteries. James Playfair grew impatient, and the
minutes seemed hours to him.

At half-past eight he heard the sound of approaching steps; he left his
men with their oars clear and ready to start, and went himself to see
who it was; but he had not gone ten feet when he met a band of
coastguards, in all about twenty men. James drew his revolver from his
waist, deciding to make use of it, if needs be; but what could he do
against these soldiers, who were coming on to the quay?

The leader came up to him, and, seeing the boat, asked:

"Whose craft is that?"

"It is a gig belonging to the _Dolphin_," replied the young man.

"And who are you?"

"Captain James Playfair."

"I thought you had already started, and were now in the Charleston
channels."

"I am ready to start. I ought even now to be on my way but--"

"But--" persisted the coastguard.

A bright idea shot through James's mind, and he answered:

"One of my sailors is locked up in the citadel, and, to tell the truth,
I had almost forgotten him; fortunately I thought of him in time, and I
have sent my men to bring him."

"Ah! that troublesome fellow; you wish to take him back to England?"

"Yes.

"He might as well be hung here as there," said the coast-guard,
laughing at his joke.

"So I think," said James Playfair, "but it is better to have the thing
done in the regular way."

"Not much chance of that, Captain, when you have to face the Morris
Island batteries."

"Don't alarm yourself. I got in and I'll get out again."

"Prosperous voyage to you!"

"Thank you."

With this the men went off, and the shore was left silent.

At this moment nine o'clock struck; it was the appointed moment. James
felt his heart beat violently; a whistle was heard; he replied to it,
then he waited, listening, with his hand up to enjoin perfect silence
on the sailors. A man appeared enveloped in a large cloak, and looking
from one side to another. James ran up to him.

"Mr. Halliburtt?"

"I am he," replied the man with the cloak.

"God be praised!" cried James Playfair. "Embark without losing a
minute. Where is Crockston?"

"Crockston!" exclaimed Mr. Halliburtt, amazed. "What do you mean?"

"The man who has saved you and brought you here was your servant
Crockston."

"The man who came with me was the gaoler from the citadel," replied Mr.
Halliburtt.

"The gaoler!" cried James Playfair.

Evidently he knew nothing about it, and a thousand fears crowded in his
mind.

"Quite right, the gaoler," cried a well-known voice. "The gaoler is
sleeping like a top in my cell."

"Crockston! you! Can it be you?" exclaimed Mr. Halliburtt.

"No time to talk now, master; we will explain everything to you
afterwards. It is a question of life or death. Get in quick!"

The three men took their places in the boat.

"Push off!" cried the captain.

Immediately the six oars dipped into the water; the boat darted like a
fish through the waters of Charleston Harbour.




Chapter IX

BETWEEN TWO FIRES

The boat, pulled by six robust oarsmen, flew over the water. The fog
was growing dense, and it was with difficulty that James Playfair
succeeded in keeping to the line of his bearings. Crockston sat at the
bows, and Mr. Halliburtt at the stern, next the Captain. The prisoner,
only now informed of the presence of his servant, wished to speak to
him, but the latter enjoined silence.

However, a few minutes later, when they were in the middle of the
harbour, Crockston determined to speak, knowing what thoughts were
uppermost in Mr. Halliburtt's mind.

"Yes, my dear master," said he, "the gaoler is in my place in the cell,
where I gave him two smart blows, one on the head and the other on the
stomach, to act as a sleeping draught, and this when he was bringing me
my supper; there is gratitude for you. I took his clothes and his keys,
found you, and let you out of the citadel, under the soldiers' noses.
That is all I have done."

"But my daughter--?" asked Mr. Halliburtt.

"Is on board the ship which is going to take you to England."

"My daughter there! there!" cried the American, springing from his seat.

"Silence!" replied Crockston, "a few minutes, and we shall be saved."

The boat flew through the darkness, but James Playfair was obliged to
steer rather by guess, as the lanterns of the _Dolphin_ were no longer
visible through the fog. He was undecided what direction to follow, and
the darkness was so great that the rowers could not even see to the end
of their oars.

"Well, Mr. James?" said Crockston.

"We must have made more than a mile and a half," replied the Captain.
"You don't see anything, Crockston?"

"Nothing; nevertheless, I have good eyes; but we shall get there all
right. They don't suspect anything out there."

These words were hardly finished when the flash of a gun gleamed for an
instant through the darkness, and vanished in the mist.

"A signal!" cried James Playfair.

"Whew!" exclaimed Crockston. "It must have come from the citadel. Let
us wait."

A second, then a third shot was fired in the direction of the first,
and almost the same signal was repeated a mile in front of the gig.

"That is from Fort Sumter," cried Crockston, "and it is the signal of
escape. Urge on the men; everything is discovered."

"Pull for your lives, my men!" cried James Playfair, urging on the
sailors, "those gun-shots cleared my route. The _Dolphin_ is eight
hundred yards ahead of us. Stop! I hear the bell on board. Hurrah,
there it is again! Twenty pounds for you if we are back in five
minutes!"

The boat skimmed over the waves under the sailors' powerful oars. A
cannon boomed in the direction of the town. Crockston heard a ball whiz
past them.

The bell on the _Dolphin_ was ringing loudly. A few more strokes and
the boat was alongside. A few more seconds and Jenny fell into her
father's arms.

The gig was immediately raised, and James Playfair sprang on to the
poop.

"Is the steam up, Mr. Mathew?"

"Yes, Captain."

"Have the moorings cut at once."

A few minutes later the two screws carried the steamer towards the
principal channel, away from Fort Sumter.

"Mr. Mathew," said James, "we must not think of taking the Sullivan
Island channel; we should run directly under the Confederate guns. Let
us go as near as possible to the right side of the harbour out of range
of the Federal batteries. Have you a safe man at the helm?"

"Yes, Captain."

"Have the lanterns and the fires on deck extinguished; there is a great
deal too much light, but we cannot help the reflection from the
engine-rooms."

During this conversation the _Dolphin_ was going at a great speed; but
in altering her course to keep to the right side of the Charleston
Harbour she was obliged to enter a channel which took her for a moment
near Fort Sumter; and when scarcely half a mile off all the guns
bearing on her were discharged at the same time, and a shower of shot
and shell passed in front of the _Dolphin_ with a thundering report.

"Too soon, stupids," cried James Playfair, with a burst of laughter.
"Make haste, make haste, Mr. Engineer! We shall get between two fires."

The stokers fed the furnaces, and the _Dolphin_ trembled all over with
the effort of the engine as if she was on the point of exploding.

At this moment a second report was heard, and another shower of balls
whizzed behind the _Dolphin_.

"Too late, stupids," cried the young Captain, with a regular roar.

Then Crockston, who was standing on the poop, cried, "That's one
passed. A few minutes more, and we shall have done with the Rebs."

"Then do you think we have nothing more to fear from Fort Sumter?"
asked James.

"Nothing at all, but everything from Fort Moultrie, at the end of
Sullivan Island; but they will only get a chance at us for half a
minute, and then they must choose their time well, and shoot straight
if they want to reach us. We are getting near."

"Right; the position of Fort Moultrie will allow us to go straight for
the principal channel. Fire away then, fire away!"

At the same moment, and as if in obedience to James Playfair, the fort
was illuminated by a triple line of lightning. A frightful crash was
heard; then a crackling sound on board the steamer.

"Touched this time!" exclaimed Crockston.

"Mr. Mathew!" cried the Captain to his second, who was stationed at the
bows, "what has been damaged?"

"The bowsprit broken."

"Any wounded?"

"No, Captain."

"Well, then, the masts may go to Jericho. Straight into the pass!
Straight! and steer towards the island."

"We have passed the Rebs!" cried Crockston; "and, if we must have balls
in our hull, I would much rather have the Northerners; they are more
easily digested."

In fact, the _Dolphin_ could not yet consider herself out of danger;
for, if Morris Island was not fortified with the formidable pieces of
artillery which were placed there a few months later, nevertheless its
guns and mortars could easily have sunk a ship like the _Dolphin_.

The alarm had been given to the Federals on the island, and to the
blockading squadron, by the firing from Forts Sumter and Moultrie. The
besiegers could not make out the reason of this night attack; it did
not seem to be directed against them. However, they were obliged to
consider it so, and were ready to reply.

It occupied James Playfair's thoughts whilst making towards the passes
of Morris Island; and he had reason to fear, for in a quarter of an
hour's time lights gleamed rapidly through the darkness. A shower of
small shell fell round the steamer, scattering the water over her
bulwarks; some of them even struck the deck of the _Dolphin_, but not
on their points, which saved the ship from certain ruin. In fact, these
shell, as it was afterwards discovered, could break into a hundred
fragments, and each cover a superficial area of a hundred and twenty
square feet with Greek fire, which would burn for twenty minutes, and
nothing could extinguish it. One of these shell alone could set a ship
on fire. Fortunately for the _Dolphin_, they were a new invention, and
as yet far from perfect. Once thrown into the air, a false rotary
movement kept them inclined, and, when falling, instead of striking on
their points, where is the percussion apparatus, they fell flat. This
defect in construction alone saved the _Dolphin_. The falling of these
shells did her little harm, and under the pressure of her over-heated
boilers she continued to advance into the pass.

At this moment, and in spite of his orders, Mr. Halliburtt and his
daughter went to James Playfair on the poop; the latter urged them to
return to their cabins, but Jenny declared that she would remain by the
Captain. As for Mr. Halliburtt, who had just learnt all the noble
conduct of his deliverer, he pressed his hand without being able to
utter a word.

The _Dolphin_ was speeding rapidly towards the open sea. There were
only three miles more before she would be in the waters of the
Atlantic; if the pass was free at its entrance, she was saved. James
Playfair was wonderfully well acquainted with all the secrets of
Charleston Bay, and he guided his ship through the darkness with an
unerring hand. He was beginning to think his daring enterprise
successful, when a sailor on the forecastle cried:

"A ship!"

"A ship?" cried James.

"Yes, on the larboard side."

The fog had cleared off, and a large frigate was seen making towards
the pass, in order to obstruct the passage of the _Dolphin_. It was
necessary, cost what it might, to distance her, and urge the
steam-engine to an increase of speed, or all was lost.

"Port the helm at once!" cried the Captain.

Then he sprang on to the bridge above the engine. By his orders one of
the screws was stopped, and under the action of the other the
_Dolphin_, veering with an extraordinary rapidity, avoided running foul
of the frigate, and advanced like her to the entrance of the pass. It
was now a question of speed.

James Playfair understood that in this lay his own safety, Miss
Jenny's, her father's, and that of all his crew.

The frigate was considerably in advance of the _Dolphin_. It was
evident from the volumes of black smoke issuing from her chimneys that
she was getting up her steam. James Playfair was not the man to be left
in the background.

"How are the engines?" cried he to the engineer.

"At the maximum speed," replied the latter; "the steam is escaping by
all the valves."

"Fasten them down," ordered the Captain.

And his orders were executed at the risk of blowing up the ship.

The _Dolphin_ again increased her speed; the pistons worked with
frightful rapidity; the metal plates on which the engine was placed
trembled under the terrific force of their blows. It was a sight to
make the boldest shudder.

"More pressure!" cried James Playfair; "put on more pressure!"

"Impossible!" replied the engineer. "The valves are tightly closed; our
furnaces are full up to the mouths."

"What difference! Fill them with cotton soaked in spirits; we must pass
that frigate at any price."

At these words the most daring of the sailors looked at each other, but
did not hesitate. Some bales of cotton were thrown into the
engine-room, a barrel of spirits broached over them, and this expensive
fuel placed, not without danger, in the red-hot furnaces. The stokers
could no longer hear each other speak for the roaring of the flames.
Soon the metal plates of the furnaces became red-hot; the pistons
worked like the pistons of a locomotive; the steamgauge showed a
frightful tension; the steamer flew over the water; her boards creaked,
and her chimneys threw out volumes of smoke mingled with flames. She
was going at a headlong speed, but, nevertheless, she was gaining on
the frigate--passed her, distanced her, and in ten minutes was out of
the channel.

"Saved!" cried the Captain.

"Saved!" echoed the crew, clapping their hands.

Already the Charleston beacon was disappearing in the south-west; the
sound of firing from the batteries grew fainter, and it might with
reason be thought that the danger was all past, when a shell from a
gun-boat cruising at large was hurled whizzing through the air. It was
easy to trace its course, thanks to the line of fire which followed it.

Then was a moment of anxiety impossible to describe; every one was
silent, and each watched fearfully the arch described by the
projectile. Nothing could be done to escape it, and in a few seconds it
fell with a frightful noise on the fore-deck of the _Dolphin_.

The terrified sailors crowded to the stern, and no one dared move a
step, whilst the shell was burning with a brisk crackle.

But one brave man alone among them ran up to the formidable weapon of
destruction. It was Crockston; he took the shell in his strong arms,
whilst showers of sparks were falling from it; then, with a superhuman
effort, he threw it overboard.

Hardly had the shell reached the surface of the water when it burst
with a frightful report.

"Hurrah! hurrah!" cried the whole crew of the _Dolphin_ unanimously,
whilst Crockston rubbed his hands.

Some time later the steamer sped rapidly through the waters of the
Atlantic; the American coast disappeared in the darkness, and the
distant lights which shot across the horizon indicated that the attack
was general between the batteries of Morris Island and the forts of
Charleston Harbour.




Chapter X

ST. MUNGO

The next day at sunrise the American coast had disappeared; not a ship
was visible on the horizon, and the _Dolphin_, moderating the frightful
rapidity of her speed, made quietly towards the Bermudas.

It is useless to recount the passage across the Atlantic, which was
marked by no accidents, and ten days after the departure from
Queenstown the French coast was hailed.

What passed between the Captain and the young girl may be imagined,
even by the least observant individuals. How could Mr. Halliburtt
acknowledge the devotion and courage of his deliverer, if it was not by
making him the happiest of men? James Playfair did not wait for English
seas to declare to the father and daughter the sentiments which
overflowed his heart, and, if Crockston is to be believed, Miss Jenny
received his confession with a happiness she did not try to conceal.

Thus it happened that on the 14th of February, 18--, a numerous crowd
was collected in the dim aisles of St. Mungo, the old cathedral of
Glasgow. There were seamen, merchants, manufacturers, magistrates, and
some of every denomination gathered here. There was Miss Jenny in
bridal array and beside her the worthy Crockston, resplendent in
apple-green clothes, with gold buttons, whilst Uncle Vincent stood
proudly by his nephew.

In short, they were celebrating the marriage of James Playfair, of the
firm of Vincent Playfair & Co., of Glasgow, with Miss Jenny Halliburtt,
of Boston.

The ceremony was accomplished amidst great pomp. Everyone knew the
history of the _Dolphin_, and everyone thought the young Captain well
recompensed for his devotion. He alone said that his reward was greater
than he deserved.

In the evening there was a grand ball and banquet at Uncle Vincent's
house, with a large distribution of shillings to the crowd collected in
Gordon Street. Crockston did ample justice to this memorable feast,
while keeping himself perfectly within bounds.

Everyone was happy at this wedding; some at their own happiness, and
others at the happiness around them, which is not always the case at
ceremonies of this kind.

Late in the evening, when the guests had retired, James Playfair took
his uncle's hand.

"Well, Uncle Vincent," said he to him.

"Well, Nephew James?"

"Are you pleased with the charming cargo I brought you on board the
_Dolphin_?" continued Captain Playfair, showing him his brave young
wife.

"I am quite satisfied," replied the worthy merchant; "I have sold my
cotton at three hundred and seventy-five per cent. profit."




End of The Blockade Runners








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Blockade Runners, by Jules Verne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE BLOCKADE RUNNERS ***

***** This file should be named 8992-8.txt or 8992-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/9/9/8992/

Produced by Norman M. Wolcott

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
