Project Gutenberg's The Graves of the Fallen, by Joseph Rudyard Kipling

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Graves of the Fallen

Author: Joseph Rudyard Kipling

Illustrator: Douglas MacPherson

Release Date: June 2, 2017 [EBook #54830]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAVES OF THE FALLEN ***




Produced by Mary Glenn Krause, Chuck Greif, MFR, University
of California and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)











                              The Graves
                             of the Fallen

                            [Illustration]

                    Imperial War Graves Commission




                                 NOTE.


     _This Descriptive Account of the work of the Imperial War Graves
     Commission was written by Mr. Rudyard Kipling at the Commission’s
     request. The Illustrations showing the cemeteries and memorials as
     they will appear when completed are by Mr. Douglas Macpherson._




                       _What the Commission is._


The Commission consists of:--

     The Secretary of State for War.

     The Secretary of State for the Colonies.

     The Secretary of State for India.

     The First Commissioner of Works.

     The Hon. Sir George Perley, K.C.M.G. (appointed by the Government
     of Canada).

     The Right Hon. Andrew Fisher, P.C. (appointed by the Government of
     Australia).

     The Hon. Sir Thomas Mackenzie, K.C.M.G. (appointed by the
     Government of New Zealand).

     The Right Hon. W. P. Schreiner, P.C., K.C., C.M.G. (appointed by
     the Government of the Union of South Africa).

     The Hon. Sir Edgar Bowring (appointed by the Government of
     Newfoundland).

and the following members who accepted the invitation to help in this
work, and were appointed by Royal Warrant:--

     Sir William Garstin, G.C.M.G., G.B.E.

     Mr. Harry Gosling, C.H., J.P.

     Mr. Rudyard Kipling.

     General Sir C. F. N. Macready, G.C.M.G., K.C.B.

     General Sir Herbert C. O. Plumer, G.C.B., G.C.M.G., G.C.V.O.

     Admiral Sir Edmund S. Poë, G.C.V.O., K.C.B.

     Major-General Fabian Ware, C.B., C.M.G.

All letters should be addressed to the Secretary, Imperial War Graves
Commission, Winchester House, St. James’s Square, S.W. 1; and not to any
individual member of the Commission.


_Its History._

The origin and development of the Imperial War Graves Commission is very
simple. In the first days of the war the different armies engaged
created organisations, under the direction of the War Office, to
register, mark, and tend the graves of British soldiers, as well as to
answer inquiries from relatives, and, where possible, to send them
photographs of the graves. Later, a National Committee was constituted,
which, on the suggestion of the Prince of Wales, who took a keen
personal interest in the work, was expanded into an Imperial Commission,
representing the Dominions, India, the Colonies, the fighting Services,
Labour, the great public departments interested, and the British Red
Cross, which latter had supplied, as it still does to a considerable
extent, the funds for photographing and planting the graves.


_Its Finance._

The finance of the Commission is Imperial. All parts of the Empire have
generously and unreservedly promised to bear their share of the
expenses. The Imperial War Conference, having considered the proposals
of the Commission, passed the following resolution on June 17, 1918:
“The Conference desires to place on record its appreciation of the
Labours of the Imperial War Graves Commission, and is in favour of the
cost of carrying out the decisions of the Commission being borne by the
respective Governments in proportion to the numbers of the graves of
their dead.”

[Illustration: A WAR CEMETERY WITH PERMANENT MEMORIALS AS DESIGNED.]




                           _THE CEMETERIES._


With the growth of the war the Commission’s work naturally covered every
part of the world where the men of the Empire had served and died--from
the vast and known cities of our dead in Flanders and France to hidden
and outlying burial-grounds of a few score at the ends of the earth.
These resting-places are situated on every conceivable site--on bare
hills flayed by years of battle, in orchards and meadows, beside
populous towns or little villages, in jungle-glades, at coast ports, in
far-away islands, among desert sands, and desolate ravines. It would be
as impossible as undesirable to reduce them all to any uniformity of
aspect by planting or by architecture.

In a war where the full strength of nations was used without respect of
persons, no difference could be made between the graves of officers or
men. Yet some sort of central idea was needed that should symbolise our
common sacrifice wherever our dead might be laid; and it was realised,
above all, that each cemetery and individual grave should be made as
permanent as man’s art could devise.


_Their Design and Care._

The Commission instructed Sir Frederic Kenyon, K.C.B., to report how
these aims could best be realised, and he, after consulting very fully
with the relatives, representatives of the Services, religion and art,
and knowing the practical limitations, particularly in obtaining labour,
for carrying out such a vast undertaking, recommended that in each
cemetery there should stand a Cross of Sacrifice, and an altarlike Stone
of Remembrance, and that the headstones of the graves should be of
uniform shape and size. Stone crosses to succeed the temporary wooden
crosses were at first suggested, but crosses of the small size
necessitated by the nearness of the graves to each other do not allow
sufficient space for the men’s names and the inscriptions, and are also
by their shape too fragile and too subject to the action of frost and
weather for enduring use. Plain headstones, measuring 2 ft. 6 in. by 1
ft. 3 in., were therefore chosen, upon which the Cross or other
religious symbol of the dead man’s faith could be carved and his
Regimental badge fully displayed. The Regiments have been consulted as
to the designs of these badges, some of which have now been approved and
are ready for engraving as soon as experiments which are being carried
on have shown how to overcome the difficulties of dealing with such
numbers. In due time, then, wherever a man may be buried, from East
Africa to North Russia, his headstone will carry his Regimental badge,
identifiable the world over.

Besides the fighting forces, provision must be made for the graves of
the merchant-seamen and discharged men whose deaths were due to enemy
action, for Sisters and Nurses killed or died of wounds or disease, for
Labour units of all races, and, indeed, for all who have served in any
capacity in the war. The distinctive badges of these headstones are not
yet all decided upon.

[Illustration: ANOTHER WAR CEMETERY AS DESIGNED.]

[Illustration: THE CROSS OF SACRIFICE.]

[Illustration: THE STONE OF REMEMBRANCE.]

[Illustration: SPECIMEN OF A REGIMENTAL HEADSTONE.]


_Inscriptions, Registers, and Planning._

In addition to the name and rank upon the headstone, the Commission feel
that relatives should, if they wish, add a short inscription of their
own choice as an expression of personal feeling and affection. These
inscriptions will be at the relatives’ expense, and, to avoid unduly
crowding the stones with very small lettering, which, besides being
difficult to read, does not weather well, it has been found necessary to
restrict the length of the inscription to sixty-six letters.[A]

 [A] In counting the sixty-six letters, the space between any two words
 must be reckoned as one letter.

Every cemetery will keep registers of the dead buried there, and in
these registers it is hoped that it will be possible, with the
assistance of his kin, to enter the age, parentage, and birthplace of
each known man.

The planning and planting of the cemeteries must depend largely on their
site and the climate of the country, but it is proposed that, as a
general rule, the cemeteries should have buildings designed for
services, ceremonies, and shelter, where the register of that cemetery
will be kept under permanent safeguard. To recapitulate:--

     1. For each Cemetery its Cross of Sacrifice and Stone of
     Remembrance, the latter bearing the quotation (_Ecclesiasticus_ 44,
     v. 14) “THEIR NAME LIVETH FOR EVERMORE”;

     2. For each grave its enduring headstone, carved with the symbol of
     the dead man’s faith, his name and rank, his Regimental badge, and
     whatever text or inscription his relatives may add;

     3. In the Cemetery building the register in which the man’s
     birthplace, age, and parentage can be recorded and referred to.


_Memorials to the Missing._

This matter is naturally of the deepest concern to the relatives of
those whose bodies have never been recovered or identified, or whose
graves, once made, have been destroyed by later battles. Their number is
not small, and Sir Frederic Kenyon has suggested that the best way to
record their memory would be to place a tablet on the walls or cloisters
at the cemetery nearest to the spot where it is presumed they have lost
their lives. In the case of officers and men in the Flying Corps, the
place of whose death could not be known within many miles, the tablet
might be placed in the cemetery nearest to the camp from which they had
started on their last flight. But in any case relatives may be assured
that the dead who have no known resting-place will be made equal with
the others, and that each case will be dealt with upon full
consideration of its merits as regards the site and the place of the
memorial.


_Graves of Indian Troops._

The symbols of their faith will also be carved on the headstones of the
soldiers of the Indian Armies who fought beside their comrades from
England and throughout the Empire in France and Belgium in 1914-16; and
of the Indian Labour Corps who have since worked and taken the risks of
life behind the lines. A committee of the Commission has decided upon
the form that these symbols should take, and has further recommended
that a Mohammedan mosque and Hindu temple should be erected in France
for remembrance of the sacrifice made by Hindus and Mohammedans alike in
the war. The designs for these buildings have been submitted for
approval in India. In all such matters the treatment of the bodies of
these soldiers will be in strict conformity with the practice of their
religions, and will be carried out under the supervision of native
officers.

[Illustration: SPECIMEN OF A REGIMENTAL HEADSTONE.]

[Illustration: SPECIMEN OF A JEWISH HEADSTONE.]


_Treatment of Isolated Graves._

After so many years of fighting over densely populated and civilised
countries like France and Belgium, it is inevitable that there must be
single graves and groups in positions where, when the life of the land
goes forward again, they cannot be reached or tended. Some lie in what
were once town or village thoroughfares, and will be so again; others by
the side of railway stations and goods yards, houses or factories, in
arable or pasture fields, parks, gardens and the like. The objections to
leaving these graves where they are need not be dwelt upon. No
precautions save them from being encroached upon or obliterated in the
course of time. There is, moreover, a strong sentiment among all ranks
that such scattered graves look lonely, and the instinct of the Services
demands that those who fell by the wayside should be gathered in to rest
with the nearest main body of their companions. That is what the
Commission, with all due care and reverence, proposes to do.


_Removal of Bodies._

In view of the enormous number (over half a million) of our dead in
France alone, the removal of bodies to England would be impossible, even
were there a general desire for it. But the overwhelming majority of
relatives are content that their kin should lie--officers and men
together--in the countries that they have redeemed. The Allied nations,
too, have freely given their land to our dead for ever, and that offer
has been accepted by the Governments. To allow exhumation and removal in
the few cases where it has been suggested would, it seemed to the
Commission, be undesirable, if only on the principle of equality, and,
judging from what many gallant fighters have said and written before
they in their turn fell, a violation, in all but a few special cases, of
the desire of the dead themselves.


_Battle Memorials._

Memorials to commemorate the parts borne by particular armies,
divisions, or regiments in campaigns and battles, such as, to name only
a few, the Canadians at Ypres, the South Africans at Delville Wood, the
Australians at Amiens, the British at the breaking of the Hindenburg
line, will be advised upon by a fully representative military committee,
and it is to be hoped that the best art of the Empire will give its
services and advice in the designing of them.


_Suggestions from the Public._

But the work so far has only been blocked out, and there is room and
welcome for suggestions of every kind from the public throughout the
world, whose servants the Commission are. For example, it has been
suggested that the entrance to individual cemeteries should carry a text
or inscription, and it has been decided that monuments should be erected
to the dead whose graves are unknown, of a special form which has yet to
be settled. These are points, among others, upon which the Commission
would be grateful for expressions of opinion.


_The Progress of the Work._

Meantime, the long and difficult business of identification and
registration goes forward still on all fronts. The various architects to
whose charge the cemeteries have been allotted are preparing their
designs for the planting and the building required in France, and steps
are being taken to prepare dignified and characteristic designs for our
cemeteries in the East and elsewhere. All this can be effected in
reasonable time; but there is no possibility of expediting the delivery
of the headstones. More than half a million of these will be required,
and at present there is not labour enough in all the world to cut, carve
and letter them. While they are being made the wooden crosses will
stand, and, where necessary, will be renewed; the registers will be
filled and filed, and the cemeteries will be faithfully and reverently
tended.

     London: PUBLISHED BY HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE. To be
     purchased through any Bookseller or directly from H.M. Stationery
     Office at the following addresses: Imperial House, Kingsway,
     London, W.C. 2, and 28, Abingdon Street, London, S.W. 1; 37, Peter
     Street, Manchester; 1, St. Andrew’s Crescent, Cardiff; 23, Forth
     Street, Edinburgh; or from E. Ponsonby, Ltd., 116, Grafton Street,
     Dublin.                                           Price 6d. Net.







End of Project Gutenberg's The Graves of the Fallen, by Joseph Rudyard Kipling

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GRAVES OF THE FALLEN ***

***** This file should be named 54830-0.txt or 54830-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/4/8/3/54830/

Produced by Mary Glenn Krause, Chuck Greif, MFR, University
of California and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images
made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
